Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Consolidated financial statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 5, 2021, formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
On February 14, 2022, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Nogin. If (i) the Merger Agreement is adopted and the transactions contemplated thereby, including the Merger, are approved by SWAG’s and Nogin’s stockholders and (ii) the Merger is subsequently completed, Merger Sub will merge with and into Nogin, with Nogin surviving the Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of SWAG (the “Merger” and, along with the transactions contemplated in the Merger Agreement, the “Transactions”).
As part of the Transactions, holders of Nogin’s common stock and vested options will receive aggregate consideration of approximately $566.0 million, payable in (i) the case of Nogin’s stockholders, newly issued shares of SWAG Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share with a value ascribed to each share of SWAG Class A common stock of $10.00, and, at their election, a portion of $20.0 million of consideration payable in cash and (ii) the case of Nogin’s optionholders, options of SWAG (collectively, the “merger consideration”).
See “Business - Nogin Combination Agreement.”
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from January 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We will incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss $1,954,091, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $1,917,009, change in fair value loss of over-allotment option liability of $61,353, and fair value of forfeited over-allotment option $17,445, offset by interest income in bank of $24 and interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $6,802.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 2, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 9,000,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $9,000,000. On August 2, 2021, the underwriters notified the Company of their intention to partially exercise their over-allotment option. As such, on August 4, 2021, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 2,807,868 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, and the sale of an additional 982,754 Private Placement Warrants, at $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $29,061,434.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Units, and the exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters, a total of $231,499,860 ($10.15 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $13,056,080 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $4,561,574 of underwriting fees, $7,982,754 of deferred underwriting fees and $511,752 of other costs.
For the period from January 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,181,232. Net loss of $1,954,091 was affected by the interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $6,802 and change in fair value loss of over-allotment option liability of $61,353, and fair value of forfeited over-allotment option $17,445. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $735,753 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants upon consummation of the Business Combination at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by February 2, 2023, then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The liquidity condition and date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after February 2, 2023.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on the date the Public Shares were first listed on NASDAQ and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per share, or $7,982,754 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. At December 31, 2021, we have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class
method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from net loss per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” “ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.