Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
References to “we”, “us”, “our”, “company” or the “Company” are to Duddell Street Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on August 28, 2020. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Duddell Street Holdings Limited, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (“Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 28, 2020. On November 2, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 17,500,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $175.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $10.1 million, inclusive of approximately $6.1 million in deferred underwriting commissions. The underwriters were granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 2,625,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. On November 30, 2020, in connection with the expiration of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, our sponsor surrendered 656,250 founder shares for no consideration.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,500,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant with our Sponsor (the “Private Placement Warrants”), generating gross proceeds of $5.5 million. On October 18, 2021, we entered into an agreement with our Sponsor whereby our Sponsor agreed to purchase an additional 1,500,000 Private Placement Warrants for aggregate proceeds of $1.5 million, with each warrant entitling the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $175.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
We intend to complete our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement of the private placement warrants, our capital shares, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. The issuance of additional shares of our ordinary shares in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in this offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that we will have only 24 months from the closing of our initial public offering, or until November 2, 2022 (the “Combination Period”) to complete our initial business combination. If we do not complete our initial business combination within such 24-month period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Proposed Business Combination
On November 7, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as it may be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among the Company, Grassroots Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), and FiscalNote Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“FiscalNote”).
The Business Combination Agreement provides for, among other things, the following transactions on the closing date: (i) the Company will domesticate as a Delaware corporation (“Newco”, such transaction, the “Domestication”) and, in connection with the Domestication, (A) each then issued and outstanding Class A ordinary share of the Company will convert automatically into one share of Class A common stock of Newco (the “Newco Class A Common Stock”), (B) each then issued and outstanding Class B ordinary share of the Company will convert automatically into one share of Newco Class A Common Stock, and (C) each then issued and outstanding common warrant of the Company will convert automatically into one warrant to purchase one share of Newco Class A Common Stock; and (ii) at least one day after the Domestication, Merger Sub will merge with and into FiscalNote, with FiscalNote as the surviving company in the merger and, after giving effect to such merger, continuing as a whollyowned subsidiary of Newco (the “Merger”).
The Domestication, the Merger and the other transactions contemplated by the Business Combination Agreement are hereinafter referred to as the “Proposed Business Combination.” The time at which the Merger becomes effective is hereinafter referred to as the “Effective Time.”
In connection with the Proposed Business Combination, Newco will adopt a dual class stock structure pursuant to which (i) all stockholders of Newco, other than the existing holders of FiscalNote Class B common stock, will hold shares of Newco Class A Common Stock, which will have one vote per share, and (ii) the existing holders of FiscalNote Class B common stock will hold shares of Class B common stock of Newco (the “Newco Class B Common Stock”), which will have 25 votes per share. The Newco Class B Common Stock will be subject to conversion to Newco Class A Common Stock upon any transfers of Newco Class B Common Stock (except for certain permitted transfers) and subject to certain other customary terms and conditions.
The Proposed Business Combination is expected to close in the second quarter of 2022, following the receipt of the required approval by the Company’s and FiscalNote’s shareholders and the fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement (i) each share of FiscalNote Class A common stock (other than dissenting shares) will be canceled and converted into the right to receive the applicable portion of the merger consideration comprised of Newco Class A Common Stock, in an amount determined by dividing the quotient of (A) the sum of $1 billion plus the aggregate exercise price payable with respect to vested FiscalNote options and FiscalNote warrants, divided by (B) the total number of issued and outstanding FiscalNote shares, taking into account the total number of shares issued or issuable as a result of any exercise or conversion of all FiscalNote equity securities outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (whether issued prior to, at or after the Effective Time), by $10.00 (the “Exchange Ratio”) , in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement, (ii) each share of FiscalNote Class B common stock (other than dissenting shares) will be canceled and converted into the right to receive the applicable portion of the merger consideration comprised of Newco Class B Common Stock, as determined pursuant to the Exchange Ratio, (iii) all of the subordinated convertible promissory notes issued by FiscalNote that are outstanding and unconverted immediately prior to the Effective Time will be automatically assumed and converted into a convertible note issued by Newco with a right of conversion into shares of Newco Class A Common Stock, (iv) all of the warrants to purchase FiscalNote Class A common stock or FiscalNote preferred stock outstanding and unexercised or unconverted, as applicable, immediately prior to the Effective Time will be deemed automatically exercised or converted into the right to receive a number of shares of Newco Class A common stock determined in accordance with the Business Combination Agreement, (v) all options to purchase Class A common stock of FiscalNote, vested or unvested, will convert into stock options to purchase shares of Newco Class A Common Stock determined in accordance with the Exchange Ratio, (vi) vested restricted stock units to acquire shares of Class A common stock of FiscalNote will be automatically deemed settled and converted into the right to receive that number of shares of Newco Class A Common Stock determined in the Business Combination Agreement, and (vii) all of the unvested restricted stock units to acquire shares of Class A common stock of FiscalNote outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be automatically assumed and converted into restricted stock units relating to shares of Newco Class A Common Stock, subject to substantially the same terms and conditions as were applicable immediately before the Effective Time.
In addition, the Business Combination Agreement contemplates that the holders of common stock, warrants, options and RSUs of FiscalNote outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time will be entitled to receive earnout consideration in the form of shares of Newco Class A Common Stock and/or restricted stock units of Newco upon occurrence of certain triggering events after the Effective Time as determined in the Business Combination Agreement.
Sponsor Agreement
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company, the Sponsor, FiscalNote and certain other persons party thereto entered into a sponsor letter agreement (the “Sponsor Agreement”), pursuant to which the Sponsor has agreed, among other things, to (i) not redeem any ordinary shares in the Company owned by it in connection with the Business Combination, (ii) vote in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby (including the Merger) and (iii) waive any adjustment to the conversion ratio set forth in the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association with respect to the Class B ordinary shares of the Company held by the Sponsor, in each case, on the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in the Sponsor Agreement.
In addition, the Sponsor has agreed that (i) all equity interests of Newco held by the Sponsor immediately after the Effective Time (the “Restricted Securities”) will be subject to a lockup of 180 days from the Effective Time and (ii) 50% of each type of the Restricted Securities held by the Sponsor will be subject to a lockup during the period from the date that is 180 days following after the Effective Time and ending on the first anniversary of the Effective Time, in each case, except to the Permitted Transferees as defined in the Sponsor Agreement.
PIPE Financing (Private Placement)
In connection with the signing of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain investors, including affiliates of Sponsor (the “PIPE Investors”). Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to such investors, on the closing date of, and immediately prior to (but subject to), the Merger, an
aggregate of 10,000,000 shares of Newco Class A Common Stock for a purchase price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $100,000,000 (the “PIPE Financing”).
Voting and Support Agreements
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, certain stockholders of FiscalNote (collectively, the “Voting Stockholders”) entered into a voting and support agreement (collectively, the “Support Agreements”) with the Company and FiscalNote, pursuant to which each Voting Stockholder has agreed to, among other things, (i) vote in favor of the Business Combination Agreement and the transactions contemplated thereby, (ii) a lockup of all equity interests of Newco held by such Voting Stockholder immediately after the Effective Time for a period of 180 days from the Effective Time (or 12 months, in the case of the Company’s co-founders), and (iii) be bound by certain other covenants and agreements related to the Business Combination. The Voting Stockholders hold sufficient shares of FiscalNote to cause the approval of the Business Combination on behalf of FiscalNote.
Registration Rights Agreement
At the closing of the Business Combination, Newco, the Sponsor, the Backstop Purchasers (as defined below) and certain other holders of Newco Class A Common Stock will enter into an amended and restated registration rights agreement (the “Amended and Restated Registration Rights Agreement”) pursuant to which, among other matters, certain stockholders of the Company and FiscalNote will be granted certain customary demand and “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to their respective shares of Newco Class A Common Stock.
Backstop Agreement
In connection with the signing of the Business Combination Agreement, the Company and certain affiliates of the Sponsor (the “Backstop Purchasers”) entered into a backstop agreement (the “Backstop Agreement”) whereby the Backstop Purchasers have agreed, subject to the other terms and conditions included therein, at the BPS Closing (as defined in the Backstop Agreement), to subscribe for Newco Class A Common Stock in order to fund any redemptions by shareholders of the Company in connection with the Business Combination, in an amount of up to $175,000,000 (the “Sponsor Backstop”).
Liquidity and Going Concern
Our liquidity needs through December 31, 2021 have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares (as defined below), a loan under a promissory note with our Sponsor of approximately $176,000 (the “Note”), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement of $2.0 million. On October 18, 2021, we entered into a warrant purchase agreement with our Sponsor whereby our Sponsor agreed to purchase an additional 1,500,000 Private Placement Warrants for aggregate proceeds to the Company of $1.5 million. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, members of the Company’s founding team or any of their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” we have until November 2, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after November 2, 2022.
Over this time period, we will be using funds not held in the Trust account for paying existing accounts payable, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures,and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and have concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 has been related to our formation, Initial Public Offering, which was consummated on November 2, 2020, and since the Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for and due diligence on a prospective target for an Initial Business Combination.We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our Initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $3.7 million, which consisted of approximately $6.0 million in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a non-operating gain of approximately $2.2 million for the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $71,000 in income earned on investments held in the Trust Account.
For the period from August 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $9.1 million, which consisted of a non-operating loss of approximately $8.0 million from changes in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, financing costs incurred for derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $469,000, and approximately $672,000 in general and administrative expenses, partially offset by approximately $31,000 in interest income earned on the Trust Account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On August 31, 2020, our Initial Shareholders paid an aggregate of $25,000 for certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of 5,031,250 Class B ordinary shares (the “founder shares”). Our Sponsor transferred 25,000 of the founder shares to each of Marc Holtzman and Bradford Allen and 300,000 of the founder shares to Peter Lee Coker Jr., the three independent directors at that time. These 350,000 shares will not be subject to forfeiture in the event the underwriters’ over-allotment option is not exercised. The Sponsor agreed to surrender for no consideration up to 656,250 founder shares, on a pro rata basis, to the extent that the option to purchase additional units was not exercised in full by the underwriters. The forfeiture was adjusted to the extent that the option to purchase additional units is not exercised in full by the underwriters so that the founder shares will represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. On November 27, 2020, the over-allotment option expired and 656,250 founder shares were surrendered for no consideration. In addition, on May 24, 2021, Mr. Coker resigned and as a result forfeited all of his 300,000 founder shares that the sponsor had previously transferred to him and assigned and transferred such founder shares to the sponsor for no consideration in connection with his resignation.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement of 5,500,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $5.5 million. On October 18, 2021, we entered into a warrant purchase agreement with our Sponsor whereby our Sponsor agreed to purchase an additional 1,500,000 Private Placement Warrants for aggregate proceeds to the Company of $1.5 million.
Due To/ From Related Party
As of December 31, 2020, we had approximately $412,000 due from an affiliate of our Sponsor, which was comprised of the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held in the bank account of an affiliate of our Sponsor, and had an aggregate amount due to an affiliate of our Sponsor of approximately $176,000, which was presented net on the consolidated balance sheets. The net amount was settled with the affiliate of our Sponsor in March 2021.
Related Party Loans
On August 28, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $250,000 to be used for the payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). The Note was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. As of December 31, 2020, we owed approximately $176,000 under the Note. We repaid the Note on March 31, 2021.
Working Capital Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, members of our founding team or any of their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters are entitled to deferred underwriting commissions of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $6.1 million in the aggregate, which will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities and investments is included in interest earned on investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board's ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 480 "Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity" and FASB ASC Topic 815, "Derivatives and Hedging" ("ASC 815"). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering (the "Public Warrants") and Private Placement Warrants as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. Subsequently, the value of the Public Warrants are measured based on the trading price since being separately listed and traded, and the Private Placement Warrants are measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model, or based on the public warrant trading price taking into account certain provisions in the warrant agreement.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all of our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Under ASC 480, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of the redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net loss by the weighted average ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net loss per ordinary shares does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,750,000 ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted loss per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from August 28, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements that, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our balance sheet.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.