Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Where possible, we have tried to identify these forward-looking statements by using words such as “believe,” “contemplate,” “continue,” “due,” “goal,” “objective,” “plan,” “seek,” “target,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “would,” “could,” “should,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” or “estimate,” and similar expressions or variations. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks including, but not limited to, those set forth in the “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a pre-commercial nitric oxide-based pharmaceutical company focused on dermatology and anti-infective therapies. Our vision is to create the world’s leader in nitric oxide-based science, technology, and clinical translation in support of delivering safe and efficacious therapies using our proprietary nitric oxide-based technology platform, Nitricil™, to generate macromolecular NCEs. Our proprietary technology platform leverages nitric oxide’s naturally occurring anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, and immunomodulatory mechanisms of action to treat a range of diseases with significant unmet needs. Nitric oxide plays a vital role in the natural immune system response against microbial pathogens and is a critical regulator of inflammation. Our ability to harness nitric oxide and its multiple mechanisms of action has enabled us to create a platform with the potential to generate differentiated product candidates. The two key components of our nitric oxide platform are our proprietary Nitricil technology, which drives the creation of NCEs, and our formulation science, both of which we use to tune our product candidates for specific potential indications. Our ability to deploy nitric oxide in a solid form, on demand and in localized formulations allows us the potential to improve patient outcomes in a variety of diseases.
We have clinical-stage dermatology and anti-infective drug candidates with multi-factorial (SB204), anti-viral (SB206), anti-fungal (SB208), and anti-inflammatory (SB414) mechanisms of action. We have also introduced a possible anti-viral product candidate for the treatment of external genital warts (SB207). We have conducted or are currently conducting preclinical work on NCEs, including berdazimer sodium, and formulations for the potential treatment of (i) SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 (SB019); (ii) antimicrobial indications for the adjacent companion animal health market (NVN4100); (iii) cervical intraepithelial neoplasia caused by high-risk human papilloma virus in the men’s and women’s health field (WH504 and WH602); and (iv) inflammatory disorders.
We are currently focusing our efforts and resources on our priority development pipeline candidates, which include (i) progressing our lead program, SB206, as a treatment for molluscum contagiosum, or molluscum, including preparing for and seeking U.S. regulatory approval, and implementing prelaunch strategy and U.S. commercial preparation; (ii) advancing our late-stage product candidate, SB204, for the treatment of acne vulgaris, or acne, within the U.S., as our second lead program toward a registrational Phase 3 study, based on two prior Phase 3 studies; and (iii) progressing our SB019 development program into a Phase 1 study for a potential intranasal prophylaxis or therapeutic for mild-to-moderate COVID-19 infection.
Please see additional details related to our “Priority Development Pipeline” and “Pipeline Expansion Opportunities”, as described in the section entitled “Business” in this Annual Report.
Business Updates
During 2021, our primary programmatic focus was on our molluscum product candidate, SB206, and we intend to continue to focus our near term development efforts on this program. Following the positive top-line results from the B-SIMPLE4 trial announced in June 2021 and the comprehensive B-SIMPLE4 safety data announced in September 2021, we target a potential NDA submission of SB206 for molluscum no later than the fourth quarter of 2022. We previously articulated a targeted NDA submission of SB206 during the third quarter of 2022, however, due to factors including supply chain constraints, impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, certain manufacturing related equipment issues and scheduling challenges, both within our corporate facility and with third-party CMOs, we have adjusted our expected timing accordingly.
Thus, we continue to prepare for a regulatory submission and potential approval of SB206 as a treatment for molluscum. The timing of the targeted NDA submission is dependent upon: (i) completion of our new manufacturing facility to have the
infrastructure and capability necessary to produce cGMP API registration batches; (ii) continued technical transfer activities to our drug product CMO and preparing the necessary registration batches of drug product; (iii) preparatory activities and data accumulation related to the NDA submission including conducting customary drug substance and drug product stability protocols; and (iv) regulatory and quality documentation compilation related to our preclinical CMC data related to the B-SIMPLE trials, and our drug manufacturing and related processes.
We are continuing to consider and progress the prelaunch strategy and commercial preparations for SB206, if approved. We have selected Syneos Health, a fully integrated biopharmaceutical solutions organization, as our commercial solutions provider for SB206 as a treatment for molluscum. Our relationship with Syneos Health, structured as a fee-for-service arrangement, is focused on implementing the SB206 prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation, if approved by the FDA.
In September 2021, we also announced our updated strategic priorities and outlined potential key milestones. In addition to the regulatory progression of SB206, including implementing prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation, we also announced our intention to progress (a) SB204, a topical monotherapy for the treatment of acne, by (i) preparing for a pivotal Phase 3 study during 2022; (ii) targeting the conduct of a potential pivotal Phase 3 trial in 2023; and (iii) targeting a potential NDA submission of SB204 for acne in 2024; and (b) SB019, as a potential intranasal treatment option for COVID-19, by (i) targeting a Phase 1 study in healthy volunteers in 2022; (ii) targeting the conduct of a potential Phase 2/3 study(s) in 2023; and (iii) targeting a potential NDA submission of SB019 for COVID-19 in 2024. The progression of the SB019 program, subsequent to the execution of a Phase 1 study, and the progression of the SB204 program, including the execution of the potentially registrational SB204 Phase 3 trial, are subject to obtaining additional financing or strategic partnering.
Further advancement of our molluscum program beyond the potential NDA submission of SB206, or advancement of any other early-stage or late-stage clinical program across our platform, has been and may be further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and is subject to our ability to secure additional capital. Sources of additional capital may potentially include (i) equity or debt financings, including through sales of common stock to Aspire Capital pursuant to the July 2020 Aspire CSPA; or (ii) non-dilutive sources, such as partnerships, collaborations, licensing, grants or other strategic relationships. Our equity issuances during the year ended December 31, 2021, have resulted in significant dilution to our existing stockholders. Any issuance of equity, or debt convertible into equity, would result in further significant dilution to our existing stockholders.
Working Capital and Additional Capital Needs
As of December 31, 2021, we had a total cash and cash equivalents balance of $47.1 million and positive working capital of $43.0 million.
We will need significant additional funding to support our planned and future operating activities and make further advancements in our product development programs beyond what is currently included in our operating forecast and related cash projection. We do not currently have sufficient funds to complete commercialization of any of our product candidates, and our funding needs will largely be determined by our commercialization strategy for SB206, subject to the NDA submission timing and the regulatory approval process and outcome. We are working with Syneos Health to focus on implementing the SB206 prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation, if approved by the FDA.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2021, plus expected contractual payments to be received in connection with existing licensing agreements, will provide us with adequate liquidity to fund our planned operating needs into the first quarter of 2023.
Please refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report for further discussion of our current liquidity and our future funding needs.
Manufacturing and Supplies
We have adopted a strategy of engaging with, utilizing and relying on third parties through partnerships, collaborations, licensing or other strategic relationships for the performance of activities, processes and services that (i) do not typically result in the generation of significant new intellectual property; and (ii) can leverage their existing robust infrastructure, systems and facilities, as well as associated subject matter expertise. A parallel and inter-related strategic objective has been to manage our own internal resources, including our manufacturing capabilities.
At this stage, we intend to pursue a dual strategy of identifying and designating a partner to become the primary third-party external supplier of our proprietary berdazimer sodium (NVN1000) drug substance to support long-term manufacturing needs, while preparing internal capabilities to support small-scale and short-term manufacturing needs, including manufacture of
registration batches to support an SB206 NDA submission and initial commercialization inventory, as described in the sections entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies-Drug Substance” and “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies-Internal Capability” in this Annual Report.
As discussed in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies-Drug Product” in this Annual Report, we have executed a master contract manufacturing agreement with Orion to enable technology transfer and manufacturing of clinical trial materials for future clinical trials with our topical product candidates in addition to potential commercial supply quantities. We continue to work toward completion of technical transfer and manufacturing activities to provide the necessary regulatory registration batches of drug product for our planned NDA submission of SB206 for molluscum, and if any of our product candidates are approved, commercial supply of drug product. A completed manufacturing technology transfer to Orion will enable the manufacture of multiple assets for supply of clinical trial materials and, potentially, commercial quantities if any of our product candidates are approved.
As we move forward with these initiatives, we will need significant additional funding to continue our operating activities, including technical transfer and manufacturing activities with third party CMOs, development and utilization of internal capabilities and cost structure changes, and to make further advancements in our product development programs, as described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report.
Supply Chain
We continue to assess the impact of COVID-19 on our supply chain and related vendors and global supply chain constraints across various industries, including interruption of, or delays in receiving, supplies of raw materials, API or drug product from third-party manufacturers due to staffing shortages, production slowdowns or stoppages and disruptions in delivery systems. We are also continuing to evaluate the impacts of COVID-19 and global supply chain constraints on our new facility. We expect to complete the commissioning and validation of our new facility to support various research and development and cGMP activities, including small-scale manufacturing capabilities for API and drug product, by the end of the first half of 2022. We are in the process of, and proceeding with the related preparatory activities associated with qualifying, commissioning and validating the manufacturing equipment for use in API production.
We currently rely on third-party suppliers to provide the raw materials that are used by us or our third-party manufacturers in the manufacture of our product candidates. There are a limited number of suppliers for raw materials, including nitric oxide, that we use to manufacture our product candidates. We also rely on third-party logistics vendors to transport our raw materials, API, and drug products through our supply chain. Certain materials, including our API, have designated hazard classifications that limit available transportation modes or quantities. Third-party logistics vendors may choose to delay or defer transportation of materials from time to time, especially in light of the pandemic and related global supply chain constraints, which could adversely impact the timing or cost of our manufacturing supply chain activities or other associated development activities.
The timetable for development of our product candidates has been impacted and may face further disruption and our business could be further adversely affected by the outbreak of COVID-19 and its variants. In particular, COVID-19 impacted the timing of trial initiation of our B-SIMPLE4 Phase 3 study and is one factor influencing the Company’s adjustment of its targeted SB206 submission timing, planned for no later than the fourth quarter of 2022. Therefore, we continue to assess any potential further impact of COVID-19 on our operations.
As we move forward with these initiatives, we will need significant additional funding to continue our operating activities, including technical transfer and manufacturing activities with third party CMOs, development and utilization of internal capabilities and cost structure changes, and to make further advancements in our product development programs, as described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report.
Amended Sato Agreement
As described within the section entitled “Business-Collaboration and Licensing Agreements” in this Annual Report, in 2017, we entered into the Sato Agreement, whereby we licensed rights to develop, use, and sell SB204 in certain topical dosage forms in Japan for the treatment of acne vulgaris, and to manufacture the finished form of SB204 for sale in Japan. In October 2018, we entered into a second amendment to the Sato Agreement which expanded the Amended Sato Agreement to include SB206, our product candidate for the treatment of viral skin infections, including molluscum.
The material terms of the Amended Sato Agreement and related revenue recognition are described in “Note 4-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
COVID-19 Overview
While certain COVID-19 vaccines have been approved and are now available for use in the United States and certain other countries, we are unable to predict how widely utilized the vaccines will be, whether they will be effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19 (including its variant strains), and when or if normal economic activity and business operations will resume. Vaccine resistance, coupled with the emergence of fast-spreading variants have introduced renewed uncertainty into whether additional measures will be implemented to combat the spread of COVID-19 including in the locations where we do business. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted the global economy, disrupted global supply chains, disrupted clinical trials and created significant volatility in and disruption of financial markets. The full extent of the pandemic, related business and travel restrictions and changes to behavior intended to reduce its spread remain uncertain as the pandemic and the potential impact of variants of the virus that causes COVID-19 continue to evolve globally.
We have continued to closely monitor and rapidly respond to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees, our community and our business operations. We have worked to continue our critical business functions, including continued operation of our development efforts, and we have adopted a series of precautionary measures and will continue to do so as the circumstances warrant, including increased sanitization of our facilities, use of personal protective equipment, as appropriate, and physical distancing practices to help protect our employees’ health and safety as they continue to advance important research related to our product candidates.
Although it is not possible at this time to estimate the entirety of the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had or will have on our business, operations and employees, our CMOs, our contract research organizations, or CROs, our partners, our collaborators in clinical research, and our contractors, suppliers and vendors supporting our ongoing facility build-out and cGMP manufacturing capability project, any continued spread of COVID-19 and its variants, measures taken by governments, actions taken to protect employees from the pandemic, and the broad impact of the pandemic on all business activities and financial markets may materially and adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition and stock price. Please refer to “Results of Operations” for further discussion of these items. Due to numerous uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, we are unable to predict the nature and extent of the future impacts that the pandemic will have on our financial condition and operating results. These uncertainties include, among other things, the ultimate severity and duration of the pandemic, including the efficacy or availability of a treatment or vaccine for COVID-19 and its variants; governmental, business or other actions that have been, or will be, taken in response to the pandemic, including continued restrictions on travel and mobility, business closures and operating restrictions and imposition of social distancing measures; impacts of the pandemic on the conduct of our previous or potential future clinical trials, including with respect to availability of investigators and clinical trial sites, patients’ ability to complete the necessary visits and clinical trial site operations, and monitoring of clinical trial data; impacts of the pandemic on regulatory authorities; and impacts of the pandemic on the United States and global economies more broadly. For additional information about risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our business, our financial condition or our results of operations, see the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report.
Corporate Updates
Chief Commercial Officer
On November 2, 2021, we announced the appointment of Brian J. Johnson, MBA, as our Chief Commercial Officer. Mr. Johnson’s experience includes implementing commercial strategy and message development through tactical planning and execution at dermatology companies such as Ortho Pharmaceutical Corporation, Medicis, and Galderma. From 2015 to 2018, Mr. Johnson served as Chief Commercial Officer of Novan, where he led pre-commercial activities including the assessment of the molluscum contagiosum market opportunity and the acne market sizing and segmentation project.
June 2021 Public Offering
On June 17, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. relating to the offering, issuance and sale of 3,636,364 shares of common stock. The June 2021 Public Offering closed on June 21, 2021. Net proceeds from the June 2021 Public Offering were approximately $37.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $2.8 million.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the June 2021 Public Offering.
Reverse Stock Split
On July 28, 2020, our stockholders approved a proposal to amend our restated certificate of incorporation to effect a reverse stock split of our common stock at a ratio of not less than one-for-two and not more than one-for-fifteen, with such ratio and the implementation and timing of such reverse stock split to be determined by our board of directors in its sole discretion. On May 18, 2021, our board of directors approved a one-for-ten reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding common stock, or the Reverse Stock Split. On May 24, 2021, we filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware a Certificate of Amendment to our Restated Certificate of Incorporation in order to effect the Reverse Stock Split, or the Charter Amendment. The Reverse Stock Split became effective at 5:00 pm Eastern Time on May 25, 2021. Pursuant to the Charter Amendment, on the effective date thereof, each outstanding ten (10) shares of common stock combined into and became one (1) share of common stock and the number of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock was reduced to 15,170,678. The new CUSIP number for our common stock is 66988N205.
All references to numbers of shares of common stock and per-share information in this Annual Report have been adjusted retroactively, as appropriate, to reflect the Reverse Stock Split.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the Reverse Stock Split.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 22, 2020, we entered into a promissory note for an unsecured loan in the amount of approximately $1.0 million under the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP. The PPP was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The loan to the Company under the PPP was made through PNC Bank, National Association. We applied for and during the second quarter of 2021 received notification of forgiveness of the entire loan balance, including any accrued interest.
See “Note 9-Paycheck Protection Program” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the Loan.
Triangle Business Center Facility Lease
On January 18, 2021, we entered into a lease with an initial term expiring in 2032, which has subsequently been amended, for 19,265 rentable square feet located in Durham, North Carolina. This site serves as our corporate headquarters and will support various cGMP activities, including research and development and small-scale manufacturing capabilities. These capabilities include the infrastructure necessary to support small-scale drug substance manufacturing and the ability to act as a primary, or secondary backup, component of a potential future commercial supply chain.
We are preparing our new location to support various cGMP activities, including research and development and small-scale manufacturing capabilities, as described in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies” in this Annual Report.
See “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the previous facility lease transaction.
Financial Overview
Since our incorporation in 2006, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to developing our nitric oxide platform technology and resulting product candidates, including conducting preclinical and clinical trials and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We conduct these activities in a single operating segment. To date, we have focused our funding activities primarily on equity and strategic relationships. However, other historical forms of funding have included payments received from licensing and supply arrangements, as well as government research contracts.
We have never generated revenue from product sales and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $279.0 million, and there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We incurred net losses of $29.7 million and $29.3 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to continue to incur substantial losses in the future as we conduct our planned operating activities. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval from the FDA for our clinical-stage product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we and/or our commercial partners would expect to incur significant expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
Please refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report for further discussion of our current liquidity and our future funding needs.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
License and collaboration revenue consists of the amortization of certain fixed and variable consideration under the Amended Sato Agreement that (i) has been received to date in the form of upfront and milestone payments; or (ii) are future, non-contingent milestone payments that become payable upon the earlier occurrence of specified fixed dates in the future or the achievement of specified milestone events. This consideration is being recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated performance period.
In November 2020, Sato determined its initial Japanese Phase 1 study for SB206 would require an amended design, including evaluation of potential lower dose strengths, to further refine dose tolerability in a subsequent Phase 1 study. Based upon (i) the need for an additional Phase 1 study; (ii) Sato’s estimated comprehensive developmental schedule for SB206 including additional post-Phase 1 clinical trials; and (iii) current and future Japanese clinical trial material manufacturing and technical transfer considerations, we concluded that a prospective delay in Sato’s overall SB206 development plan had occurred. We estimated the program timeline to be extended by 1.75 years from our previous estimate, and a corresponding extension of the performance period estimate to 9.25 years, completing in the second quarter of 2026.
In late July 2021, Sato communicated an updated plan regarding its amended design for its additional Japanese Phase 1 study for SB206. The amended study design includes evaluation of potential lower dose strengths, including potential further refinement in a subsequent dose tolerability study. As part of the communication regarding these Phase 1 studies, Sato also communicated an updated comprehensive timeline for the Japanese SB206 program. The updated timeline assumes that the 12% formulation is appropriate to proceed for development in Japan, and is to be reassessed based on the findings of the Phase 1 study.
Based upon (i) the expected timing of the additional Phase 1 study, including a subsequent dose tolerability study; (ii) Sato’s estimated comprehensive developmental schedule for SB206, including additional post-Phase 1 clinical trials; and (iii) current and future Japanese clinical trial material manufacturing and technical transfer considerations, including the manufacturing site for drug product, we concluded that a prospective delay in Sato’s overall SB206 Japanese development plan had occurred in July 2021. We estimate the program timeline to be extended by 0.75 years from our previous estimate, and a corresponding extension of the performance period estimate to 10 years, completing in the first quarter of 2027. We understand that the progression of the Japanese SB204 program could follow the same timeline as the Japanese SB206 program, subject to the nature of the results of Sato’s comprehensive asset developmental program, including SB206. This estimated timeline remains subject to prospective reassessment and adjustment based upon Sato’s interaction with the Japanese regulatory authorities and other developmental and timing considerations.
The material terms of the Amended Sato Agreement and related revenue recognition are described in “Note 4-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Government Contracts and Grants Revenue
Government research contracts and grant revenue relates to the research and development of our nitric oxide platform for preclinical advancement of NCEs and formulations related to potential treatments for illnesses in the women’s health field. Revenue related to conditional government contracts and grants is recognized when qualifying expenses are incurred.
Research and Development Expenses
Since our incorporation, we have focused our resources on our research and development activities, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing development efforts and activities related to regulatory filings for our product candidates. Research and development expenses, including those paid to third parties for which there is no alternative use, are expensed as they are incurred. Research and development expenses include:
•external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, investigative sites and consultants to conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•costs to acquire, develop and manufacture supplies for clinical trials and preclinical studies at our facilities;
•costs to establish drug substance and drug product manufacturing capabilities with external CMOs and to enhance drug delivery device technologies through partnerships with technology manufacturing vendors;
•legal and other professional fees related to compliance with FDA requirements;
•licensing fees and milestone payments incurred under license agreements;
•salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our research and development functions; and
•facilities, depreciation and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of facilities, utilities, equipment and other supplies.
From our incorporation through December 31, 2021, we have incurred approximately $202.3 million in research and development expenses to develop, expand or otherwise improve our nitric oxide platform and resulting product candidates. This amount is net of $10.5 million of aggregate contra-research and development expense representing amortization of the liability related to the $12.0 million of funding received from Ligand to pursue the development and regulatory approval of SB206. For the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, we recognized amortization, or a decrease in contra-research and development expense, of $0.1 million and $2.2 million respectively.
For a description of the methodology and assumptions used to recognize the ratable amortization of this liability, as well as other information about the Funding Agreement with Ligand, please see “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
The table below sets forth our research and development expenses incurred for external clinical programs and the related product candidates, and other research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Other research and development expenses include: (i) all preclinical program and development costs, including WH504, WH602 and SB019; (ii) manufacturing capability and campaign costs; (iii) external costs to establish drug substance and drug product manufacturing capabilities at third-party CMOs; (iv) facility and infrastructure costs, excluding capital costs subject to depreciation; and (v) costs related to all research and development salaries and related personnel costs.
(1)Amounts shown net of $0.1 million and $2.2 million of contra-research and development expense recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the Funding Agreement with Ligand described in the section entitled “Business-Research and Development Arrangements” in this Annual Report and in “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our major clinical development activities were primarily associated with the continued conduct of our current SB206 Phase 3 clinical program activities. Our plan and timelines for further clinical development of SB206 have been and may be further impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that for the foreseeable future, the substantial majority of our research and development efforts will be focused on: (i) preparing for and seeking U.S. regulatory approval of SB206 as a treatment for molluscum; (ii) conducting drug manufacturing capability transfer activities to external third-party CMOs, including a drug delivery device technology enhancement project; (iii) developmental and regulatory activities for our SB019 program (Coronaviridae (COVID-19)), including a Phase 1 study, targeted for initiation in 2022; and (iv) preparatory activities for a potential Phase 3 study, targeted for initiation in 2023, related to SB204 as a treatment for acne.
We also expect to incur substantial costs in 2022 associated with our research and development personnel, and certain manufacturing capability costs related to the infrastructure necessary to support small-scale drug substance and drug product manufacturing operations at our new corporate headquarters, including capital costs subject to depreciation and various ongoing operating costs. We may decide to revise our development and operating plans or the related timing, depending on information we learn through our research and development activities, including regulatory submission efforts related to SB206, potential SB206 commercialization strategies developed in conjunction with Syneos Health, the impact of outside factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to enter into strategic arrangements, our ability to access additional capital and our financial priorities.
The successful development and potential for regulatory approval of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of our current product candidates or any future product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of product candidates. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report for a discussion of the risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development projects.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation expenses for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate development and other administrative functions. Other general and administrative expenses include market research costs, prelaunch strategy costs, including medical affairs, and commercial preparation activities for SB206, allocated depreciation and facility-related costs, legal costs of pursuing patent protection of our intellectual property, insurance coverage and professional services fees for auditing, tax, general legal, business development, litigation defense and other corporate and administrative services.
We expect to continue to incur substantial general and administrative expenses in 2022 in support of our prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation activities for SB206. We may decide to revise our plans or the related timing associated with our prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation activities for SB206, depending on information we learn through our regulatory submission process and potential SB206 commercialization strategies developed in conjunction with Syneos Health.
We also expect to continue to incur substantial general and administrative expenses in 2022 in support of our operating activities and as necessary to operate in a public company environment. Significant general and administrative expenses associated with operations in a public company environment include legal, accounting, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums and investor relations activities.
Impairment loss on long-lived assets
As of June 29, 2020, we evaluated all of our long-lived assets for potential held for sale classification, and assessed our remaining long-lived assets classified as held and used for potential impairment pursuant to accounting policies described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. This evaluation and assessment was triggered by the decommissioning of our large scale drug manufacturing capability at our previous Morrisville, North Carolina, facility and by preparatory actions taken in connection with the planned lease termination transaction for the facility that was executed in July 2020. In connection with this evaluation and impairment assessment, which is described in the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations-Impairment loss on long-lived assets” in this Annual Report and in “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we recognized an impairment loss on long-lived assets that represent the carrying value in excess of fair value of assets held and used or the carrying value in excess of fair value less cost to sell for assets held for sale.
Loss on facility asset group disposition
In conjunction with the lease termination transaction executed in July 2020, all assets and liabilities within the related facility asset group were disposed of on July 16, 2020. As of the disposition date, the net aggregate carrying value of the assets and liabilities was written off, combined with certain other direct costs incurred in connection with the lease termination transaction, which resulted in a loss on disposition, which is described in “Note 17-Asset Group Disposition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of (i) foreign currency adjustments related to the contract asset and contract receivables related to the Amended Sato Agreement; (ii) gain on extinguishment of debt related to the forgiveness of our PPP loan; (iii) interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents; and (iv) other miscellaneous income and expenses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods indicated:
* Not meaningful
Revenue
License and collaboration revenue of $2.8 million and $4.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, was associated with our performance during the period and the related amortization of the non-refundable upfront and expected milestone payments under the Amended Sato Agreement. The change in revenue recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 relates to changes in estimates related to the expected duration of the combined SB204 and SB206 development program timeline. A change in estimate occurred in November 2020, and again in July 2021. The most recent change in estimate resulted in a program timeline extension of the performance period estimate to 10 years, completing in the first quarter of 2027. The material terms of the Amended Sato Agreement and related revenue recognition are described in “Note 4-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Government research contracts and grants revenue totaled $0.1 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized revenue of less than $0.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively, related to the $1.1 million grant we received in September 2019 from the DoD’s CDMRP as part of its Peer Reviewed Cancer Research Program. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized revenue of $0.1 million and $0.2 million, respectively, related to the $1.0 million grant we received in February 2020 from the NIH and to the $0.2 million grant received in September 2019 from the NIH.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net increase of $0.6 million, or 3% was primarily related to (i) a net $1.4 million increase in the SB206 program, (ii) a $0.5 million decrease in other research and development expenses and (iii) a $0.3 million decrease in our SB414 program.
In the SB206 program, we experienced (i) a $2.6 million decrease in gross clinical trial costs primarily due to the conduct and completion of the B-SIMPLE4 Phase 3 trial during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the relatively higher cost of B-SIMPLE4 Phase 3 trial start-up and conduct activities and B-SIMPLE 1 and B-SIMPLE 2 Phase 3 trial wind down activities during the comparative year ended December 31, 2020, (ii) a $1.9 million increase in regulatory consulting services, stability and other analytical testing services, and CMC consulting services and materials in support of our planned SB206 NDA submission, and (iii) a $2.1 million decrease in contra-research and development expense from the ratable amortization of the Ligand Funding Agreement liability, which represents Ligand’s contribution to specified clinical development and regulatory activities for SB206 as a treatment for molluscum. The SB206 clinical development activities conducted during the comparative period in 2020, including but not limited to the B-SIMPLE 1 and B-SIMPLE 2 Phase 3 trials, were eligible for Ligand contribution and associated amortized contra-research and development expense recognition, but the B-SIMPLE 4 Phase 3 trial conducted during a portion of the comparative year ended December 31, 2020 and during the current year ended December 31, 2021 was not eligible for Ligand contributions and therefore no contra-research and development expense was recognized against the gross B-SIMPLE 4 trial costs. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we recorded $0.1 million and $2.2 million, respectively, of contra-research and development expense, related to amortization of the liability related to the Funding Agreement with Ligand, based on our reassessment of the estimated total cost to progress the SB206 program to a potential United States regulatory approval. Further information regarding our reassessment of the SB206 program is described in “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The $0.5 million decrease in other research and development expenses was primarily driven by (i) a $1.6 million net decrease in research and development personnel costs, (ii) a $0.8 million net decrease in rent and depreciation expense following the reduction of our real estate footprint due to the exit and the lease termination of our former Morrisville, North Carolina facility completed in the third quarter of 2020, (iii) $0.3 million of discrete facility decommissioning costs incurred in the second and third quarters of 2020 associated with our former Morrisville, North Carolina facility, and (iv) a $0.7 million decrease in our preclinical, grant-funded WH602 and WH604 programs; partially offset by (i) $1.2 million costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to our in vitro and in vivo studies to evaluate our SB019 product candidate as an intranasal treatment option for COVID-19, (ii) a $1.0 million net increase in external drug manufacturing technology transfer projects ongoing with our contract manufacturing partners, (iii) a $0.6 million net increase in other facility preparation and operating service costs, and (iv) $0.1 million costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 associated with exploratory work to evaluate our new chemical entity, NVN4100, as a potential product candidate for antimicrobial indications in companion animal health.
The $1.6 million net decrease in research and development personnel costs is primarily due to (i) a $0.7 million decrease in non-cash compensation expense related to the change in the fair value of our Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, (ii) a $0.4 million decrease in non-cash compensation expense associated with stock option compensation, (iii) a $0.4 million decrease in discrete severance charges and retention incentive compensation associated with business realignment and personnel reduction actions taken during the first quarter of 2020, and (iv) a $0.1 million decrease in recurring salary and benefits costs due to a reduced number of research and development personnel between the two comparative periods.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $11.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of approximately $1.1 million, or 10% from the prior year was primarily due to (i) a $0.9 million increase in insurance premium expenses associated with our directors’ and officers’ liability policies, (ii) a $0.3 million net increase in general and administrative personnel and related costs, and (iii) a $1.9 million increase in SB206 prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation costs; partially offset by (i) $1.7 million of aggregate non-cash expense recognized during 2020 related to the issuance of commitment shares in consideration for entering into the June 2020 Aspire CSPA and July 2020 Aspire CSPA and (ii) a $0.3 million decrease in rent and depreciation expense following the reduction of our real estate footprint within our Morrisville, North Carolina facility after the lease termination completed in the third quarter of 2020.
The $0.3 million net increase in general and administrative personnel and related costs includes (i) a $0.3 million increase in cash-based compensation expenses related to a success bonus paid to all employees following the announcement of the positive top-line results of our B-SIMPLE 4 study and hiring bonuses for new employees and (ii) a $0.3 million increase in non-cash compensation expense associated with stock option compensation, which was offset with a $0.3 million decrease in non-cash compensation expenses related to the change in the fair value of our Performance Plan liability.
Impairment loss on long-lived assets
As of June 29, 2020, we evaluated all of our long-lived assets for potential held for sale classification, and assessed our remaining long-lived assets classified as held and used for potential impairment pursuant to accounting policies described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. Our evaluation resulted in a $2.4 million non-cash impairment loss on long-lived assets recognized during the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020, comprised of (i) a $0.9 million impairment charge recognized on the asset group associated with the Morrisville, North Carolina facility, including the right-of-use asset, leasehold improvements and other property affixed to the facility, (ii) a $0.2 million impairment charge recognized on furniture and equipment to be sold to our landlord’s new tenant pursuant to a bill of sale described in “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, (iii) a $0.8 million impairment charge recognized on certain manufacturing and laboratory equipment that we intended to sell through a consignment seller, and (iv) a $0.5 million impairment charge recognized on equipment and other property not directly associated with our continuing research and development and pilot scale drug manufacturing capabilities.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, certain equipment assets we had previously classified as held for sale during the aforementioned June 29, 2020 evaluation were reclassified as held and used. The reclassification determination was based upon new facts and circumstances that enabled us to re-use the equipment in connection with our planned build-out of our newly leased facility in Durham, North Carolina. Upon reclassification to assets held and used, we avoided certain estimated selling costs that had been included in the previously recognized impairment charge during the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020 and, as a result, we recognized a $0.1 million favorable adjustment to the impairment charge during the quarterly period ended December 31, 2020.
During the second quarter of 2021, we assessed the carrying value of a disposal group classified as assets held for sale in the consolidated balance sheets. The disposal group and related assets consisted of certain manufacturing and laboratory equipment associated with our previous large scale drug manufacturing capability that was being sold over time through a consignment seller. Based on our assessment of the disposal group’s recoverability, during the second quarter of 2021, we recognized a $0.1 million non-cash impairment loss on long-lived assets that represented the full write off of its remaining carrying value.
For additional information regarding our impairment evaluation see “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Loss on facility asset group disposition
In conjunction with the lease termination transaction as described in “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, all assets and liabilities within the facility asset group were disposed of on July 16, 2020. As of the disposition date, the aggregate carrying value of the assets was $7.3 million and the aggregate carrying value of the associated lease liabilities was $6.0 million. The $1.3 million net charge resulting from the write-off of these assets and liabilities was combined with $0.5 million of other direct costs incurred in connection with the lease termination transaction to result in a $1.8 million total loss on disposition. This loss, which is in addition to the impairment loss recognized during the quarterly period ended June 30, 2020 and described in “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, was based upon Company-specific facts and circumstances associated with the July 2020 lease termination transaction, rather than the market participant valuation model that was required to be used during the impairment assessment as of June 29, 2020.
For additional information regarding our facility asset group disposition see “Note 17-Asset Group Disposition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was $0.2 million income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.9 million income for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily due to a $1.6 million negative impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations over the comparative periods for certain time-based milestones related to the Amended Sato
Agreement, partially offset by a $1.0 million gain on debt extinguishment related to the forgiveness of our PPP loan in June 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $279.0 million. We incurred net losses of $29.7 million and $29.3 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates and potentially begin commercialization activities. We are subject to all of the risks inherent in the development of new pharmaceutical products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval from the FDA for our clinical-stage product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we and/or our commercial partners and commercial solutions providers would expect to incur significant expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution.
As of December 31, 2021, we had a total cash and cash equivalents balance of $47.1 million and positive working capital of $43.0 million.
From January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021, we have raised total equity and debt proceeds of $96.9 million to fund our operations, including (i) $37.2 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock in the June 2021 public offering (as defined below); (ii) $5.2 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock (or pre-funded warrants in lieu thereof) and accompanying common warrants in the March 2020 Public Offering (as defined below); (iii) $7.2 million in net proceeds from the sale of common stock (or pre-funded warrants in lieu thereof) in the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering (as defined below); (iv) an additional $6.0 million of proceeds associated with exercises through December 31, 2021 of common warrants issued as part of the March 2020 Public Offering and March 2020 Registered Direct Offering; (v) $40.3 million in proceeds from the sale of common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA and the common stock purchase agreements entered into with Aspire Capital dated August 30, 2019 and June 16, 2020; and (vi) less than $0.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options. We also obtained a loan under the PPP (as defined below) of approximately $1.0 million in April 2020 to support certain qualified expenses, including payroll and rental expense, which is described below. The PPP loan was forgiven in June 2021.
To date, we have focused our funding activities primarily on equity financings, while generating additional liquidity and capital through other sources, including: (i) governmental research contracts and grants totaling $12.9 million; (ii) our licensing and supply arrangements with Sato, totaling $28.8 million; and (iii) $25.0 million and $12.0 million in proceeds from two funding transactions during the second quarter of 2019 with Reedy Creek Investments LLC, or Reedy Creek, and Ligand, respectively, as described below.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2021, plus expected contractual payments to be received in connection with existing licensing agreements, will provide us with adequate liquidity to fund our planned operating needs into the first quarter of 2023. This operating forecast and related cash projection includes: (i) costs associated with preparing for and seeking U.S. regulatory approval of SB206 as a treatment for molluscum, including costs to prepare for a pre-NDA meeting with the FDA and NDA-enabling drug stability studies for SB206; (ii) costs associated with the completion and readiness of our new corporate headquarters and manufacturing capability necessary to support small-scale drug substance and drug product manufacturing; (iii) conducting drug manufacturing activities with external third-party CMOs, including a drug delivery device technology enhancement project; (iv) developmental and regulatory activities for our SB019 program (Coronaviridae (COVID-19)), including a Phase 1 study, targeted for conduct in 2022; (v) preparatory activities for a potential Phase 3 study, targeted for initiation in 2023, related to SB204 as a treatment for acne; and (vi) initial efforts to support potential commercialization of SB206, but excludes: (a) any potential costs associated with other late-stage clinical programs, including executing the potentially registrational Phase 3 study of SB204 for acne; (b) progression of the SB019 program subsequent to execution of a Phase 1 study; (c) operating costs that could occur between a potential NDA submission for SB206 through NDA approval, specifically including marketing and commercialization efforts to achieve potential launch of SB206; and (d) proceeds from any potential future sales of common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. We may decide to revise our development and operating plans or the related timing, depending on information we learn through our research and development activities, including regulatory submission efforts related to SB206, potential commercialization strategies, the impact of outside factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to enter into strategic arrangements or other transactions, our ability to access additional capital and our financial priorities.
Our ability to continue to operate our business, including our ability to advance development programs unrelated to SB206, as well as our ability to progress SB206 for molluscum subsequent to an NDA submission, is dependent upon our ability to access additional sources of capital, including, but not limited to (i) equity or debt financings, including through potential sales using the remaining availability under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA; or (ii) non-dilutive sources, such as partnerships, collaborations, licensing, grants or other strategic relationships. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain new funding on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis, or at all. Our inability to obtain significant additional funding on acceptable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business and cause us to alter or reduce our planned operating activities, including but not limited to delaying, reducing, terminating or eliminating planned product candidate development activities, to conserve our cash and cash equivalents. Our anticipated expenditure levels may change if we adjust our current operating plan. Such actions could delay development timelines and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and market valuation. We are also exploring the potential for strategic transactions, such as strategic acquisitions or in-licenses, sales or divestitures of some of our assets, or other potential strategic transactions, which could include a sale of the company. If we were to pursue such a transaction, we may not be able to complete the transaction on a timely basis or at all or on terms that are favorable to us.
We will need significant additional funding to support our planned and future operating activities and make further advancements in our product development programs beyond what is currently included in our operating forecast and related cash projection. We do not currently have sufficient funds to complete commercialization of any of our product candidates, and our funding needs will largely be determined by our commercialization strategy for SB206, subject to the NDA submission timing and the regulatory approval process and outcome. Therefore, we will need to secure additional capital or financing and/or delay, defer or reduce our cash expenditures by the first quarter of 2023. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional capital or financing on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis or at all.
Our cash and cash equivalents are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including money market accounts. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested with a view toward liquidity and capital preservation, and we seek to minimize the potential effects of concentration and degrees of risk.
Purchase Agreements with Aspire Capital
Common Stock Purchase Agreements
On July 21, 2020, we entered into the July 2020 Aspire CSPA which provides that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Aspire Capital is committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $30.0 million of shares of our common stock at our request from time to time during the 30-month term of the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. The July 2020 Aspire CSPA replaced prior agreements with Aspire Capital entered into on August 30, 2019, or the 2019 Aspire CSPA, and June 15, 2020, or the June 2020 Aspire CSPA, which provided that, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Aspire Capital was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $25.0 million and $20.0 million, respectively.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, total proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to the August 2019 Aspire CSPA, June 2020 Aspire CSPA and July 2020 Aspire CSPA were $6.3 million and $33.9 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $12.0 million in remaining availability for sales of its common stock under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, subject to certain limitations.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the 2019 Aspire CSPA, the June 2020 Aspire CSPA and the July 2020 CSPA.
Equity Offerings
June 2021 Public Offering
On June 17, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. relating to the offering, issuance and sale of 3,636,364 shares of common stock. We also granted Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., as underwriter, a 30-day option to purchase up to 545,454 additional shares of common stock, which was not exercised. The June 2021 Public Offering closed on June 21, 2021.
Net proceeds from the June 2021 Public Offering were approximately $37.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $2.8 million.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the June 2021 Public Offering.
March 2020 Registered Direct Offering
On March 24, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with several institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which we agreed to sell and issue in a registered direct offering priced at-the-market under Nasdaq rules, or the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, an aggregate of 1,055,000 shares of our common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase 805,465 shares of common stock. The March 2020 Registered Direct Offering closed on March 26, 2020. At closing, we also issued to H.C. Wainwright, as placement agent, warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 55,814 shares of common stock representing 3.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock and shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants sold in this offering.
Net proceeds from the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering were approximately $7.2 million after deducting the fees and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $0.8 million.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the March 2020 Registered Direct Offering.
March 2020 Public Offering
On February 27, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with H.C. Wainwright relating to the offering, issuance and sale of 1,400,000 shares of common stock, pre-funded warrants to purchase 433,333 shares of common stock, and accompanying common warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,833,333 shares of common stock, or, collectively, the March 2020 Public Offering. We also granted H.C. Wainwright, as underwriter, a 30-day option to purchase up to 275,000 additional shares of common stock and/or common warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 275,000 shares of common stock, which H.C. Wainwright partially exercised on March 2, 2020 to purchase 149,860 shares of common stock and common warrants to purchase 275,000 shares of common stock. The March 2020 Public Offering closed on March 3, 2020. At closing, we also issued to designees of H.C. Wainwright, as underwriter, warrants to purchase an aggregate of up to 59,496 shares of common stock representing 3.0% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock sold and shares of common stock underlying the pre-funded warrants sold in this offering.
Net proceeds from the March 2020 Public Offering were approximately $5.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses of approximately $0.8 million.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the March 2020 Public Offering.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 22, 2020, we entered into a promissory note, which was subsequently amended, or the Note, for an unsecured loan in the amount of approximately $1.0 million, or the Loan, under the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP. The PPP was established under the CARES Act and is administered by the United States Small Business Administration, or the SBA. The Loan to us was made through PNC Bank, National Association. Subject to the terms of the Note, the Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of one percent (1%) per annum. We previously applied for and during the second quarter of 2021 received notification of forgiveness of the entire loan balance, including any accrued interest.
See “Note 9-Paycheck Protection Program” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the Loan.
Research and Development Arrangements
Royalty and Milestone Payments Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek Investments LLC
On April 29, 2019, we entered into a royalty and milestone payments purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with Reedy Creek, pursuant to which Reedy Creek provided us funding in an initial amount of $25.0 million for us to use primarily to pursue the development, regulatory approval and commercialization (including through out-license agreements and other third-party arrangements) activities for SB206, as a treatment for molluscum, and advance programmatically other activities with respect to SB414, for atopic dermatitis, and SB204, for acne.
Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, we will pay Reedy Creek ongoing quarterly payments, calculated based on an applicable percentage per product of any upfront fees, milestone payments, royalty payments or equivalent payments received by us pursuant to any out-license agreement for the products in the United States, Mexico or Canada, net of any upfront fees,
milestone payments, royalty payments or equivalent payments paid by us to third parties pursuant to any agreements under which we have in-licensed intellectual property with respect to the products.
The applicable percentage used for determining the ongoing quarterly payments, applied to amounts received directly by us pursuant to any out-license agreement for each product, ranges from 10% for SB206 to 20% for SB414 and SB204. However, the agreement provides that the applicable percentage for each product will be 25% for fees or milestone payments received by us (but not royalty payments received by us) until Reedy Creek has received payments under the Purchase Agreement equal to the total funding amount provided by Reedy Creek under the Purchase Agreement. If we decide to commercialize any product on our own following regulatory approval, as opposed to commercializing through an out-license agreement or other third-party arrangement, we will only be obligated to pay Reedy Creek a low single digits royalty on net sales of the products.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Purchase Agreement.
Development Funding and Royalties Agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated
On May 4, 2019, we entered into the Funding Agreement with Ligand, pursuant to which Ligand provided us funding of $12.0 million, which we used to pursue the development and regulatory approval of SB206, as a treatment for molluscum.
Pursuant to the Funding Agreement, we will pay Ligand up to $20.0 million in milestone payments upon the achievement by us of certain regulatory and commercial milestones associated with SB206 or any product that incorporates or uses NVN1000, the API for our clinical stage product candidates, as a treatment for molluscum. In addition to the milestone payments, we will pay Ligand tiered royalties ranging from 7% to 10% based on annual aggregate net sales of the products in the United States, Mexico or Canada.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Funding Agreement.
Licensing Arrangements
Expansion of Partnership with Sato in Japanese Territory
On October 5, 2018, we and Sato entered into the second amendment to the initial license agreement dated January 12, 2017, or the Sato Amendment. The initial license agreement had focused on the development and commercialization of SB204 for the treatment of acne vulgaris in Japan. The Sato Amendment also provides Sato with the exclusive rights to develop and commercialize SB206 and related dosage forms for the treatment of viral skin infections, including but not limited to molluscum contagiosum and external genital warts, in Japan. We have received approximately $28.8 million from Sato beginning January 2017 through December 31, 2021 under the Amended Sato Agreement, including (i) a $10.8 million upfront payment received following the execution of the agreement in January 2017; (ii) a $2.2 million payment related to the initiation of a Phase 1 trial in Japan in the third quarter of 2018; (iii) $11.2 million of installment payments received following the execution of the Sato Amendment; and (iv) a $4.6 million payment related to a time-based developmental milestone received in the second quarter of 2021. In addition to the upfront payment paid in three installments in 2018 and 2019 that we received from Sato under the terms of the Sato Amendment, the Sato Amendment also provides for an aggregate of 1.0 billion JPY in additional non-contingent milestone payments that become payable upon the earlier occurrence of specified fixed dates in the future or the achievement of specified milestone events, of which we received 0.5 billion JPY in the second quarter of 2021.
See “Note 4-Licensing Arrangements” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the Amended Sato Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $24.8 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $29.7 million, with adjustments for non-cash amounts related primarily to (i) depreciation expense of $0.3 million, (ii) impairment of long-lived assets of $0.1 million, (iii) a foreign currency transaction loss of $0.8 million related to fair value adjustments for payments received and to be received under the Amended Sato Agreement, (iv) stock-based compensation expense of $0.3 million, (v) a $1.0 million gain on debt extinguishment related to forgiveness of the PPP loan, and (vii) a $4.3 million favorable change in cash related to changes in other operating assets and liabilities. The favorable net change in cash related to changes in assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $1.5 million increase in deferred revenue associated with (i) the recognition of license and collaboration revenue of $2.8 million associated with the Company’s performance during the period and (ii) a time-based developmental milestone payment that became due and payable as of December 31, 2021 of $4.3 million, a $0.7 million decrease in prepaid insurance, prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily related to a decrease in certain prepaid service contracts, a $0.3 million increase in accrued legal and professional fees, a $0.5 million increase in accounts payable, a $0.4 million increase in accrued compensation, a $1.4 million increase in other accrued expense, which included a $0.7 million increase related to goods and services associated with the planning, design and build-out of our new facility, and a $0.3 million net change in other long-term assets and liabilities. These increases were partially offset by a $0.7 million decrease in accrued outside research and development services.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $31.1 million and consisted primarily of a net loss of $29.3 million, with adjustments for non-cash amounts related primarily to (i) depreciation expense of $1.2 million, (ii) impairment of long-lived assets of $2.3 million, (iii) loss on facility asset group disposition of $0.8 million, (iv) stock-based compensation expense of $1.3 million, (v) fees of $1.7 million related to commitment shares for the June 2020 Aspire CSPA and July 2020 Aspire CSPA, (vi) a loss on disposal of equipment of $0.1 million, and (vii) a $9.1 million net decrease in cash related to changes in other operating assets and liabilities. The net decrease in cash related to changes in assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $0.3 million decrease in deferred revenue, a $2.2 million decrease in research and development service obligation liabilities related to the amortization of the liability in connection with the Funding Agreement with Ligand, a $1.5 million increase in prepaid insurance, prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily related to an increase in prepaid service contracts and insurance, a $0.4 million decrease in accrued legal and professional fees, a $0.4 million decrease in accounts payable, a $0.3 million decrease in other long-term assets and liabilities primarily related to the change in the fair value of our Performance Plan liability, a $4.4 million increase in contracts and grants receivable, and a $0.1 million decrease in accrued outside research and development services. These decreases were partially offset by a $0.7 million increase in accrued compensation. The decrease in deferred revenue and increase in contracts and grants receivable relate to the Amended Sato Agreement and included (i) the recognition of license and collaboration revenue of $4.2 million associated with the Company’s performance during the period; (ii) the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations of approximately $0.9 million; and (iii) a time-based developmental milestone payment that became due and payable as of December 31, 2020 of $4.8 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the $7.5 million of net cash used in investing activities included purchases of property, equipment and services associated with the planning, design and build-out of our new corporate headquarters and small-scale manufacturing facility in Durham, North Carolina, offset by payments received related to the landlord funded tenant improvement allowance. As of December 31, 2021, we also had goods and services associated with the planning, design and build-out of our new facility of $1.5 million included in accounts payable and other accrued expenses in the accompanying balance sheets, which we expect to settle through cash payments during the first half of 2022.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the $0.1 million of net cash used in investing activities included purchases of property and equipment totaling $0.6 million primarily related to (i) goods and services associated with the planning and design of our new facility in Durham, North Carolina of $0.2 million and (ii) installment payments made to a drug delivery device technology manufacturing vendor in connection with an ongoing drug delivery device technology enhancement project of $0.4 million. These purchases were partially offset by $0.5 million of proceeds from the sale of equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $44.1 million and consisted primarily of (i) $37.6 million of proceeds from the sale of our common stock pursuant to the June 2021 Public Offering, (ii) $6.3 million of proceeds from the sale of our common stock pursuant to the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, (iii) $0.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of common warrants associated with the March 2020 Public Offering and March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, (iv) $0.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $0.4 million of payments of costs related to the June 2021 Public Offering.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $52.8 million and consisted primarily of $5.3 million of proceeds, net of underwriting fees, from the closing of our March 2020 Public Offering, $5.5 million of proceeds from the exercise of common warrants associated with the March 2020 Public Offering, $7.3 million of proceeds, net of placement agent fees, from our March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, $1.0 million from the entry into the Note relating to the Loan under the PPP, and $33.9 million of proceeds from the sale of our common stock pursuant to the 2019 Aspire CSPA, the June 2020 Aspire CSPA and the July 2020 Aspire CSPA. These financing cash inflows were partially offset by $0.2 million of other offering costs, including legal and professional fees, directly associated with the March 2020 Public Offering, March 2020 Registered Direct Offering and the February 2020 shelf registration statement filing.
Capital Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had a total cash and cash equivalents balance of $47.1 million and positive working capital of $43.0 million. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless, and until, we obtain regulatory approval of one of our current or future product candidates and achieve successful commercialization by a strategic partner or by ourselves. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $279.0 million, and there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We will need significant additional funding to support our planned and future operating activities and make further advancements in our product development programs beyond what is currently included in our operating forecast and related cash projection. We do not currently have sufficient funds to complete commercialization of any of our product candidates, and our funding needs will largely be determined by our commercialization strategy for SB206, subject to the NDA submission timing and the regulatory approval process and outcome. We are working with Syneos Health to focus on implementing the SB206 prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation, if approved by the FDA.
Our ability to continue to operate our business, including our ability to advance development programs unrelated to SB206, as well as our ability to progress SB206 for molluscum subsequent to an NDA submission, is dependent upon our ability to access additional sources of capital, including, but not limited to (i) equity or debt financings, including through potential sales using the remaining availability under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA; or (ii) non-dilutive sources, such as partnerships, collaborations, licensing, grants or other strategic relationships. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain new funding on terms acceptable to us, on a timely basis, or at all. Our inability to obtain significant additional funding on acceptable terms could have a material adverse effect on our business and cause us to alter or reduce our planned operating activities, including but not limited to delaying, reducing, terminating or eliminating planned product candidate development activities, to conserve our cash and cash equivalents. Our anticipated expenditure levels may change if we adjust our current operating plan. Such actions could delay development timelines and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and market valuation.
Our equity issuances during the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, have resulted in significant dilution to our existing stockholders. Any future additional issuances of equity, or debt that could be convertible into equity, would result in further significant dilution to our existing stockholders.
As of December 31, 2021 we had 18,815,892 shares of common stock outstanding. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had reserved 3,065,953 shares of common stock for future issuance related to (i) outstanding warrants to purchase common stock, (ii) outstanding stock options and stock appreciation rights, and (iii) future issuance under the 2016 Incentive Award Plan. Our common stock consists of 200,000,000 authorized shares as of December 31, 2021.
If we are unable to obtain significant additional funding on acceptable terms, including through the utilization of the remaining amount available under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, it could have a material adverse effect on our business and cause us to alter or reduce our planned operating activities, including but not limited to delaying, reducing, terminating or eliminating planned product candidate development activities, to conserve our cash and cash equivalents. We may pursue additional capital through equity or debt financings, including potential sales under the July 2020 Aspire CSPA, or from non-dilutive sources, including partnerships, collaborations, licensing, grants or other strategic relationships. Our anticipated expenditure levels may change if we adjust our current operating plan. Such actions could delay development timelines and have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition and market valuation.
We are also exploring the potential for strategic transactions, such as strategic acquisitions or in-licenses, sales or divestitures of some of our assets, or other potential strategic transactions, which could include a sale of our business. If we were to pursue such a transaction, we may not be able to complete the transaction on a timely basis or at all or on terms that are favorable to us. Alternatively, if we are unable to obtain significant additional funding on acceptable terms or progress with a strategic transaction, we could instead determine to dissolve and liquidate our assets or seek protection under the bankruptcy laws. If we decide to dissolve and liquidate our assets or to seek protection under the bankruptcy laws, it is unclear to what extent we would be able to pay our obligations, and, accordingly, it is further unclear whether and to what extent any resources would be available for distributions to stockholders.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount or timing of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs, results, and evaluation of results of trials for our clinical-stage product candidates, including trials conducted by us or potential future partners;
•the progress, timing, costs and results of development and preclinical study activities relating to other potential applications of our nitric oxide platform;
•the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
•our ability to enter into strategic relationships and transactions to support the continued development and commercialization of certain product candidates and the success of those arrangements;
•our success in optimizing the size and capability of our new manufacturing facility and related processes to meet our strategic objectives;
•our success in the technical transfer of methods and processes related to our drug substance and drug product manufacturing with our current and/or potential future contract manufacturing partners;
•the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
•the occurrence and timing of potential development and regulatory milestones achieved by Sato, our licensee for SB204 and SB206 in Japan;
•the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting, financing or other arrangements that we may enter into;
•the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights;
•defending against intellectual property related claims;
•the costs associated with any potential future securities litigation, and the outcome of that litigation;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies; and
•subject to receipt of marketing approval, revenue received from commercial sales or out licensing of our product candidates.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities
Facility Leasing Transactions
In July 2020 we entered into a lease termination agreement, which provided for the early termination of the previously existing lease, as amended, for our former corporate headquarters in Morrisville, North Carolina. In connection with the termination of our lease, we entered into a sublease agreement, which was effective upon the termination of our previous lease agreement, through which we subleased from the new tenant space in the building that was covered by our previous lease. The sublease expired on March 31, 2021. In January 2021 we entered into a new lease agreement, pursuant to which we leased space located in Durham, North Carolina to serve as the Company’s new corporate headquarters and support various cGMP activities, as described in the section entitled “Business-Manufacturing and Supplies” in this Annual Report.
See the section entitled “Properties” in this Annual Report and “Note 8-Commitments and Contingencies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding the previous facility lease transaction, including the lease termination and sublease and the new facility lease.
Amended Sato Agreement
Pursuant to the Amended Sato Agreement, we are obligated to supply Sato with all quantities of licensed products required by Sato for their development activities in Japan. As part of the Amended Sato Agreement, we and Sato also agreed to negotiate a commercial supply agreement pursuant to which we or a third-party contract manufacturer would be the exclusive supplier to Sato of the API of licensed products for the commercial manufacture of licensed products in the licensed territory. Additionally, we have agreed to perform certain oversight, review and supporting activities for Sato, including: (i) using commercially reasonable efforts to obtain marketing approval of SB204 and SB206 in the U.S, (ii) sharing all future scientific information we may obtain during the term of the Amended Sato Agreement pertaining to SB204 and SB206, (iii) performing certain additional preclinical studies if such studies are deemed necessary by the Japanese regulatory authority, up to and not to exceed a total cost of $1.0 million, and (iv) participating in a joint committee that oversees, reviews, and approves Sato’s development and commercialization activities under the Amended Sato Agreement. Additionally, we have granted Sato the option to use our trademarks in connection with the commercialization of licensed products in the licensed territory for no additional consideration, subject to our approval of such use. We cannot estimate if, when or in what amounts such payments will become due under the Amended Sato Agreement.
The intellectual property rights granted to Sato under the Amended Sato Agreement include certain intellectual property rights which we have licensed from UNC. Under our license agreement with UNC described in “Note 3-Research and Development Licenses” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we are obligated to pay UNC a running royalty percentage in the low single digits on net sales of licensed products, including net sales that may be generated by Sato. Additionally, we are obligated to make payments to UNC that represent the portion of the Sato upfront and milestone payments that were estimated to be directly attributable to the UNC intellectual property rights included in the license to Sato.
We had also previously entered into an agreement with a third party to assist us in exploring the licensing opportunity which led to the execution of the Sato Agreement. We are obligated to pay the third party a low-single-digit percentage of all upfront and milestone payments the Company receives from Sato under the Amended Sato Agreement.
We have accrued certain fees that we will pay to UNC and a third party in the future upon receipt of non-contingent installment and milestone payments from Sato. As of December 31, 2021, we had recorded capitalized contract acquisition costs of $0.3 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and other assets and had accrued $0.1 million in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we paid fees totaling $0.1 and less than $0.1 million, respectively.
See “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the Amended Sato Agreement.
Amendments to Sublicense Agreements with KNOW Bio
Pursuant to the terms of the amendments to the KNOW Bio Agreements that we entered into in October 2017, we re-acquired from KNOW Bio exclusive, worldwide rights under certain United States and foreign patents and patent applications controlled by us as of the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements, and patents and patent applications which became controlled by us during the three years immediately following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements, directed towards nitric oxide-releasing compositions and methods of manufacturing thereof, including methods of manufacturing Nitricil compounds, and other nitric oxide-based therapeutics, to develop and commercialize products for all diagnostic, therapeutic, prophylactic
and palliative uses for any disease, condition or disorder caused by certain oncoviruses, or the Oncovirus Field. KNOW Bio also granted to us an exclusive license, with the right to sublicense, under any patents and patent applications which became controlled by KNOW Bio during the three years immediately following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements and directed towards nitric oxide-releasing compositions and methods of manufacturing thereof, including methods of manufacturing Nitricil compounds, and other nitric oxide-based therapeutics, but not towards medical devices, to develop and commercialize products for use in the Oncovirus Field. Additionally, KNOW Bio agreed that KNOW Bio would not commercialize any products in the Oncovirus Field during the first three years following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements. The three-year period in which new patents and patent applications are added to the exclusive license and the three-year term of the commercialization non-compete both expired on December 29, 2018.
In addition to the $0.3 million non-refundable upfront payment we made upon execution of the KNOW Bio Amendments, we are obligated to make the following contingent payments in exchange for the rights granted to us in the Oncovirus Field:
For products that incorporate a certain nitric oxide-releasing composition specified in the KNOW Bio Amendments and (i) are covered by KNOW Bio patents or (ii) materially use or incorporate know-how of KNOW Bio or us related to such composition that is created during the three years immediately following the execution date of the KNOW Bio Agreements, or the Covered Products, we must make the following payments to KNOW Bio:
o A milestone payment upon the first time each Covered Product is approved by the FDA for marketing in the Oncovirus Field;
o A royalty in the low single digits on net sales of Covered Products in the Oncovirus Field until the later of the expiration of the KNOW Bio patents covering the applicable Covered Product or the expiration of regulatory exclusivity on the applicable Covered Product; and
o In the event we sublicense the rights to a Covered Product to a third party in the Oncovirus Field, the Company must pay KNOW Bio a low double-digit percentage of any clinical development or NDA approval milestones we receive from the sublicensee for the Covered Product in the Oncovirus Field.
Nitricil is not the nitric oxide-releasing composition specified in the KNOW Bio Amendments as the subject of the foregoing payments. As such, products based on Nitricil are not subject to the foregoing milestone, royalty and sublicensing payment obligations.
The rights granted to us in the Oncovirus Field in the KNOW Bio Amendments continue for so long as there is a valid patent claim under the KNOW Bio Agreements, and upon expiration continue on a perpetual non-exclusive basis, and are subject to the termination rights of KNOW Bio and us that are set forth in the KNOW Bio Agreements. In addition, under the KNOW Bio Amendments, KNOW Bio may terminate the rights granted to the Company in the Oncovirus Field without terminating the Original KNOW Bio Agreements.
See “Note 2-KNOW Bio, LLC” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the sublicense agreement with KNOW Bio.
Royalty and Milestone Payments Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek Investments LLC
In April 2019, we entered into the Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek pursuant to which Reedy Creek provided us funding and we are obligated to pay Reedy Creek certain ongoing quarterly payments. See the section entitled “Management’s Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report and “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Purchase Agreement.
Development Funding and Royalties Agreement with Ligand Pharmaceuticals Incorporated
In 2019, we entered into the Funding Agreement with Ligand, pursuant to which Ligand provided us funding and we are obligated to pay Ligand up to $20.0 million in milestone payments. See the section entitled “Management’s Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Liquidity and Capital Resources” in this Annual Report and “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information related to the Funding Agreement.
Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, or the Performance Plan
In August 2018, our board of directors approved and established the Performance Plan. We believed that the Performance Plan would help us attract, retain and incentivize the highly qualified resources that were and will be necessary to execute on our
operating strategy. Executive management and the board of directors believe this plan clearly and directly ties long-term employee incentive compensation to specific, significant increases in our underlying common stock price and thus directly aligns employee and stockholder objectives. Unlike our historical practice of providing long-term incentives to our employees through annual stock option grants under the 2016 Plan at the then-current market price of our common stock, the Performance Plan only provides for employees to receive long-term incentive compensation payments if the established stock price targets ($111.70 per share and $254.50 per share, as adjusted) are achieved. The Performance Plan was adjusted on May 25, 2021 as a result of the 1-for-10 Reverse Stock Split, which correspondingly adjusted the two share price goals.
The Performance Plan is tiered, with two separate tranches, each of which has a distinct share price target (measured as the average publicly traded share price of our common stock on the Nasdaq stock exchange for a thirty consecutive trading day period) that will trigger a distinct fixed bonus pool. The share price target for the first tranche is $111.70 per share. The share price target for the second tranche is $254.50 per share. The related contingent bonus pools for the first and second tranches are $25.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively. The compensation committee has discretion to distribute the bonus pool related to each tranche among eligible participants by establishing individual minimum bonus amounts before, as well as by distributing the remainder of the applicable pool after, the achievement of each tranche specific share price target. Otherwise, if we do not achieve one or both related share price targets, as defined, no portion of the bonus pools will be paid.
The Performance Plan provides for the bonus pool to generally be paid in the form of cash. However, the compensation committee has discretion to pay any bonus award under the Performance Plan in the form of cash, shares of our common stock or a combination thereof, provided that our board and stockholders have approved the reservation of such shares of our common stock for such payment. The share price targets will be adjusted in the event of any stock splits, cash dividends, stock dividends, combinations, reorganizations, reclassifications, or similar events. In addition, in the event of a change in control, the plan provides that a bonus pool will become due and payable to participants on a pro rata basis, as calculated and determined by the compensation committee based upon our progress toward the share price target as of the date of the change in control and subject to adjustment by the compensation committee as permitted under the plan.
The Performance Plan was effective immediately upon approval and expires on March 1, 2022, and covers all employees, including our executive officers, consultants and other persons deemed eligible by our compensation committee. The Performance Plan was subsequently amended and restated to reflect minor changes in the timing for establishing minimum bonus amounts.
See “Note 12-Tangible Stockholder Return Plan” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the Performance Plan.
Paycheck Protection Program
On April 22, 2020, we entered into the Note for the Loan under the PPP of approximately $1.0 million. The PPP was established under the CARES Act, and is administered by the SBA. The Loan was made through PNC Bank, National Association. Subject to the terms of the Note, the Loan bears interest at a fixed rate of one percent (1%) per annum. Principal and interest on unforgiven amounts are payable monthly commencing on the fifteenth day of the month following the First Payment Date, as defined within the Note. The Note provides that the Loan may be prepaid by the Company at any time prior to the April 22, 2022 maturity date without penalty. We previously applied for and during the second quarter of 2021 received notification of forgiveness of the entire loan balance, including any accrued interest.
For discussion of the Note we entered into for the Loan under the PPP, please refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Paycheck Protection Program” in this Annual Report.
See “Note 9-Paycheck Protection Program” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information on the Loan.
Warrants
In our March 2020 Public Offering, March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, and January 2018 public offering, we issued warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The warrants provide each warrant holder with the right to require net cash settlement of the warrants upon the occurrence of certain fundamental transactions, provided that such transactions are within our control. For any fundamental transaction that is not within our control, including a fundamental transaction not approved by our board of directors, the warrant holder will only be entitled to receive from us or any successor entity the same type or form of consideration (and in the same proportion) that is being offered and paid to our common stockholders in connection with the fundamental transaction, whether that consideration be in the form of cash, stock or any combination thereof. In the event of any fundamental transaction, and regardless of whether it is within our control, the settlement amount of the warrants (whether
in cash, stock or a combination thereof) is determined based upon a Black-Scholes value that is calculated using inputs as specified in the warrants, including a defined volatility input equal to the greater of our 100-day historical volatility or 100%.
See the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis-Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates-Classification of Warrants and Pre-Funded Warrants Issued in Connection with Offerings of Common Stock” in this Annual Report and “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the terms of the warrants.
Development Services Agreement
We intend to pursue a dual strategy of identifying and designating a partner to become the primary third-party external supplier of our proprietary berdazimer sodium (NVN1000) drug substance to support long-term manufacturing needs, while preparing internal capabilities to support small-scale and short-term manufacturing needs, including manufacture of registration batches to support an SB206 NDA submission and initial commercialization inventory.
In July 2021, we entered into a development services agreement with a third-party full-scale API manufacturer for certain manufacturing process feasibility services including process familiarization, safety assessments, preliminary engineering studies, and initial process and analytical methods determination. Following the successful completion of certain preliminary activities with this third-party API manufacturer and other preparatory activities, we would then plan to proceed with the third-party API manufacturer beyond the initial stages noted above, in which case we would expect to incur substantial costs associated with technical transfer efforts, capital expenditures, manufacturing capabilities, and certain quantities of its drug substance.
Drug Product Manufacturing
We have established a strategic alliance with Orion, a Finnish full-scale pharmaceutical company with broad experience in drug manufacturing. The alliance enables Orion to manufacture our topical nitric oxide-releasing product candidates on our behalf and on the behalf of our global strategic partners. We have executed a master contract manufacturing agreement to enable technology transfer and manufacturing of clinical trial materials for future clinical trials with our topical product candidates.
We enter into various statements of work, under the master contract manufacturing agreement, that govern certain workflows and deliverables, including production of drug product and other manufacturing related services. These statements of work generally provide for termination on notice, and, therefore, we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these statements of work are not material.
Commercial Preparation
In September 2021, we announced that we engaged Syneos Health, a fully integrated biopharmaceutical solutions organization, as our commercial solutions provider for SB206 as a treatment for molluscum. This relationship with Syneos Health, structured as a fee-for-service arrangement, will focus on implementing the SB206 prelaunch strategy and commercial preparation, if approved by the FDA. The contracts related to Syneos generally provide for termination on notice, and, therefore, we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Other
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business, including, but not limited to, with clinical research organizations for clinical trials, clinical supply manufacturing, and preclinical research studies, and with manufacturing related vendors for raw materials, production related equipment, drug product and drug substance stability testing, supportive consultative services, and other products and services for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and, therefore, we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Net Operating Loss and Research and Development Tax Credit Carryforwards
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state NOLs of approximately $100.0 million and $62.9 million, respectively. The NOLs begin to expire in 2028 and 2023 for federal and state tax purposes, respectively. Certain of our federal net operating losses have an indefinite carryforward. We have research and development tax credits of approximately $1.7 million to offset future federal taxes. These credits begin to expire in 2040.
We record a valuation allowance to offset any net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that we will not recognize some or all of the deferred tax assets. We have had a history of net losses since inception, and, as a result, we have established a 100% valuation allowance of $31.8 million for our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021. If circumstances change and we determine that we will be able to realize some or all of these net deferred tax assets in the future, we will record an adjustment to the valuation allowance.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 contains provisions which limit the ability to utilize the net operating loss carryforwards and general business credits, including the research and development credit in the case of certain events including significant changes in ownership interests. In accordance with Section 382 of the Code, a change in equity ownership of greater than 50% within a three-year period results in an annual limitation on our ability to utilize our NOL carryforwards created during the tax periods prior to the change in ownership.
During the course of preparing the Company’s consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31 2021, the Company completed an analysis under Sections 382 and 383 of the Code of its historical NOL and tax credit carryforward amounts. If an ownership change, as defined in Section 382, occurs, it results in a Section 382 limitation that applies to all NOLs and tax credits generated prior to the ownership change date that can be used to offset taxable income incurred after the ownership change date. The annual limitation is based on a company’s stock value prior to the ownership change, multiplied by the applicable federal long-term, tax-exempt interest rate. As a result, a portion of the prior year net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards were determined to be limited.
See “Note 13-Income Taxes” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further details. If an additional change in equity ownership occurs in the future which exceeds the Section 382 threshold, our NOL carryforwards and research and development credits may be subject to additional limitations. Since our net operating loss carryforwards are limited, if we have taxable income which exceeds the permissible yearly net operating loss carryforwards, we would incur a federal income tax liability even though net operating loss carryforwards would be available in future years.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have adopted or are currently evaluating are described in detail within “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
There were no changes in or disagreements with accountants on accounting and financial disclosures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Assessment of Long-Lived Assets for Held-for-Sale Classification and Potential Impairment; Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Non-Recurring Basis
As described in “Note 16-Assets Held for Sale, Impairment Charges” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we evaluated all of our long-lived assets for potential held for sale classification and potential impairment as of June 29, 2020. This evaluation, which included the conduct of nonrecurring fair value measurements pursuant to FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements, required the use of significant judgments and estimates.
The carrying values of long-lived assets within disposal groups that met the criteria to be classified as held for sale were adjusted to equal the disposal groups’ fair value less cost to sell. Quoted or estimated selling prices were used to estimate the fair value of the disposal group assets, which were determined to be Level 2 or Level 3 inputs within the fair value measurement hierarchy in ASC 820, respectively.
Long-lived assets in certain asset groups that remained classified as held and used were assessed for potential impairment. For those asset groups that had indicators of impairment and failed a test of recoverability, their carrying value was adjusted to equal their estimated fair value. For the asset group consisting of a right-of-use lease asset, leasehold improvements and other property affixed to the Morrisville, North Carolina, facility, we determined that the lease terms established in the new tenant’s prime lease of the Morrisville, North Carolina, facility were representative of the asset group’s highest and best use and were consistent with market terms; therefore, such terms were considered to be the best available valuation inputs for the fair value estimate, and such inputs were determined to be Level 3 inputs within the fair value measurement hierarchy. For the asset group consisting of other property and equipment not directly associated with our continuing research, development and pilot scale drug manufacturing capabilities, we determined that a market participant was unlikely to pay any material value for such assets, and, therefore, we determined that their fair value was zero. The inputs used to estimate fair value of this asset group were determined to be Level 3 inputs within the fair value measurement hierarchy. Given the impairment recorded among our long-lived assets, it is reasonably possible that changes in judgments and assumptions we used to estimate the fair value of such assets or other circumstances, including changes in our intended use of such assets, could cause us to consider some portion or all of the remaining long-lived assets to become impaired.
Leases
We lease office space and certain equipment under non-cancelable lease agreements. We assess all arrangements, that convey the right to control the use of property, plant and equipment, at inception, to determine if it is, or contains, a lease based on the unique facts and circumstances present in that arrangement. For those leases identified, we determine the lease classification, recognition, and measurement at the lease commencement date. For arrangements that contain a lease we: (i) identify lease and non-lease components; (ii) determine the consideration in the contract; (iii) determine whether the lease is an operating or financing lease; and (iv) recognize lease Right of Use, or ROU, assets and corresponding lease liabilities. Lease liabilities are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. The corresponding ROU asset is measured from the initial lease liability, adjusted by (i) accrued or prepaid rents; (ii) remaining unamortized initial direct costs and lease incentives; and (iii) any impairments of the ROU asset. The interest rate implicit in our lease contracts is typically not readily determinable and as such, we use our incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at the lease commencement date, which represents an internally developed rate that would be incurred to borrow, on a collateralized basis, over a similar term, an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
See “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding our accounting policies for our lease agreements.
Revenue Recognition
Beginning in 2017, we began to generate revenue from (i) non-refundable upfront fees, milestone payments and royalties earned under license agreements and (ii) providing research and development services.
See “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” and “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for further information and accounting considerations related to revenue recognition, including revenue recognition pertaining to licensing arrangements.
Licensing Arrangements
We entered into the Sato Agreement in the first quarter of 2017, and the Sato Amendment in October 2018, and may enter into additional licensing arrangements in the future, in exchange for non-refundable upfront payments and potential future milestone and royalty payments.
If the license of our Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the estimated performance period and the appropriate method of measuring progress during the performance period for purposes of recognizing revenue. We re-evaluate the estimated performance period and measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust related revenue recognition accordingly.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license and collaboration revenue and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Amounts received prior to satisfying all revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue in the accompanying balance sheets.
Specifically related to the Sato Agreement, as amended, we recognize revenue using a time-based input method that results in straight-line recognition over the Company’s performance period. We monitor and reassess the estimated performance period for purposes of revenue recognition during each reporting period. Therefore, if the duration of the combined SB204 and SB206 development program timeline is affected by the establishment or subsequent adjustments to a mutually agreed upon SB204 and SB206 development plan in the Japan territory, we will adjust its estimated performance period for revenue recognition purposes accordingly, as needed. For further information regarding such timeline, see “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Government research contracts and grants revenue.
Under the terms of the contracts and grants awarded, we are entitled to receive reimbursement of our allowable direct expenses, allocated overhead, general and administrative expenses and payment of other specified amounts. Revenues from development and support activities under government research contracts and grants are recorded in the period in which the related costs are incurred. Associated expenses are recognized when incurred as research and development expense. Revenue recognized in excess of amounts collected are recorded as contracts and grants receivable. Any of the funding sources may, at their discretion, request reimbursement for expenses or return of funds, or both, as a result of noncompliance by us with the terms of the grants. No reimbursement of expenses or return of funds has been requested or made since inception of the contracts and grants. See “Note 5-Revenue Recognition” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional information regarding government grants.
Research and Development Expenses
Accrued Expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with applicable vendor personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued expenses include fees incurred by CROs in connection with clinical trials, fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials, professional service fees and unpaid salaries, wages and benefits.
We accrue our expenses related to clinical trials based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. We do not anticipate the future settlement of existing accruals to differ materially from our estimates.
Reedy Creek Purchase Agreement
We have determined that the Purchase Agreement with Reedy Creek is within the scope of ASC 730-20, Research and Development Arrangements. We concluded that there has not been a substantive and genuine transfer of risk related to the Purchase Agreement as (i) Reedy Creek has the opportunity to recover its investment regardless of the outcome of the research and development programs within the scope of the agreement (prior to commercialization of any in scope assets through potential out-licensing agreements and related potential future milestone payments); and (ii) there is a presumption that we are obligated to pay Reedy Creek amounts equal to its investment based on the related party relationship at the time the parties entered into the Purchase Agreement. The Purchase Agreement is a broad funding arrangement, due to (i) the multi-asset, or portfolio approach including three developmental assets that are within the scope of the arrangement; and (ii) Reedy Creek’s approximate 5% ownership of our outstanding shares of common stock at the time of entry into the Purchase Agreement.
As such, we have determined that the appropriate accounting treatment under ASC 730-20 was to record the initial proceeds of $25.0 million as cash and cash equivalents, as we had the ability to direct the usage of funds, and a long-term liability within our classified balance sheet. The long-term liability will remain until we receive future milestones from other potential third parties, as defined within the Purchase Agreement, of which 25% will be contractually owed to Reedy Creek. If potential future milestones are received by us, and become partly due to Reedy Creek, the corresponding partial repayment to Reedy Creek will result in a ratable reduction of the total long-term obligation to repay the initial purchase price.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the applicable accounting treatment of the Purchase Agreement.
Ligand Funding Agreement
We have determined that the Ligand transaction is within the scope of ASC 730-20 as it represents an obligation to perform contractual services for the development of SB206 using commercially reasonable efforts. In addition, the Funding Agreement also states that if all development of SB206 is ceased prior to the first regulatory approval, we must pay to Ligand an amount equal to the purchase price less the amount spent in accordance with the development budget on development activities conducted prior to such cessation. As such, we concluded that the appropriate accounting treatment under ASC 730-20 was to record the initial proceeds of $12.0 million, as a liability and as restricted cash on our consolidated balance sheet, as the funds could only be used for the progression of SB206.
We amortize the liability ratably during each reporting period, based on the Ligand funding as a percentage of the total direct costs we incur during the reporting period related to the estimated total cost to progress the SB206 program to a regulatory approval in the United States. The ratable Ligand funding has been presented within our accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as an offset to research and development expenses associated with the SB206 program.
However, because the aggregate amount spent in accordance with the SB206 development budget on SB206 development activities had exceeded the $12.0 million purchase price, we reported no restricted cash balance related to the Funding Agreement, as of December 31, 2021 in our consolidated balance sheet.
See “Note 6-Research and Development Arrangements” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the applicable accounting treatment of the Funding Agreement.
Classification of Warrants and Pre-Funded Warrants Issued in Connection with Offerings of Common Stock
Warrants
In our March 2020 Public Offering, March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, and January 2018 public offering we issued warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The warrants provide each warrant holder with the right to require net cash settlement of the warrants upon the occurrence of certain fundamental transactions, provided that such transactions are within
our control. For any fundamental transaction that is not within our control, including a fundamental transaction not approved by our board of directors, the warrant holder will only be entitled to receive from us or any successor entity the same type or form of consideration (and in the same proportion) that is being offered and paid to our common stockholders in connection with the fundamental transaction, whether that consideration be in the form of cash, stock or any combination thereof. In the event of any fundamental transaction, and regardless of whether it is within our control, the settlement amount of the warrants (whether in cash, stock or a combination thereof) is determined based upon a Black-Scholes value that is calculated using inputs as specified in the warrants, including a defined volatility input equal to the greater of our 100-day historical volatility or 100%.
We assessed the warrants for appropriate equity or liability classification pursuant to our accounting policy described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. During this assessment, we determined that (i) the warrants did not constitute a liability under ASC 480; (ii) the warrants met the definition of a derivative under ASC 815; (iii) the warrant holder’s option to receive a net cash settlement payment only becomes exercisable upon the occurrence of certain specified fundamental transactions that are within our control; (iv) upon the occurrence of a fundamental transaction that is not within our control, the warrant holder would receive the same type or form of consideration offered and paid to common stockholders; (v) the warrants are indexed to our common stock; and (vi) the warrants met all other conditions for equity classification under ASC 480 and ASC 815. Based on the results of this assessment, we concluded that the warrants were freestanding equity-linked derivative instruments that met the criteria for the own-equity scope exception to derivative accounting under ASC 815. Accordingly, the warrants were classified as equity and were accounted for as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the terms of the warrants and the applicable accounting treatment.
Pre-Funded Warrants
In the March 2020 Public Offering and March 2020 Registered Direct Offering, we also issued pre-funded warrants to purchase shares of our common stock. The pre-funded warrants did not provide each warrant holder with the option to settle any unexercised warrants for cash in the event of any fundamental transactions. In all fundamental transaction scenarios, the warrant holder was only entitled to receive from us or any successor entity the same type or form of consideration (and in the same proportion) that was being offered and paid to our stockholders in connection with the fundamental transaction, whether that consideration be in the form of cash, stock or any combination thereof. The pre-funded warrants also included a separate provision whereby the exercisability of the warrants was limited if, upon exercise, the warrant holder or any of its affiliates would have beneficially owned more than 4.99% (or an amount up to 9.99% if the holder so elects) of our common stock.
We assessed the pre-funded warrants for appropriate equity or liability classification pursuant to our accounting policy described in “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. During this assessment, we determined the pre-funded warrants were freestanding instruments that did not meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480 and did not meet the definition of a derivative pursuant to ASC 815. The pre-funded warrants were indexed to our common stock and met all other conditions for equity classification under ASC 480 and ASC 815. Based on the results of this assessment, we concluded that the pre-funded warrants were freestanding equity-linked financial instruments that met the criteria for equity classification under ASC 480 and ASC 815. Accordingly, the pre-funded warrants were classified as equity and were accounted for as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
See “Note 10-Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional discussion regarding the terms of the pre-funded warrants and the applicable accounting treatment.
Stock-Based Compensation
Determination of the Fair Value of Stock-based Compensation Grants
We record the fair value of stock options, and other stock-based compensation issued to employees and non-employees as of the grant date as stock-based compensation expense. We typically recognize compensation expense over the requisite service period, which is typically the vesting period.
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of assumptions, some of which are highly subjective, including (i) the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant, (ii) the expected volatility of our stock, (iii) the expected term of the award, (iv) the risk-free interest rate and (v) expected dividends. In applying these assumptions, we considered the following factors:
•Due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. We also considered characteristics such as industry, stage of life cycle, financial leverage, enterprise value, risk profiles and position within the industry, along with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•We have estimated the expected term of our employee stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby, the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
•The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields of United States Treasury securities with maturities similar to the expected term of granted stock-based awards.
•We have never declared or paid any cash dividends to common stockholders and do not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Consequently, we use an expected dividend yield of zero.
See “Note 11-Stock-Based Compensation” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for additional detail including the weighted average assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for awards granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We are also required to estimate forfeitures at the time of grant, and to revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting option forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. To the extent that actual forfeitures differ from our estimates, the difference is recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period the estimates were revised. Stock-based compensation expense recognized in the financial statements is based on awards that are ultimately expected to vest.
Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, or Performance Plan
On August 2, 2018, our board of directors approved and established the Tangible Stockholder Return Plan, which is a performance-based long-term incentive plan. The Performance Plan was effective immediately upon approval and expires on March 1, 2022. The Performance Plan is tiered, with two separate tranches, each of which has a distinct share price target (measured as the average publicly traded share price of our common stock on the Nasdaq stock exchange for a 30 consecutive trading day period) that will, if achieved, trigger a distinct fixed bonus pool. As adjusted for the Reverse Stock Split, the share price target for the first tranche and related bonus pool are $111.70 per share and $25.0 million, respectively. As adjusted for the Reverse Stock Split, the share price target for the second tranche and related bonus pool are $254.50 per share and $50.0 million, respectively.
We have concluded that the Performance Plan is within the scope of ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation as the underlying plan obligations are based on the potential attainment of certain market share price targets of our common stock. Any awards under the Performance Plan would be payable, at the discretion of our compensation committee following the achievement of the applicable share price target, in cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, provided that, prior to any payment in common stock, our stockholders have approved the reservation of shares of our common stock for such payment.
ASC 718 requires that a liability-based award should be classified as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets and the amount of compensation cost recognized should be based on the fair value of the liability. When a liability-based award includes both a service and market condition, the market condition is taken into account when determining the appropriate method to estimate fair value and the compensation cost is amortized over the estimated service period. Therefore, the liability associated with the Performance Plan obligation is recorded within other long-term liabilities on the accompanying consolidated balance sheets included in this Annual Report at the estimated fair value on the date of issuance and is re-valued each subsequent reporting period end with adjustments to the fair value recognized as stock-based compensation expense within operating expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations included in this Annual Report.
The fair value of obligations under the Performance Plan are estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach. Our common stock price is simulated under the Geometric Brownian Motion framework under each simulation path. The other assumptions for the Monte Carlo simulation include the risk-free interest rate, estimated volatility and the expected term. Expected stock price volatility is based on our actual historical volatility over a historical period equal to the expected remaining life of the plan, adjusted for certain market considerations and other factors. The fair value of the underlying common stock is the published closing market price by Nasdaq as of each reporting date, as adjusted for significant events, as necessary. The risk-
free interest rate is based on the United States Treasury yield curve in effect on the date of valuation equal to the remaining expected life of the plan. The dividend yield percentage is zero because we do not currently pay dividends, nor do we intend to do so during the expected term of the plan. The expected life of bonus awards under the Performance Plan is assumed to be equivalent to the remaining contractual term based on the estimated service period including the service inception date of the plan participants and the contractual end of the Performance Plan.
Our estimates underlying the assumptions used in the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model are subject to risks and uncertainties and may change over time. Such changes could have a significant effect on our reported net losses in future periods.
See “Note 12-Tangible Stockholder Return Plan” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value of the Performance Plan and see “Note 1-Organization and Significant Accounting Policies” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for our accounting policy pertaining to the fair value of financial instruments.
Stock Appreciation Rights
SARs that include cash settlement features are accounted for as liability-based awards pursuant to ASC 718 Compensation-Stock Compensation. The fair value of such SARs is estimated using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model on each financial reporting date using expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected life and fair value per share assumptions.
The fair value of each liability award is estimated with a valuation model that uses certain assumptions, such as the award date, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected life of the award and fair value per share assumptions. Due to limited historical data, we estimate stock price volatility based on the actual volatility of comparable publicly traded companies over the expected term. In evaluating similarity, we considered factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, financial leverage, size and risk profile. The expected term for liability-based awards is the estimated contractual life. The risk-free rate is based on the United States Treasury yield curve during the expected life of the award.
See “Note 11-Stock-Based Compensation” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for the significant assumptions used in estimating the fair value of SARs.