ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of certain significant factors that have affected our consolidated financial condition and operating results during the periods included in the accompanying audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes. You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes, included elsewhere in this annual report.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains certain statements that are “forward-looking statements” as that term is defined under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Act”) and releases issued by the SEC. The words “may,” “hope,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “continue,” and other expressions which are predictions of or indicate future events and trends and which do not relate to historical matters identify forward-looking statements. We believe that it is important to communicate our future expectations to our shareholders, and we therefore make forward-looking statements in reliance upon the safe harbor provisions of the Act. However, there may be events in the future that we are not able to accurately predict or control, and our actual results may differ materially from the expectations we describe in our forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from anticipated future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental responses to limit the further spread of COVID-19, including impacts on our operations, and the operations and businesses of our customers and vendors, including whether our operations and those of our customers and vendors will continue to be treated as “essential” operations under government orders restricting business activities or, even if so treated, whether site-specific health and safety concerns might otherwise require certain of our company’s operations to be halted for some period of time; uncertainty with respect to the duration and severity of these impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, including impacts on the general economy and the markets served by our customers, as well as supply chain disruptions and materials cost increases that are not passed along to our customers; the extent to which the impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic could result in a reduction in demand for our products and services; general economic conditions in the markets served by our businesses and those of our customers, some of which are cyclical and experience periodic downturns, such as recent disruptions in the pricing of oil and gas; the impact of geopolitical activity on those markets, including the outbreak (or threat of outbreak) of armed hostilities, prices and availability of its raw materials; uncertainties with respect to our ability to achieve anticipated growth within the semiconductor, life sciences and other technology-enabled markets; the impact of fluctuations in relevant foreign currency exchange rates or unanticipated increases in applicable interest rates; unanticipated delays or problems in introducing new products; announcements by competitors of new products, services or technological innovations; changes in pricing policies or the pricing policies of competitors; and the amount of any payments required to satisfy contingent liabilities related to discontinued operations and discontinued operations of our predecessors, including liabilities for certain products, environmental matters, employee benefit obligations and other matters. We advise you to read further about certain of these and other risk factors set forth in Item 1A of this annual report, entitled “Risk Factors.” We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required by law. Whenever you read or hear any subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributed to us or any person acting on our behalf, you should keep in mind the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section.
Non-GAAP Financial Information
In our discussion of our outlook and results of operations, we utilize financial measures that have not been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States ("GAAP"). They include adjusted income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc., adjusted diluted earnings per share attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. continuing operations, adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization ("adjusted EBITDA"), and total adjusted segment EBITDA. Tables showing the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures, other than total adjusted segment EBITDA, to the comparable GAAP measures are included in "-Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures to the Comparable GAAP Measures," while the reconciliation of total adjusted segment EBITDA is included in "-Results of Operations."
We believe non-GAAP metrics are commonly used financial measures for investors to evaluate our operating performance and, when read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, present a useful tool to evaluate our ongoing operations and performance from period to period. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are some of the factors we
use in internal evaluations of the overall performance of our businesses. We acknowledge that there are many items that impact our reported results and the adjustments reflected in these non-GAAP measures are not intended to present all items that may have impacted these results. In addition, the non-GAAP measures we use are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Overview and Outlook
Overview. We design, develop, manufacture, service and market proprietary engineered industrial products. We have 19 primary manufacturing and service facilities located in 7 countries, including the United States. Over the past year and a half, we have executed several strategic initiatives to change the portfolio of businesses that we operate to focus on materials science-based businesses with leading technologies, compelling margins, strong cash flow, and high levels of recurring revenue that serve markets with favorable secular tailwinds. These initiatives, which are described below, have increased our ability to provide solutions to the semiconductor, life sciences, and other technology industries.
We manage our business as three segments: a Sealing Technologies segment, an Advanced Surface Technologies segment, and an Engineered Materials segment.
Our Sealing Technologies segment designs, manufactures and sells sealing products, including: metallic, non-metallic and composite material gaskets, dynamic seals, compression packing, resilient metal seals, elastomeric seals, custom-engineered mechanical seals for applications in the aerospace industry and other markets, hydraulic components, expansion joints, sanitary gaskets, hoses and fittings for the hygienic process industries, fluid transfer products for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries, and heavy-duty commercial vehicle parts used in wheel-end and suspension components. These products are used in a variety of industries, including chemical and petrochemical processing, pulp and paper processing, power generation, food and pharmaceutical processing, primary metal manufacturing, mining, water and waste treatment, heavy-duty trucking, aerospace, medical, filtration and semiconductor fabrication. In many of these industries, performance and durability are vital for safety and environmental protection. Many of our products are used in highly demanding applications, e.g., where extreme temperatures, extreme pressures, corrosive environments, strict tolerances, and/or worn equipment create challenges for product performance.
Our Advanced Surface Technologies segment applies proprietary technologies, processes, and capabilities to deliver highly differentiated suites of products and services for the most challenging applications in high growth markets. The segment’s products and services are used in highly demanding environments requiring performance, precision and repeatability, with a low tolerance for failure. The segment’s services include cleaning, coating, testing, refurbishment and verification services for critical components and assemblies used in state-of-the-art advanced node semiconductor manufacturing equipment. The segment also designs, manufactures and sells specialized optical filters and thin-film coatings for the most challenging applications in the industrial technology, life sciences, and semiconductor markets and complex front-end wafer processing sub-systems, new and refurbished electrostatic chuck pedestals, and edge-welded metal bellows for the semiconductor equipment industry and for critical applications in the space, aerospace and defense markets.
Our Engineered Materials segment includes operations that design, manufacture and sell self-lubricating, non-rolling metal-polymer, engineered plastics, and fiber reinforced composite bearing products, critical service flange gaskets, seals and electrical flange isolation kits used in high-pressure wellhead equipment, flow lines, water injection lines, sour hydrocarbon process applications, and crude oil and natural gas pipeline/transmission line applications. These products are used in a wide range of applications, including the automotive, aerospace, pharmaceutical, pulp and paper, natural gas, health, power generation, machine tools, air treatment, refining, petrochemical and general industrial markets.
Acquisitions
On December 17, 2021, our subsidiary, EnPro Holdings, Inc. (“EnPro Holdings”), acquired all issued and outstanding membership interests of TCFII NxEdge LLC (“NxEdge”). The consideration paid by EnPro Holdings was $856.8 million in cash, net of cash acquired, subject to customary purchase price adjustments related to the final acquisition date net working capital determination. We funded the acquisition of NxEdge with available cash and borrowings under our senior credit facilities.
NxEdge is an advanced manufacturing, cleaning, coating, and refurbishment business focused on the semiconductor value chain, with six main facilities located in Idaho and California. Since the date of its acquisition, NxEdge has been included as part of the Company’s Advanced Surface Technologies segment.
On October 26, 2020, a subsidiary of EnPro formed for this purpose (the "Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary") acquired all of the equity securities of Alluxa, Inc. ("Alluxa"), a privately held, California-based company. Alluxa is an industrial technology company that provides specialized optical filters and thin-film coatings for the most challenging applications in the industrial
technology, life sciences, and semiconductor markets. Alluxa's products are developed through a proprietary coating process using state-of-the-art advanced equipment. Alluxa is included as part of the Advanced Surface Technologies segment.
Alluxa works in collaboration with customers across major end markets to provide customized, complex precision coating solutions through its specialized technology platform and proprietary processes. Alluxa has long-standing customer relationships across its diversified customer base, serving customers across the Americas, Europe, and Asia. Founded in 2007, Alluxa has two locations in California and is headquartered in Santa Rosa, California.
The cash purchase price of Alluxa was $238.4 million, net of cash acquired. We funded the purchase with available cash and rollover equity from Alluxa executives. In connection with the completion of the transaction, we entered into a limited liability operating agreement with respect to the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary in connection with the rollover transaction, with three equity owners of Alluxa, who were also executives of Alluxa (the "Alluxa Executives"), receiving approximately 7% of the equity interests of the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary in return for their contribution of the rollover shares of Alluxa.
In connection with the consummation of the Alluxa acquisition, the Alluxa Executives entered into a limited liability operating agreement (the “Alluxa LLC Agreement”) with respect to Alluxa Subsidiary. Under the LLC Agreement, the Alluxa Executives have certain governance and information rights with respect to the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary and are subject to transfer restrictions with respect to their equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary. Each Alluxa Executive also has the right to sell to the Company, and the Company has the right to purchase from each Alluxa Executive (collectively, the “Alluxa Put and Call Rights”), one-third of the Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary during each of three exercise periods commencing on January 1 and ending on June 30 of each of 2024, 2025 and 2026, with any amount not sold or purchased in a prior exercise period being carried forward to the subsequent exercise periods. The Alluxa LLC Agreement also provides for the purchase by the Company of all of an Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary in connection with the termination of employment of the Alluxa Executive under specified circumstances, with payments in certain circumstances to be made in annual installments. In connection with a Alluxa Executive’s death, disability, or incapacity at any time prior to December 31, 2023 or a separation from employment for cause, including the Alluxa Executive’s breach of the non-competition and non-solicitation agreement, or a voluntary separation from employment without good reason, the consideration payable under the Alluxa LLC Agreement in connection with any such purchase by the Company of an Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary is equal to the fixed value of the equity interests as set forth in the Alluxa LLC Agreement. In all other cases, including upon any exercise of the Alluxa Put and Call Rights, the consideration payable under the Alluxa LLC Agreement in connection with any such purchase by the Company of an Alluxa Executive’s equity interests in the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary is equal to the greater of the fixed value of the equity interests as set forth in the Alluxa LLC Agreement or a price based upon a multiple of twelve-month adjusted EBITDA based upon certain financial metrics of the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary, plus cash and less indebtedness of the Alluxa Acquisition Subsidiary prior to the relevant payment, and subject to certain adjustments dependent upon the circumstances of the purchase and sale.
On July 2, 2019, we acquired The Aseptic Group (comprising Aseptic Process Equipment SAS and Aseptic Services SARL). Headquartered in Limonest, France, The Aseptic Group distributes, designs, and manufactures aseptic fluid transfer products for the pharmaceutical and biopharmaceutical industries. The Aseptic Group has been included as part of EnPro’s Garlock division within the Sealing Technologies segment.
On September 25, 2019, we acquired the outstanding equity securities of LeanTeq, LLC and LeanTeq Co., Ltd. (collectively "LeanTeq"), a privately-held, Taiwan-based company. LeanTeq provides refurbishment services for critical components and assemblies used in state-of-the-art semiconductor equipment. The equipment is used to produce the latest and most technologically advanced microchips for smartphones, autonomous vehicles, high-speed wireless connectivity (5G), artificial intelligence, and other leading-edge applications.
LeanTeq was founded in 2011, is headquartered in Taoyuan City, Taiwan, and has two locations in Taiwan and one in the United States (Silicon Valley). LeanTeq partners closely with original equipment manufacturers throughout the development and production lifecycle to achieve Process of Record qualifications, enabling long-term, recurring aftermarket revenue. Aftermarket refurbishment services have historically represented approximately 65% of LeanTeq's total sales. LeanTeq’s suite of services includes cleaning, coating, analytical testing, inspection and verification, kit assembly, failure analysis, and other value-added services. LeanTeq is included as part of EnPro's Advanced Surface Technologies segment.
In connection with the consummation of the LeanTeq acquisition, two LeanTeq equity holders who are managers of LeanTeq (the “LeanTeq Executives”) applied approximately 10% of the total transaction consideration paid in the acquisition to purchase equity interests of our subsidiary (the “LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary”) acquiring LeanTeq pursuant to an agreement (the “LeanTeq LLC Agreement”) entered into upon the closing of the LeanTeq acquisition (the “LeanTeq Closing”). Under the LeanTeq LLC Agreement, each of the LeanTeq Executives will also have the right to sell to us, and we will have the
right to purchase from each of the LeanTeq Executives, the LeanTeq Executive’s equity interests in the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary, following the third anniversary of the Closing, a change-of-control of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary or EnPro, dissolution of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary, termination of employment, death or disability of the LeanTeq Executive, and certain other circumstances such as a dispute regarding our performance of the LeanTeq LLC Agreement. The consideration, which is payable in two installments, in such purchase and sale arrangements is generally to be based upon a multiple of twelve-month adjusted EBITDA based upon certain financial metrics of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary, plus cash and less indebtedness of the LeanTeq Acquisition Subsidiary prior to the relevant installment payment, subject to certain adjustments dependent upon the circumstances of the purchase and sale.
The combined purchase price of the LeanTeq and The Aseptic Group acquisitions was approximately $338.5 million, net of cash acquired and including the equity rollover from the LeanTeq Executives.
Dispositions
On December 21, 2021, we sold specified equity interests and assets of our Compressor Products International ("CPI") business included in our Engineered Materials segment. The aggregate purchase price of the CPI business was $195.0 million, subject to adjustment based on the amount on December 21, 2021 of cash, debt and working capital of the entities sold in the transaction, as well as for the amount of specified selling expenses. As a result of the sale, we booked a pre-tax gain of $117.6 million in other income (expense) on our Consolidated Statement of Operations, which is subject to customary purchase price adjustments related to the final acquisition date net working capital determination.
On September 2, 2021, we sold certain assets and liabilities of our polymer components business unit, which was principally located in Houston, Texas and included in our Sealing Technologies segment. As a result of the sale, we recorded a pre-tax gain of $19.5 million in other income (expense) on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
On December 31, 2020, we sold the shares of Technetics Group UK Limited ("Technetics Group UK"), included in our Sealing Technologies segment, for a nominal cash purchase price. As part of the agreement with the buyer, we delivered to the buyer £148,000 of cash to fund value added tax ("VAT") payments due for VAT liabilities already incurred and £50,000 for working capital. We incurred a loss upon the sale of approximately £976,000 ($1.3 million).
On November 30, 2020, we closed on the sale of our bushing block business in our Engineered Materials segment principally located in Dieuze, France. Prior to finalizing the sale of the business, we determined it to be impaired and recorded a $6.2 million impairment charge that consisted of $1.8 million of non-cash impairments of long-lived assets and $4.4 million of cash payments due to the buyer at closing. The impairment charge was recorded in other operating expenses on our consolidated statement of operations. Upon closing of the business, we recorded a $0.1 million gain on the sale of business in other non-operating expense on our consolidated statement of operations. Total charges related to the exit of our bushing block business were $6.1 million.
On November 20, 2020, we completed the sale of the Air Springs portion of our heavy-duty trucking business for $23.1 million in cash, net of an estimated working capital adjustment and fees, and a long-term promissory note with a fair-value of $6.4 million (face value of $7.5 million). As part of the agreement with the buyer, we retained the U.S. accounts receivable for the business, which created a large working capital adjustment at closing. The amount of retained accounts receivable in the U.S. was approximately $8.6 million. The purchase price is subject to final working capital adjustments. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a $0.1 million non-cash loss on sale of business to in the fourth quarter of 2020.
In August of 2020, subsequent to announcing the exit of our Motor Wheel® brake drum and Crewson® brake adjuster brands in the second quarter of 2020, we identified a buyer and entered into a definitive agreement to sell the assets related to the businesses. On September 2, 2020, we completed the sale for $8.9 million, net of transaction fees. This transaction resulted in a $3.1 million loss on sale of the business in other non-operating expense on our consolidated statements of operations, composed of a $3.0 million non-cash loss on the sales of assets and a $0.1 million loss on other expenses. Prior to finding a buyer of the brands, we determined the assets were impaired and recorded restructuring and impairment charges of $7.4 million in other operating expenses on our consolidated statements of operations. Total losses on the exit of our Motor Wheel® brake drum and Crewson® brake adjuster brands recorded in 2020 were $10.5 million.
In the second quarter of 2020 we entered into an agreement to sell the Lunar® air disc brake business located in both the U.S. and in Shanghai, China. The sale of the U.S. assets of the business closed in the third quarter of 2020 for $0.3 million, resulting in a gain of $0.2 million recorded in non-operating income on our consolidated statement of operations. The sale of the Lunar® manufacturing facility located in Shanghai, China closed in the fourth quarter of 2020 for $0.9 million, resulting in no gain or loss. Prior to closing on the sale of the business, we determined the assets to be impaired and recorded a $2.1 million impairment charge, of which $1.6 million was related to impairment of long-lived assets and $0.5 million related to the impairment of inventory. The impairment of long-lived assets was recorded in other operating expense and the impairment of
inventory was recorded in cost of sales on our consolidated statement of operations. Total net loss related to the exit of the Lunar® air disc brake business was $1.9 million.
The Air Springs portion of our heavy-duty truck business, Motor Wheel® brake drum and Crewson® brake adjuster brands, and Lunar® air disc brake business had been included in our Sealing Technologies segment.
On December 12, 2019, certain of our subsidiaries entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement with Arcline FM Holdings, LLC (“Arcline FM Holdings”), an affiliate of Arcline Investment Management, LP, pursuant to which we agreed to transfer all of the outstanding equity interests in our indirect subsidiary, Fairbanks Morse, LLC (“Fairbanks Morse”), to Arcline FM Holdings and to cause one of our subsidiaries to sell certain related Canadian assets to an affiliate of Arcline FM Holdings, for an aggregate purchase price of $450 million. This divestiture transaction was completed on January 21, 2020. Fairbanks Morse manufactured heavy-duty, medium-speed reciprocating engines used primarily in marine and power generation applications and comprised our entire Power Systems segment. In light of the entry into the definitive agreement in December 2019 to divest Fairbanks Morse, we classified the Power Systems segment as a discontinued operation for the fourth quarter and full year 2019, and all prior quarterly and annual financial results of EnPro were recast to reflect the Power Systems segment as a discontinued operation. Unless otherwise indicated, amounts discussed in this Item 8 pertain to continuing operations only (see Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for information on discontinued operations and the disposition of Fairbanks Morse).
In September 2019, we sold certain assets and certain liabilities of our brake products business unit located in Rome, Georgia, which was included in our Sealing Technologies segment. The aggregate sales price for the transaction was $6.8 million, of which we received $3.6 million in September 2019 at the closing of the sale of the business and $0.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 that was applied to the sale of the building, which closed in February 2020. On the closing of the sale of the building, we received $2.9 million and received the balance of $0.2 million in the fourth quarter of 2020.
After attempts to sell the ATDynamics business (an asset group in the Stemco division of our Sealing Technologies segment) during the fourth quarter of 2019, in January 2020, we decided to shut it down. As a result of the unsuccessful sales process, we reviewed the carrying amounts of long-lived assets at December 31, 2019 and determined the carrying amounts were not recoverable. As a result of this assessment, we recorded a $2.6 million impairment loss in the fourth quarter of 2019. In connection with the decision to shut down the business, we decided to not complete and sell the inventory we had on hand and recognized a $1.5 million inventory impairment.
We review the carrying amounts of long-lived assets when certain events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. In 2020, sales declines by businesses utilizing two of the indefinite-lived trademarks within our Sealing Technologies segment were determined to be triggering events for an impairment analysis. Based on the results of this analysis, we recorded a $16.1 million impairment of indefinite-lived trademarks in the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter of 2019, in consideration of the financial performance of the Motorwheel business, an asset group in the Stemco division of our Sealing Technologies segment, we determined that a test of Motorwheel's recoverability was required. As a result of this test, all long-lived assets of Motorwheel were determined to be impaired, resulting in an impairment loss of $21.0 million, which equaled the excess of these assets' net book value at December 31, 2019 over their fair value.
COVID-19 Impacts. COVID-19 has significantly impacted the health and economic environment around the world. Our customers are principally global manufacturers and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on general economic conditions, and more deleterious effects on certain markets, have had and may continue to have negative implications on demand for their goods and consequently on their demand for our products and services. Because of uncertainties with respect to the continuing severity and duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, which may vary significantly in different regions of the world and could be impacted by new variants, the duration and terms of related governmental orders restricting activities, and the timing and pace of any economic recovery as COVID-19 impacts abate in different regions, we cannot predict with precision the extent and duration of any future changes in demand for our products and services due to COVID-19 impacts and the consequent impact on our business and financial results.
All of our primary manufacturing facilities are currently open and generally have not experienced significant supply chain disruptions. Certain operations are experiencing upstream supply chain challenges for raw materials and components, including certain metals and rubber-related chemicals, as raw material supply, which was reduced in response to the economic slowdown related to the COVID-19 pandemic, has not sufficiently increased to address increasing demand, including inventory restocking, as general economic activity has improved. Additionally, each of our businesses has developed continuity and contingency plans, based on various scenarios in preparation for potential operational disruptions, to permit us to adjust production levels to demand. We cannot predict if and when closures or production changes may arise as a result of implications related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Global Sales
Please refer to Item 1, "Business-Background" for information with respect to our sales by geographic region in 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Outlook
Financial highlights for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
1 Reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures to their respective GAAP measure are located in the "- Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measure to the Comparable GAAP Measure" at the end of this section.
We experienced strong demand growth and improved momentum across all of our businesses throughout 2021. Our performance was driven primarily by Sealing Technologies as we continue to produce higher results driven by improved performance in our Garlock business as well as from the benefits of portfolio reshaping within our Stemco business. We continued our progress on portfolio reshaping with the divestiture of our polymer components business and our CPI business in addition to acquiring NxEdge towards the end of the year.
We believe that our strong performance in 2021 was likely enhanced to some extent by customers restocking as the economy in the United States and certain other regions continue to recover from the pandemic, however, we are unable to quantify the amount or the extent to which we benefited from these restocking purchases. We expect to continue to see strong demand in many of the industries we serve in 2022.
We remain committed to our strategy to create shareholder value through earnings growth and balanced capital allocation. We remain focused on disciplined investments for organic growth and innovation, strategic acquisitions, and returning capital to shareholders. In October of 2020, our board of directors authorized a two-year program of up to $50.0 million for the repurchase of our common shares through October 2022. We have yet to make any repurchases under the new authorization. In February 2022, our board of directors approved an increase in the quarterly dividend from $0.27 per share to $0.28 per share.
In connection with our growth strategy, we will continue to evaluate making additional acquisitions to take advantage of opportunities that arise. We will consider making additional divestitures over time, and under the right circumstances, to further our long-term strategic goals of refocusing our portfolio on businesses with compelling margins, leading technology, high cash flow return on investment, and favorable secular tailwinds.
Results of Operations
We measure operating performance based on segment earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, and other selected items ("Adjusted Segment EBITDA" or "Segment AEBITDA"), which is segment revenue reduced by operating expenses and other costs identifiable with the segment, excluding acquisition and divestiture expenses, restructuring costs, impairment charges, non-controlling interest compensation, amortization of the fair value adjustment to acquisition date inventory, and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted Segment EBITDA is not defined under GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures used by other companies. Corporate expenses include general corporate administrative costs. Expenses not directly attributable to the segments, corporate expenses, net interest expense, gains and losses related to the sale of assets, and income taxes are not included in the computation of Adjusted Segment EBITDA. The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as those for EnPro.
Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa being subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the sellers. This expense is recorded in selling, general, and administrative expenses on our Consolidated
Statements of Operations and is directly related to the terms of the acquisitions. This expense will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with each of these acquisitions unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
Other income (expense), net in the table above contains all items included in other (operating) expense and other income (expense) on our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ending December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 with the exception of $6.2 million, $26.2 million, and $6.3 million, respectively, of segment restructuring costs and $0.7 million of corporate restructuring costs in 2019 which are shown separately. Additionally, other income (expense), net in the table above for the years ending December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 also includes $3.7 million, $6.1 million, and $4.1 million, respectively, of miscellaneous expenses that are either not associated with a particular segment or not considered part of administering the corporate headquarters. These expenses are included in selling, general and administrative expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
2021 Compared to 2020
Sales of $1,141.8 million in 2021 increased 6.3% from $1,074.0 million in 2020. The following table summarizes the impact of acquisitions, divestitures, and foreign currency on sales by segment:
Following are the key effects of acquisitions and divestitures on sales for 2021 compared to 2020:
Advanced Surface Technologies Acquisitions:
•NxEdge in December 2021
•Alluxa in October 2020
Sealing Technologies Divestitures:
•Divestiture of the polymer components business unit in September 2021
•Divestiture of Technetics Group UK Limited in December 2020
•Divestiture of the Air Springs portion of our heavy duty trucking business in November 2020
•Divestiture of Motorwheel® brake drum and Crewson® brake adjuster brands in September 2020
•Divestiture of the Lunar® air disc brake business, both the U.S. and Shanghai China operations, in the second and third quarters of 2020
Engineered Materials Divestitures:
•Divestiture of CPI in December 2021
•Divestiture of the bushing block business in November 2020
Following is a discussion of operating results for each segment during 2021 compared to 2020:
Sealing Technologies. Sales of $599.8 million in 2021 reflect a 5.8% decrease compared to $636.7 million in 2020. Excluding favorable foreign exchange translation ($9.6 million) on our 2021 sales and the sales from businesses that have since been divested ($114.5 million) from 2020 results, sales were up 13.0% or $68.0 million. This increase was driven by increased demand in food and pharmaceuticals, petrochemical, and heavy-duty truck, partially offset by decline in demand in the aerospace market.
Segment AEBITDA of $141.4 million in 2021 increased 7.9% from $131.0 million in 2020. Segment AEBITDA margin increased from 20.6% in 2020 to 23.6% in 2021. Excluding the favorable foreign exchange translation ($2.5 million) and the
Segment AEBITDA earned from businesses that have since been divested ($14.7 million) from 2020 results, Adjusted Segment EBITDA increased 19.4%, or $22.6 million. The increase in Segment AEBITDA was driven by increased sales volume, net of unfavorable product mixes driven by lower margin sales in our heavy-duty trucking business as we saw higher sales to original equipment manufacturers ($21.3 million), increased pricing ($11.9 million), and lower travel-related expense ($0.7 million), partially offset by increased manufacturing costs driven by higher material prices ($6.0 million), higher incentive compensation ($1.2 million), and increased segment selling, general, and administrative costs ($4.3 million).
Advanced Surface Technologies. Sales of $247.3 million in 2021 reflect a 44.5% increase compared to $171.2 million in 2020. Excluding the favorable foreign exchange translation ($2.5 million) and the sales from a recent acquisition ($37.0 million) from 2021 results, sales were up 21.4% or $36.6 million. This increase was driven primarily by stronger demand in the semiconductor market.
Segment AEBITDA of $73.2 million in 2021 increased 55.4% from $47.1 million in 2020. Segment AEBITDA margin increased from 27.5% in 2020 to 29.6% in 2021. Excluding the impact of Segment AEBITDA from acquisitions ($17.9 million) and the favorable impact of foreign exchange translation ($1.4 million), Segment AEBITDA was up 14.4% or $6.8 million. The increase in Adjusted Segment EBITDA was driven by increased sales including a more favorable product mix in our Technetics Semi business ($12.5 million), and increased pricing ($1.3 million), partially offset by increased manufacturing costs as a result of sales growth ($4.4 million), increased incentive compensation costs ($1.1 million), and increased selling, general, and administrative costs ($1.5 million).
Engineered Materials. Sales in 2021 increased 10.0% to $302.4 million from $275.0 million in 2020. Excluding the impact of favorable foreign exchange translation ($8.4 million) and the sales from businesses that have since been divested ($11.3 million), sales were up $30.3 million, or 11.5%, primarily due to stronger demand in automotive and general industrial markets, partially offset by weakness in the oil and gas and power generation markets.
Segment AEBITDA of $43.3 million in 2021 increased from $32.5 million in 2020, an increase of $10.8 million, or 33.2%. Segment AEBITDA margin was 14.3%, up from 11.8% in 2020. Excluding the impact of favorable foreign exchange translation ($2.0 million ) and the Segment AEBITDA contributed from businesses that have since been divested ($0.4 million), Segment AEBITDA increased $8.3 million, or 25.1%. The increase in Adjusted Segment EBITDA was driven by increased sales volume and product mix ($3.8 million), increased pricing ($7.2 million) and manufacturing efficiencies ($6.6 million), partially offset by increased incentive compensation costs ($5.0 million), higher selling, general, and administrative costs to support the higher sales volume and the easing of 2020 cost-reduction measures implemented at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic ($2.2 million), and increased freight costs ($2.2 million).
Corporate expenses for 2021 increased $25.0 million as compared to 2020. The increase was driven primarily by higher acquisition and divestiture costs ($15.1 million) and increased incentive compensation costs ($8.4 million).
Interest expense, net in 2021 decreased by $1.2 million as compared to 2020, primarily due to a refund from the IRS, which included $1.7 million of applicable interest, as a result of the conclusion of an audit of our 2014 through 2017 U.S. federal income tax returns.
Other income (expense), net in 2021 increased by $196.1 million as compared to 2020, due mainly to a $137.8 million year-over-year increase in gain on sale of businesses in 2021, a $27.9 million decrease in environmental charges, a $16.1 million decrease in impairment charges, a $7.5 million legal settlement recorded in 2020 for a products liability claim for goods last supplied in 2008, a $5.3 million increase in pension (non-service) income, $2.4 million of decreased miscellaneous expenses that are either not associated with a particular segment or not considered part of administering the corporate headquarters, $1.6 million less charges related to previously divested businesses, and $0.3 million increase in gains recorded on sale of assets, partially offset by a $3.0 million charge in 2021 due to the reversal of a receivable related to an amount due from the sellers of Aseptic for uncertain tax positions that have passed the statute of limitations. An offsetting decrease in expense was recorded for the release of the corresponding liability for the uncertain tax position and is reflected as a reduction in tax expense.
Income tax expense was $34.8 million in 2021 and income tax benefit was $3.5 million in 2020. The effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 16.4% and 13.2% respectively. The effective tax rate for 2021 was primarily driven by the foreign rate differential related to certain foreign divestitures and earnings that were subject to lower tax rates, the effect of these items resulted in a net $3.1 million decrease in income tax expense. Additionally, the effective tax rate was increased by GILTI and non-deductible expenses and decreased by the release of uncertain tax positions associated with audit closures and statute expirations, resulting in a net increase to tax expense of $1 million.
Income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. was $177.2 million, or $8.53 per share, in 2021 compared to a loss from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. of $23.7 million, or $1.15 per share, in 2020.
2020 Compared to 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019, see "Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Restructuring and Other Costs
We incurred $6.2 million, $46.7 million and $35.1 million of restructuring and impairment costs during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
During 2021, we conducted a number of restructuring activities throughout our operations, which included the exit of some smaller locations and targeted workforce reductions. All costs associated with such initiatives were incurred in 2021. Workforce reductions associated with our restructuring activities totaled 58 administrative and manufacturing positions.
In 2020 our Stemco business in our Sealing Technologies segment underwent significant restructuring and portfolio reshaping activities, including the exit of our Motorwheel® and Crewson® brake adjuster brands and our Lunar® air disc brake business. In our Engineered Materials segment, we were able to successfully restructure and divest our bushing block business operated in Dieuze, France. We also took significant restructuring activities in our CPI German workforce.
Additionally, sales declines by business utilizing two indefinite lived trademarks within our Sealing Technologies segment were determined to be triggering events for impairment analysis and an impairment charge was taken. Substantially all costs associated with these initiatives, as well as other smaller restructuring and impairment charges, were incurred or accrued for as of December 31, 2020. Workforce reductions in 2020 associated with our restructuring activities totaled 289 administrative and manufacturing positions. Of the $46.7 million of restructuring and impairment charges taken in 2020, $17.4 million was related to severance and other cash restructuring charges while $29.3 million was related to impairments and write-downs of assets, including long-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets, property, plant, and equipment, and inventory.
During 2019, we conducted several restructuring activities in our Stemco division in the Sealing Technologies segment, mostly consisting of the exit of our automatic tire inflation systems and RF-based tire pressure monitoring and inflation system product lines and impairments related to intangible assets and property, plant and equipment of our Motorwheel product line. We also recorded restructuring and impairment costs related the shut down of our ATDynamics business completed in January 2020. Substantially all costs associated with these initiatives, as well as other smaller restructuring and impairment charges, were incurred or accrued for as of December 31, 2019. Workforce reductions in 2019 associated with our restructuring activities totaled 121 administrative and manufacturing positions. Of the $35.1 million of restructuring and impairment charges taken in 2019, $6.3 million was related to severance and other cash restructuring charges while $28.8 million was related to impairments and write-downs of assets, including long-lived and indefinite-lived intangible assets, property, plant, and equipment, and inventory.
Please see the "Overview and Outlook" section of Management's Discussion and Analysis and Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for further information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash requirements for, but not limited to, working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, and debt repayments have been funded from cash balances on hand, revolver borrowings and cash generated from operations. We are proactively pursuing acquisition opportunities. Should we need additional capital, we have resources available, which are discussed in this section under the heading “Capital Resources.”
As of December 31, 2021, we held $28.4 million of cash and cash equivalents in the United States and $309.7 million of cash outside of the United States. If the funds held outside the United States were needed for our operations in the U.S., we have several methods to repatriate without significant tax effects, including repayment of intercompany loans, distributions subject to a 100 percent dividends-received deduction for income tax purposes, or distributions of previously-taxed earnings.
Because of the transition tax, GILTI, and Subpart F provisions, undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries totaling $298.7 million at year-end have been subjected to U.S. income tax or are eligible for the 100 percent dividends-received deduction under Section 245A of the Internal Revenue Code ("IRC") provided in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Whether through
the application of the 100 percent dividends received deduction, or distribution of these previously-taxed earnings, we do not intend to distribute foreign earnings that will be subject to any significant incremental U.S. or foreign tax. During 2021, we repatriated $41.8 million of earnings from our foreign subsidiaries, resulting in no incremental U.S. tax and only $1.6 million of foreign withholding taxes net of refunds to be received. As a result, we have not recognized a deferred tax liability on our investment in foreign subsidiaries. However, due to the sale of CPI foreign entities, we have recognized a deferred tax liability of $0.2 million related to non-creditable withholding taxes we expect to incur in the future upon repatriation of the sale proceeds.
The net operating loss (“NOL”) resulting from a 2017 deduction in connection with the funding of our asbestos settlement trust was carried back to offset federal taxable income reported in the preceding ten years. We filed an initial carryback claim in May 2018 and received federal refunds totaling $96.9 million in 2018 ($95.8 million in June 2018 and $1.1 million in July 2018) and an additional $17.5 million in February 2019. In addition, we filed amended income tax returns for the preceding ten years in December 2018 to capture foreign tax credits freed up during the carryback period. We received federal refunds in 2021 totaling $24.7 million as a result of the amended returns and IRS audit closure. The carryback claim and the amended returns also freed up an additional $14.9 million in foreign tax credits, which were utilized to reduce taxes in 2019, 2020 and 2021.
Cash Flows
Operating activities of continuing operations provided cash in the amount of $142.0 million, $57.6 million and $130.8 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in operating cash flows in 2021 versus 2020 was primarily attributable to increased sales volume and reduced income tax payments ($60.8 million) primarily related a refund from the IRS as a result of the conclusion of an audit of our 2014 through 2017 U.S. federal income tax returns and higher tax payments in 2020 as a result of the sale of discontinued operations. These increases were partially offset by a build in accounts receivable, inventories, and accounts payable. The decrease in operating cash flow in 2020 versus 2019 was primarily attributable to increased tax payments ($58.4 million) and increased payments related to environmental remediation ($26.5 million), partially offset by improved working capital.
Investing activities of continuing operations used $651.2 million in 2021, provided $216.1 million in 2020, and used $331.1 million of cash in 2019. The cash used in 2021 was primarily the result of the acquisition of NxEdge ($856.8 million), partially offset by proceeds from the divestiture of CPI and other business during the year ($224.3 million). Cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was primarily driven by cash received from divestitures, including the sales of Fairbanks Morse, our Air Springs business and other businesses during the year ($475.1), partially offset by cash used in the acquisition of Alluxa ($238.3 million). Cash used in 2019 was primarily attributable to acquisitions of LeanTeq and Aseptic ($310.5 million).
Financing activities of continuing operations provided $618.2 million in cash in 2021, primarily attributable to a net draw on our revolving credit facility ($175.0 million), new term loan facilities (as discussed below) ($465.0 million), and issuance of common stock ($10.0 million), partially offset by $22.4 million in dividend payments and $3.8 million in principal payments to our existing Term Loan A-1 facility (as defined below). Financing activities of continuing operations provided $167.3 million in 2020 primarily attributable to net payments on our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan Facility (as defined below) of $138.3 million and $21.7 million in payments of dividends. Financing activities used $123.8 million in 2019, primarily from $17.1 million net draw on the Revolving Credit Facility, and $149.1 million net proceeds from a new term loan facility, partially offset by $20.9 million in dividends paid and $15.0 million in cash used to repurchase stock.
Capital Resources
Senior Secured Credit Facility. On December 17, 2021, we entered into a Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended Credit Agreement”) dated as of December 17, 2021 among the Company and EnPro Holdings, as borrowers, certain of our foreign subsidiaries are from time to time party thereto, as designated borrowers, the guarantors party thereto, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer. The Amended Credit Agreement amends, restates and replaces the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement dated as of June 28, 2018, as amended, among the Company and EnPro Holdings as borrowers, the guarantors party thereto, the lenders party thereto and Bank of America, N.A., as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer.
The Amended Credit Agreement provides for credit facilities in the initial aggregate principal amount of $1,007.5 million, consisting of a five-year, senior secured revolving credit facility of $400.0 million (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), a $142.5 million senior secured term loan facility in replacement of the our existing senior secured term loan facility, maturing September 25, 2024 (the “Term Loan A-1 Facility”), a five-year, senior secured term loan facility of $315.0 million (the “Term Loan A-2 Facility”) and a 364-day, senior secured term loan facility of $150.0 million (the “364-Day Facility” and together with the Revolving Credit Facility, the Term Loan A-1 Facility and the Term Loan A-2 Facility, the “Facilities”). The
Amended Credit Agreement also provides that we may seek incremental term loans and/or additional revolving credit commitments in an amount equal to the greater of $275.0 million and 100% of consolidated EBITDA for the most recently ended four-quarter period for which we have reported financial results, plus additional amounts based on a consolidated senior secured leverage ratio. The Amended Credit Agreement became effective on December 17, 2021.
Initially, borrowings under the Facilities (other than the 364-Day Facility) bear interest at an annual rate of LIBOR plus 1.75% or base rate plus 0.75%, although these interest rates are subject to incremental increase or decrease based on a consolidated total net leverage ratio. Borrowings under the 364-Day Facility bear interest at an annual rate of LIBOR plus 1.50% or base rate plus 0.50%. In addition, a commitment fee accrues with respect to the unused amount of the Revolving Credit Facility at an annual rate of 0.225%, which rate is also subject to incremental increase or decrease based on a consolidated total net leverage ratio. The Amended Credit Agreement contains customary LIBOR replacement provisions.
The Term Loan A-1 Facility will amortize on a quarterly basis in an annual amount equal to 2.50% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan A-1 Facility ($150.0 million) in year one after the closing, 5.00% of such original principal amount in year two and 1.25% of such original principal amount in each of the first three quarters of year three, with the remaining outstanding principal amount payable at maturity. The Term Loan A-2 Facility will amortize on a quarterly basis in an annual amount equal to 2.5% of the original principal amount of the Term Loan A-2 Facility in each of years one through three, 5.0% of such original principal amount in year four and 1.25% of such original principal amount in each of the first three quarters of year five, with the remaining outstanding principal amount payable at maturity. The 364-Day Facility will not amortize and will be payable in full at maturity. The Facilities are subject to prepayment with the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales, casualty or condemnation events and non-permitted debt issuances. The Facilities are subject to prepayment with the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales not reinvested in acquisitions within a specified period, casualty or condemnation events, and non-permitted debt issuances. There is no prepayment penalty for a full or partial repayment of the Facilities at any time.
The Company and EnPro Holdings are the permitted borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility. We have the ability to add wholly owned foreign subsidiaries as borrowers under the Revolving Credit Facility. Each of our domestic, consolidated subsidiaries (other than any subsidiaries that may be designated as "unrestricted" by the Company from time to time an inactive subsidiaries) is required to guarantee the obligations of the borrowers under the Facilities, and each of our existing domestic, consolidated subsidiaries (other than inactive subsidiaries) has entered into the Amended Credit Agreement to provide such a guarantee.
Borrowings under the Facilities are secured by a first-priority pledge of the following assets:
•100% of the capital stock of each domestic subsidiary of the Company (other than unrestricted or inactive subsidiaries);
•65% of the capital stock of any first tier foreign subsidiary of the Company and its domestic subsidiaries (other than unrestricted or inactive subsidiaries); and
•substantially all of the assets (including, without limitation, machinery and equipment, inventory and other goods, accounts receivable, bank accounts, general intangibles, financial assets, investment property, license rights, patents, trademarks, trade names, copyrights, chattel paper, insurance proceeds, contract rights, hedge agreements, documents, instruments, indemnification rights, tax refunds and cash, but excluding real estate interests) of the Company and its domestic subsidiaries (other than unrestricted or inactive subsidiaries).
The Amended Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants and required financial ratios, including:
•a maximum consolidated total net leverage ratio of not more than 4.75 to 1.0 (with total debt, for the purposes of such ratio, to be net of up to $150 million of unrestricted cash of EnPro Industries, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries), which ratio will decrease to 4.5 to 1.0 for each fiscal quarter beginning with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022 and ending with the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2022, and to 4.0 to 1.0 for each quarter thereafter; and, once so decreased, may be increased (up to three times) at the borrowers' option to not more than 4.5 to 1.0 for the for-quarter period following a significant acquisition; and
•a minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio of at least 2.5 to 1.0.
The Amended Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants (subject, in each case, to customary exceptions and qualifications), including covenants that limit our ability to, among other things:
•grant liens on our assets;
•incur additional indebtedness (including guarantees and other contingent obligations);
•make certain investments (including loans and advances);
•merge or make other fundamental changes;
•sell or otherwise dispose of property or assets;
•pay dividends and other distributions and prepay certain indebtedness;
•make changes in the nature of our business;
•enter into transactions with our affiliates;
•enter into burdensome contracts; and
•modify or terminate documents related to certain indebtedness.
We were in compliance with all covenants of the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021. The borrowing availability under our Revolving Credit Facility at December 31, 2021 was $213.6 million after giving consideration to $11.4 million of outstanding letters of credit and $175.0 million of outstanding borrowings. The balance of our outstanding Term Loan A-1 Facility, Term Loan A-2 Facility and 364-Day Facility at December 31, 2021 was $141.6 million, $315.0 million and $150.0 million, respectively.
Senior Notes. On October 17, 2018, we completed the offering of $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 5.75% senior notes due 2026 (the "Senior Notes") and applied the net proceeds of that offering, together with borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, to redeem on October 31, 2018 the full $450 million aggregate principal amount of our outstanding 5.875% senior notes due 2022 (the "Old Notes"), of which $300 million aggregate principal amount were issued in 2014 and $150 million aggregate principal amount were issued in a follow-on offering in 2017. The Old Notes were redeemed at a price equal to 102.938% of the aggregate principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the redemption date. We recorded a loss on the redemption of the Old Notes of approximately $18.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2018.
The Senior Notes were issued to investors at 100% of the principal amount thereof. The Senior Notes are unsecured, unsubordinated obligations of EnPro and mature on October 15, 2026. Interest on the Senior Notes accrues at a rate of 5.75% per annum and is payable semi-annually in cash in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, commencing April 15, 2019. The Senior Notes are required to be guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by each of EnPro’s existing and future direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries that is a borrower under, or guarantees, our indebtedness under the Revolving Credit Facility or guarantees any other Capital Markets Indebtedness (as defined in the indenture governing the Senior Notes) of EnPro or any of the guarantors.
On or after October 15, 2021, we may, on any one or more occasions, redeem all or a part of the Senior Notes at specified redemption prices plus accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, we may redeem a portion of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes before October 15, 2021 with the net cash proceeds from certain equity offerings at a specified redemption price plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the redemption date. We may also redeem some or all of the Senior Notes before October 15, 2021 at a redemption price of 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but not including, the redemption date, plus a “make whole” premium.
Each holder of the Senior Notes may require us to repurchase some or all of the Senior Notes held by such holder for cash upon the occurrence of a defined “change of control” event. Our ability to redeem the Senior Notes prior to maturity is subject to certain conditions, including in certain cases the payment of make-whole amounts.
The indenture governing the Senior Notes requires us to apply the net cash proceeds of certain asset sales not reinvested in acquisitions, capital expenditures, or used to repay or otherwise reduce specified indebtedness within a specified period, to the extent the remaining net proceeds exceed a specified amount, to offer to repurchase the Senior Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount thereof plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of our contractual obligations and commitments at December 31, 2021, is as follows:
The payments for long-term debt shown in the table above reflect the contractual principal amount for the Senior Notes and term loans under our Amended Credit Agreement. In our Consolidated Balance Sheet, these amounts are shown net of a debt discount of $5.4 million. The scheduled payments for the short-term debt shown in the table above reflect the contractual principal amount for the 364-Day Facility under our Amended Credit Agreement. In our Consolidated Balance Sheet, this amount is shown net of a debt discount of $0.7 million. Additional discussion regarding the Senior Notes and Amended Credit Agreement is included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Capital Resources,” and in Note 11, "Debt," to the consolidated financial statements. The interest on debt represents the contractual interest coupon. It does not include the debt discount accretion, which also is a component of interest expense.
Payments for other liabilities are estimates for other retained liabilities of previously owned businesses included in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2021. These estimated payments, along with our estimated payments of environmental liabilities, are based on information currently known to us. However, it is possible that these estimates will vary from actual results and it is possible that these estimates may be updated if new information becomes available in the future or if there are changes in the facts and circumstances related to these liabilities. Additional discussion regarding these liabilities is included earlier in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in “Contingencies - Environmental" and "Contingencies - Crucible Steel Corporation a/k/a Crucible, Inc.,” and in Note 19, "Commitments and Contingencies," to the consolidated financial statements.
The table does not include obligations under our pension and postretirement benefit plans, which are included in Note 14, "Pension and Postretirement Benefits," to the consolidated financial statements.
Share Repurchase Program
In October 2018, our board of directors authorized a two-year program for expenditures of up to $50.0 million of our outstanding common shares. Prior to the expiration of this authorization in October 2020, we repurchased a total of 0.3 million shares for $20.3 million, of which we repurchased 0.1 million shares for $5.3 million in 2020 and we repurchased 0.2 million shares for $15.0 million in 2019.
In October of 2020, our board of directors authorized a new two-year program of up to $50.0 million for the repurchase of our outstanding common shares through October 2022. We have not made any repurchases under the new authorization.
Dividends
On January 13, 2015, our board of directors adopted a policy under which it intends to declare regular quarterly cash dividends on EnPro’s common stock, with the determination of whether to declare a dividend and the amount being considered each quarter, after taking into account our cash flow, earnings, cash position, financial position and other relevant matters. In 2021, our board declared a dividend of $0.27 per share in each quarter, and on February 16, 2022 we announced that our board of directors had increased the quarterly dividend to $0.28 per share, commencing with the dividend to be paid on March 16, 2022 to all shareholders of record as of March 2, 2022. Each of the Credit Agreement and the indenture governing the Senior Notes includes covenants restricting the payment of dividends, but includes a basket permitting the payment of cash dividends of up to $50.0 million per year under the Credit Agreement and $60.0 million per year under the indenture governing the Senior Notes. Other baskets may be available under that the agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility and the indenture governing the Senior Notes to permit the payment of dividends in excess of the respective basket amount.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements, in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures pertaining to contingent assets and liabilities. Note 1, “Overview, Basis of Presentation, Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Guidance,” to the Consolidated Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies used to prepare the Consolidated Financial Statements and recently issued accounting guidance. On an ongoing basis we evaluate our estimates, including, but not limited to, those related to bad debts, inventories, intangible assets, income taxes, warranty obligations, restructuring, pensions and other postretirement benefits, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates.
We believe the following accounting estimates are the most critical. Some of them involve significant judgments and uncertainties and could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Temporary differences arising between the tax basis of an asset or liability and its carrying amount on the Consolidated Balance Sheet are used to calculate future income tax assets or liabilities. This method also requires the recognition of deferred tax benefits, such as net operating loss carryforwards. Valuation allowances are recorded as appropriate to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount considered likely to be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to the taxable income (losses) in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the date of enactment of the change. A tax benefit from an uncertain tax position is recognized only if we believe it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on its technical merits. If the recognition threshold for the tax position is met, only the portion of the tax benefit that we believe is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized is recorded. Our future results may include favorable or unfavorable adjustments to our estimated tax liabilities due to closure of income tax examinations, statute expirations, new regulatory or judicial pronouncements, changes in tax laws, changes in projected levels of taxable income, future tax planning strategies, or other relevant events.
Environmental
Although we believe past operations were in substantial compliance with the then applicable regulations, we or one or more of our subsidiaries are involved with various remediation activities or an investigation to determine responsibility for environmental conditions at 19 sites.
Our policy is to accrue environmental investigation and remediation costs when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. For sites with multiple future projected cost scenarios for identified feasible investigation and remediation options where no one estimate is more likely than all the others, our policy is to accrue the lowest estimate among the range of estimates. The measurement of our liability is based on an evaluation of currently available facts with respect to each individual situation and takes into consideration factors such as existing technology, presently enacted laws and regulations and prior experience in the remediation of similar contaminated sites. Liabilities are established for all sites based on these factors. As assessments and remediation progress at individual sites, these liabilities are reviewed and adjusted to reflect additional technical data and legal information. Given the uncertainties regarding the status of laws, regulations, enforcement policies, the impact of other parties potentially being fully or partially liable, technology and information related to individual sites, we do not believe it is possible to develop an estimate of the range of reasonably possible environmental loss in excess of our recorded liabilities.
We believe that our accruals for specific environmental liabilities are adequate based on currently available information. Based upon limited information regarding any incremental remediation or other actions that may be required at these sites, we cannot estimate any further loss or a reasonably possible range of loss related to these matters. Actual costs to be incurred in future periods may vary from estimates because of the inherent uncertainties in evaluating environmental exposures due to unknown and changing conditions, changing government regulations and legal standards regarding liability.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
We do not amortize goodwill, but instead it is subject to annual impairment testing. The goodwill asset impairment test involves comparing the fair value of a reporting unit to its carrying amount. We would recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized would not exceed
the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Interim tests may be required if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying amount.
To estimate the fair value of our reporting units, we use both discounted cash flow and market valuation approaches. The discounted cash flow approach uses cash flow projections to calculate the fair value of each reporting unit while the market approach relies on market multiples of similar companies. There are inherent assumptions and estimates used in developing future cash flows which require management to apply judgment to the analysis of goodwill impairment, including projected revenues and profit margins, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, discount rates and tax rates. For the market approach, we chose a group of peer companies we believe are representative of each respective reporting unit. We used a 75% weighting for the discounted cash flow valuation approach and a 25% weighting for the market valuation approach, reflecting our belief that the discounted cash flow valuation approach provides a better indicator of value since it reflects the specific cash flows anticipated to be generated in the future by the business.
We completed our required annual impairment tests of goodwill as of October 1, 2020 and 2019 with no impairment indicated. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we performed our testing as of both October 1, 2021 and November 1, 2021. These assessments did not indicate any impairment of the goodwill, and the fair values of each of our reporting units exceeded their carrying values by at least 50%, with the exception of our Alluxa reporting unit. We determined our Alluxa reporting unit, allocated $126.0 million of goodwill, was not impaired and its fair value exceeded its carrying value by 28%.
We determined our weighted average cost of capital ("WACC") for our Alluxa reporting unit, used in our discounted cash flow analysis, to be 12% at our test date of November 1, 2021. If the WACC used in this assessment would increase by one percentage point, we estimate that the carrying value of the Alluxa reporting unit would exceed its book value by approximately 19%. A change in assumptions used in the testing of Alluxa's goodwill for impairment, such as a change in discount rate, inability to meet financial forecasts used in the test, or a shift in the market multiples could result in Alluxa's fair value dropping below the carrying value of its assets resulting in impairment. We will continue to monitor the performance of Alluxa in relation to its forecast and perform an interim test if we determine a triggering event to occur.
The most recent annual assessment was conducted in the context of information that was reasonably available to us, as well as our consideration of the future potential impacts of COVID-19 on our business. However, because of uncertainties at this time with respect to the severity and duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, the duration and terms of related governmental orders restricting activities, and the timing and pace of any economic recovery as COVID-19 impacts ultimately abate, we cannot predict with specificity the extent and duration of any future impact on our business and financial results from COVID-19. In addition, site-specific health and safety concerns might otherwise require certain of our operations to be halted for some period of time. Accordingly, if the impact is more severe or longer in duration than we have projected, such impact could potentially result in impairments of assets in future periods. We will test all reporting units again at our next test date of November 1, 2022, or earlier as circumstances may require.
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting and record assets and liabilities at their respective fair value. The fair value of intangible assets associated with acquisitions is determined using an income valuation approach. Projecting discounted future cash flows requires us to make significant estimates regarding projected revenues and profit margins, projected capital expenditures, changes in working capital, discount rates, attrition rates, royalty rates, obsolescence rates and tax rates. The excess of purchase price over the estimated fair value is recorded as goodwill.
Many of the factors used in assessing fair value are outside the control of management, and it is reasonably likely that assumptions and estimates will change in future periods. These changes could result in future impairments. For additional information, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Overview and Outlook” as well as Notes 1 and 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact of Pending Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, "Overview, Basis of Presentation, Significant Accounting Policies and Recently Issued Accounting Guidance," to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting guidance that we have not yet adopted.
Contingencies
A description of our contingencies is included in Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
On October 17, 2018, we completed the offering of the Senior Notes and applied the net proceeds of that offering, together with borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility, to redeem all of the Old Notes on October 31, 2018. The Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on an unsecured, unsubordinated, joint and several basis by our existing and future wholly owned direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries, that are each guarantors of our Revolving Credit Facility, including subsidiaries that were wholly owned at the time they provided the guarantee but thereafter became majority owned subsidiaries (collectively, the “Guarantor Subsidiaries”). The Guarantor Subsidiaries at December 31, 2020 comprise all of our consolidated domestic subsidiaries at that date. Our subsidiaries organized outside of the United States, (collectively, the “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) did not guarantee the Old Notes and do not guarantee the Senior Notes.
The Guarantor Subsidiaries jointly and severally guarantee on an unsecured, unsubordinated basis the performance and punctual payment when due, whether at stated maturity of the Senior Notes, by acceleration or otherwise, all of our obligations under the Senior Notes and the indenture governing the Senior Notes (the “Indenture”), whether for payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest on the Senior Notes, expenses, indemnification or otherwise (all such obligations guaranteed by the Guarantor Subsidiaries are referred to as the “Guaranteed Obligations”). The Guarantor Subsidiaries have jointly and severally agreed to pay, in addition to the obligations stated above, any and all expenses (including reasonable counsel fees and expenses) incurred by the trustee (the “Trustee”) under the Indenture in enforcing any rights under their guarantees of the Guaranteed Obligations.
Each guarantee of a Guarantor Subsidiary is limited to an amount not to exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed by it without rendering the guarantee, as it relates to such Guarantor Subsidiary, voidable under applicable law relating to fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors generally. Each guarantee of a Guarantor Subsidiary is a continuing guarantee and shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the Trustee, the holders of the Senior Notes and their successors, transferees and assigns and, subject to the provisions described in the following sentence, remains in full force and effect until payment in full of all of the Guaranteed Obligations of such Guarantor Subsidiary and is binding upon such Guarantor Subsidiary and its successors. A guarantee of the Senior Notes by a Guarantor Subsidiary is subject to release in the following circumstances: (i) the sale, disposition, exchange or other transfer (including through merger, consolidation, amalgamation or otherwise) of the capital stock of the subsidiary made in a manner not in violation of the Indenture; (ii) the designation of the subsidiary as an “Unrestricted Subsidiary” under the Indenture; (iii) the legal defeasance or covenant defeasance of the Senior Notes in accordance with the terms of the Indenture; or (iv) the subsidiary ceasing to be our subsidiary as a result of any foreclosure of any pledge or security interest securing our Revolving Credit Facility or other exercise of remedies in respect thereof.
The following tables present summarized financial information for EnPro Industries, Inc. (the "Parent") and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis after intercompany eliminations.
The summarized results of operations information for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
The summarized balance sheet information at December 31, 2021 was as follows:
The table above reflects $11.2 million of current intercompany receivables due to the Guarantor Subsidiaries from the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries and $3.2 million of current intercompany payables due to the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries from the Guarantor Subsidiaries within current assets and liabilities held and used.
The Senior Notes are structurally subordinated to the indebtedness and other liabilities of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. The Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries are separate and distinct legal entities and have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay any amounts due pursuant to the Senior Notes or the Indenture, or to make any funds available therefor, whether by dividends, loans, distributions or other payments. Any right that the Company or the Guarantor Subsidiaries have to receive any assets of any of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries upon the liquidation or reorganization of any Non-Guarantor Subsidiary, and the consequent rights of holders of Senior Notes to realize proceeds from the sale of any of a Non-Guarantor Subsidiary’s assets, would be effectively subordinated to the claims of such Non-Guarantor Subsidiary’s creditors, including trade creditors and holders of preferred equity interests, if any, of such Non-Guarantor Subsidiary. Accordingly, in the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries, the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries will pay the holders of their debts, holders of preferred equity interests, if any, and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their assets to the Company or any Guarantor Subsidiaries.
If a Guarantor Subsidiary were to become a debtor in a case under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code or encounter other financial difficulty, under federal or state fraudulent transfer or conveyance law, a court may avoid, subordinate or otherwise decline to enforce its guarantee of the Senior Notes. A court might do so if it is found that when such Guarantor Subsidiary entered into its guarantee of the Senior Notes, or in some states when payments became due under the Senior Notes, such Guarantor Subsidiary received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration and either:
•was insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of such incurrence;
•was left with unreasonably small or otherwise inadequate capital to conduct our business; or
•believed or reasonably should have believed that it would incur debts beyond its ability to pay.
The court might also avoid the guarantee of the Senior Notes without regard to the above factors, if the court found that the Guarantor Subsidiary entered into its guarantee with actual intent to hinder, delay or defraud our creditors.
A court would likely find that a Guarantor Subsidiary did not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for its guarantee of the Senior Notes, if such Guarantor Subsidiary did not substantially benefit directly or indirectly from the funding made available by the issuance of the Senior Notes. If a court were to avoid a guarantee of the Senior Notes provided by a Guarantor Subsidiary, holders of the Senior Notes would no longer have any claim against such Guarantor Subsidiary. The measures of insolvency for purposes of these fraudulent transfer or conveyance laws will vary depending upon the law applied in any proceeding to determine whether a fraudulent transfer or conveyance has occurred, such that we cannot predict what standards a court would use to determine whether or not a Guarantor Subsidiary was solvent at the relevant time or, regardless of the standard that a court uses, that the guarantee of a Guarantor Subsidiary would not be subordinated to such Guarantor Subsidiary’s other debt. As noted above, each guarantee provided by a Guarantor Subsidiary includes a provision intended to limit the Guarantor Subsidiary’s liability to the maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent transfer or conveyance. This provision may not be effective to protect those guarantees from being avoided under fraudulent transfer or conveyance law, or it may reduce that Guarantor Subsidiary’s
obligation to an amount that effectively makes its guarantee worthless, and we cannot predict whether a court will ultimately find it to be effective.
On the basis of historical financial information, operating history and other factors, we believe that each of the Guarantor Subsidiaries, after giving effect to the issuance of its guarantee of the Senior Notes when such guarantee was issued, was not insolvent, did not have unreasonably small capital for the business in which it engaged and did not and has not incurred debts beyond its ability to pay such debts as they mature. We cannot assure you, however, as to what standard a court would apply in making these determinations or that a court would agree with our conclusions in this regard.
Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures to the Comparable GAAP Measures
Reconciliation of Adjusted Income from Continuing Operations Attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc.
We believe that it would be helpful to the readers of the financial statements to understand the impact of certain selected items on our reported income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. and diluted earnings per share attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. continuing operations, including items that may recur from time to time. The items adjusted for in these non-GAAP financial measures are those that are excluded by management in budgeting or projecting for performance in future periods, as they typically relate to events specific to the period in which they occur. Accordingly, these are some of the factors the company uses in internal evaluations of the overall performance of its businesses. In addition, management believes these non-GAAP financial measures are commonly used financial measures for investors to evaluate the company’s operating performance and, when read in conjunction with the company’s consolidated financial statements, present a useful tool to evaluate the company’s ongoing operations and performance from period to period. Management acknowledges that there are many items that impact a company’s reported results and the adjustments reflected in these non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to present all items that may have impacted these results. In addition, these non-GAAP measures are not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies.
A reconciliation of (i) income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to adjusted income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc., including on a per share basis, and (ii) income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
1 Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa that is subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the LeanTeq and Alluxa sellers and is directly related to the terms of the respective acquisition. This expense will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with the acquisition unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
2 In connection with the acquisition of Aseptic in 2019, we recognized a liability for uncertain tax positions and a related indemnification asset for the portion of that liability recoverable from the seller. We determined the statute of limitations expired on some of the uncertain tax positions in 2021 and, accordingly, removed a portion of the liability and receivable. The release of the related liability was recorded as part of our tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the reversal of the related receivable was recorded as an expense in other non-operating income (expense) on our consolidated statement of operations.
3Adjusted diluted earnings per share.
4 There were 0.1 million potentially dilutive shares in the year ended December 31, 2020 that were excluded from the calculation of consolidated earnings per share in that period since they were antidilutive. These shares were added back for the purpose of calculating adjusted income from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. per share.
5 Other adjustments are included in selling, general, and administrative, cost of sales, and other operating expenses on the consolidated statement of operations.
The adjusted income tax expense presented above is calculated using a normalized company-wide effective tax rate excluding discrete items of 30.0% for continuing operations. Per share amounts were calculated by dividing by the weighted-average shares of diluted common stock outstanding during the periods.
Reconciliation of Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to Adjusted EBITDA
1 Non-controlling interest compensation allocation represents compensation expense associated with a portion of the rollover equity from the acquisitions of LeanTeq and Alluxa that is subject to reduction for certain types of employment terminations of the LeanTeq Executive Officers and the Alluxa Executive Officers sellers and is directly related to the terms of the respective acquisition. This expense will continue to be recognized as compensation expense over the term of the put and call options associated with the acquisition unless certain employment terminations have occurred.
2 In connection with the acquisition of Aseptic in 2019, we recognized a liability for uncertain tax positions and a related indemnification asset for the portion of that liability recoverable from the seller. We determined the statute of limitations expired on some of the uncertain tax positions in 2021 and, accordingly, removed a portion of the liability and receivable. The release of the related liability was recorded as part of our tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the reversal of the related receivable was recorded as an expense in other non-operating income (expense) on our consolidated statement of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA as presented in the table above also represents the amount defined as "EBITDA" under the indenture governing the Senior Notes.
Reconciliation of Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations Attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to Total Adjusted Segment EBITDA
The reconciliation of income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to EnPro Industries, Inc. to total adjusted segment EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 is included in “-Results of Operations."