ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and capital resources should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Overview
We are a geographically diversified supplier providing environmentally-sensitive products, as well as rentals and services to customers across multiple industries. We operate our business through two reportable segments: Industrial Solutions, which serves various markets including power transmission, oil and natural gas exploration and production (“E&P”), pipeline, renewable energy, petrochemical, construction and other industries, and Fluids Systems, which primarily serves E&P customers.
Industrial Solutions - Our Industrial Solutions segment, which generated 32% of consolidated revenues and $40 million of operating income for 2021, provides temporary worksite access solutions, including the rental of our manufactured recyclable composite matting systems, along with related site construction and services to customers in various markets including power transmission, E&P, pipeline, renewable energy, petrochemical, construction and other industries, primarily in the United States and Europe. We also sell our manufactured recyclable composite mats to customers around the world, with power transmission being the primary end-market.
Our Industrial Solutions segment has been a primary source of operating income and cash generation for us in recent years. The expansion of our Industrial Solutions segment into the power transmission and other industrial markets remains a strategic priority for us due to such markets’ relative stability compared to E&P, as well as the magnitude of growth opportunity in these markets, including the potential positive impact from the energy transition. In 2021, approximately 80% of our total capital expenditures were directed to the Industrial Solutions segment in support of this growth strategy.
During 2020, our business was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as customers delayed purchases and planned projects citing COVID-related market uncertainty, permitting delays, and logistical restrictions. In addition, our rental and service business has been impacted by the downturn in the U.S. oil and natural gas industry, as further discussed below. As compared to 2019, segment revenues from E&P customers decreased by $53 million (59%) to $37 million in 2021. During this same period, segment revenues from power transmission and other industrial markets increased by $47 million (43%) to $157 million in 2021. We expect customer activity, particularly in the power transmission sector, will remain robust in the coming years, driven in part by the impacts of the energy transition and the increasing investment in grid reliance initiatives.
In 2020, we began leveraging our chemical blending capacity and technical expertise into industrial blending operations, and in response to the increasing market demand for cleaning products resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, began producing disinfectants and industrial cleaning products in 2020. The scale-up of production was completed by the end of the third quarter of 2020, which effectively repositioned our chemical blending operation located in Conroe, Texas to support industrial end-markets. Beginning prospectively in the fourth quarter of 2020, the assets and operating results associated with these industrial blending operations are included in the Industrial Solutions segment, while the historical results from earlier in 2020, which were immaterial, are included in the Fluids Systems segment. Despite our initial success, a key blue-chip customer experienced a significant decline in product demand and cancelled all orders of disinfectants and cleaning products in the third quarter of 2021. In February 2022, in consideration of broader strategic priorities and the timeline and efforts required to further develop the industrial blending business, our management recommended and our Board of Directors approved a plan to exit our Industrial Blending operations. As part of the exit plan, we expect to complete the wind down of the Industrial Blending business by the end of the second quarter 2022 and pursue the sale of the industrial blending and warehouse facility located in Conroe, Texas, as well as the sale or other disposal of the blending and packaging equipment and other related assets currently used in these operations. The Industrial Blending business contributed $9 million of revenues in 2021 and incurred an operating loss of $2 million. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of the long-lived assets associated with the Industrial Blending business was $20 million. As a result of the plan to exit and dispose of the assets used in the Industrial Blending business, we may incur pre-tax charges in the range of approximately $4 million to $8 million primarily related to the non-cash impairment of long-lived assets, which we expect to recognize in the first quarter of 2022.
Fluids Systems - Our Fluids Systems segment, which generated 68% of consolidated revenues and incurred a $19 million operating loss for 2021, provides drilling, completion, and stimulation fluids products and related technical services to customers for oil, natural gas, and geothermal projects primarily in North America and Europe, the Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”), as well as certain countries in Asia Pacific and Latin America. Our Fluids Systems operating results remain dependent on oil and natural gas drilling activity levels in the markets we serve and the nature of the drilling operations (including the depth and whether the wells are drilled vertically or horizontally), which governs the revenue potential of each well. Drilling activity levels, in turn, depend on a variety of factors, including oil and natural gas commodity pricing, inventory
levels, product demand, and regulatory restrictions. Oil and natural gas prices and activity are cyclical and volatile, and this market volatility has a significant impact on our operating results.
While our Fluids Systems revenue potential is driven by a number of factors including those described above, rig count data remains the most widely accepted indicator of drilling activity. Average North American rig count data for the last three years is as follows:
_______________________________________________________
Source: Baker Hughes Company
During 2019, U.S. rig count steadily declined, exiting the year at 805 active rigs, a 26% decline from the end of 2018. The decline in market activity contributed to a significant decline in segment revenues and operating income. During March 2020, oil prices collapsed due to geopolitical events along with the worldwide effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, U.S. rig count declined significantly beginning in March 2020 before reaching a low of 244 in August 2020. During 2021, oil prices rebounded, and the average U.S. rig count gradually increased, ending the year at 586 rigs, 38% lower than the 2019 average. We anticipate that market activity will continue to improve in 2022, although U.S. activity is expected to remain well below 2019 levels as many of our customers remain focused on cost-saving measures and generating sufficient cash flows. Further, the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 variants, an uncertain economic environment, including widespread supply chain disruptions, as well as enacted and proposed legislative changes in the U.S. impacting the oil and natural gas industry, make the timing and pace of recovery difficult to predict.
Outside of North America land markets, drilling activity is generally more stable as this drilling activity is based on longer-term economic projections and multi-year drilling programs, which typically reduces the impact of short-term changes in commodity prices on overall drilling activity. However, operations in several countries in the EMEA region experienced activity disruptions and project delays beginning in early 2020 and continuing through 2021, driven by government-imposed restrictions on movements of personnel, quarantines of staffing, and logistical limitations as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Revenues and profitability from our international Fluids Systems business have gradually recovered in 2021, with revenues for the fourth quarter 2021 approaching pre-COVID levels. Although the impacts of COVID-19 on our international operations has significantly declined in recent months, we expect some level of operational disruption and project delays will continue to impact international activity levels in the near-term, with the impact from the duration and magnitude of the pandemic and related government responses very difficult to predict.
In response to the 2020 market changes and reduced demand for our products and services as a result of the decline in oil prices and the COVID-19 pandemic, we took a number of actions during 2020 and continuing into 2021 aimed at conserving cash and protecting our liquidity, including:
•The implementation of cost reduction programs, including workforce reductions, employee furloughs, the suspension of the Company’s matching contributions to its U.S. defined contribution plan, and temporary salary reductions effective April 1, 2020 for a significant portion of U.S. employees, including a 15% cut to the salaries paid to executive officers and the annual cash retainers paid to all non-employee members of the Board of Directors (compensation and matching contributions to the U.S. defined contribution plan were restored by the third quarter of 2021);
•The initiation of additional actions to further reduce the operational footprint of the Fluids Systems business in the U.S., to better align our cost structure with the lower market activity levels; and
•The elimination of all non-critical capital investments.
As part of the cost reduction programs, we reduced our global employee base by approximately 650 (30%) in 2020.
In 2020, we recognized $29.2 million of total charges, including $28.6 million in Fluids Systems consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to our exit from Brazil, $10.3 million for inventory write-downs, $3.5 million for severance and other costs, and $3.0 million in fixed asset impairments.
In 2021, we recognized $5.5 million of total charges, primarily related to self-insured costs associated with Hurricane Ida damage to our Fourchon, Louisiana Fluids Systems operating base, facility exit, and severance costs. We have continued to take cost actions throughout 2021 to further reduce the operational footprint of the Fluids Systems business in the U.S., to better align our cost structure with the lower market activity levels.
Additionally, with ongoing support from outside financial and other advisors, we have continuously reviewed our portfolio during the oil and natural gas cycle of the last couple of years. These reviews have focused on evaluating changes in the outlook for our served markets and customer priorities, while identifying opportunities for value-creating options in our portfolio, as well as placing investment emphasis in markets where we generate strong returns and where we see greater long-term viability and stability. While we have taken certain actions to reduce our workforce and cost structure, our business contains high levels of fixed costs, including significant facility and personnel expense. In February 2022, our Board of Directors approved management’s plan to explore strategic options for our U.S. mineral grinding business, which contributed total third-party revenues of $36 million in 2021 yielding approximately break-even operating income and ended the year with $47 million of net capital employed, including approximately $25 million of net working capital. We continue to evaluate other under-performing areas of our business, particularly within the U.S. and Gulf of Mexico oil and natural gas markets, which necessitates consideration of broader structural changes to transform this business for the new market realities. In the absence of a longer-term increase in activity levels, we may incur future charges related to these efforts or potential asset impairments, which may negatively impact our future results.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Consolidated Results of Operations
Summarized results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020 are as follows:
Revenues
Revenues increased 25% to $614.8 million for 2021, compared to $492.6 million for 2020. This $122.2 million increase includes a $97.9 million (28%) increase in revenues in North America, comprised of a $49.4 million increase in the Industrial Solutions segment and a $48.5 million increase in the Fluids Systems segment. Revenues from our North America operations increased primarily due to the significant growth in power transmission and other industrial markets, which impacts our Industrial Solutions segment, as well as the improvement in North America rig count, which favorably impacted our Fluids Systems segment. Revenues from our international operations increased by $24.3 million (17%) but continued to be unfavorably impacted by activity disruptions and project delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Additional information regarding the change in revenues is provided within the operating segment results below.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues increased 12% to $529.6 million for 2021, compared to $473.3 million for 2020. Fluids Systems segment cost of revenues for 2021 includes $3.0 million of charges primarily related to facility exit and severance costs, and 2020 included a total of $14.1 million of charges related to inventory write-downs, severance costs, and facility exit costs. The remaining increase was primarily driven by the 25% increase in revenues described above, partially offset by the benefit of cost reduction programs implemented in 2020 and 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $7.8 million to $94.4 million for 2021, compared to $86.6 million for 2020. This increase was primarily driven by higher performance-based incentive and stock-based compensation expense, as well as higher personnel costs in 2021, partially offset by the benefit of cost reduction programs implemented in 2020 and 2021, and lower severance charges. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues was 15.4% for 2021 compared to 17.6% for 2020.
Other operating income, net
In August 2021, Hurricane Ida caused damage to our Fourchon, Louisiana Fluids Systems operating base. While this event is covered by our property and business interruption insurance programs, these programs contain self-insured retentions, which remain our financial obligations, resulting in $2.6 million of charges for 2021. In addition, 2021 includes a $0.8 million gain related to the final insurance settlement associated with the July 2018 fire at our Kenedy, Texas drilling fluids facility, and a $1.0 million gain related to a legal settlement in the Industrial Solutions segment, as well as gains on sales of assets. Other operating income for 2020 primarily relates to gains on sales of assets, including a $1.3 million gain related to our exit from Brazil.
Impairments and other charges
Fluids Systems segment included non-cash charges for 2020 consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil, as well as $3.0 million attributable to the abandonment of certain property, plant and equipment.
Foreign currency exchange
Foreign currency exchange was a $0.4 million gain for 2021 compared to a $3.4 million loss for 2020 and reflects the impact of currency translation on assets and liabilities (including intercompany balances) that are denominated in currencies other than functional currencies.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was $8.8 million for 2021 compared to $11.0 million for 2020. Interest expense for 2021 and 2020 includes $3.7 million and $5.2 million, respectively, in noncash amortization of original issue discount and debt issuance costs. The decrease in cash interest expense is primarily due to lower debt balances.
(Gain) loss on extinguishment of debt
In 2021 and 2020, we repurchased $28.3 million and $33.1 million, respectively, of our Convertible Notes in the open market for $28.1 million and $29.1 million, respectively. The $1.0 million loss and $0.4 million gain for 2021 and 2020, respectively, reflects the difference in the amount paid and the net carrying value of the extinguished debt, including original issue discount and debt issuance costs.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
The provision for income taxes was $7.3 million for 2021, despite reporting a pretax loss for the period, primarily reflecting the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss. The tax expense primarily relates to earnings from our international operations since we are currently unable to recognize the tax benefit from our U.S. losses as they may not be realized. The benefit for income taxes was $11.9 million for 2020, reflecting an effective tax benefit rate of 13%. This result primarily reflects the impact of the $11.7 million non-cash recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil and other nondeductible expenses, as well as the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss, where the tax benefit from losses in the U.S was partially offset by the tax expense related to earnings from our international operations.
Operating Segment Results
Summarized financial information for our reportable segments is shown in the following table (net of inter-segment transfers):
Fluids Systems
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
North America revenues increased 21% to $275.3 million for 2021, compared to $226.8 million for 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to a $51.7 million increase from U.S. land markets driven primarily by the 10% increase in U.S. rig count and an increase in market share, partially offset by a $23.2 million decrease from offshore Gulf of Mexico driven primarily by changes in customer drilling and completion activity levels. In addition, Canada increased $23.2 million driven primarily by the 47% increase in Canada rig count and an increase in market share. For 2021, U.S. revenues include $201.9 million from land markets and $25.4 million from offshore Gulf of Mexico.
Internationally, revenues increased 14% to $145.5 million for 2021, compared to $127.8 million for 2020. The increase was primarily driven by higher activity in Europe and Asia Pacific regions following significant impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as described above.
Operating loss
The Fluids Systems segment incurred an operating loss of $19.0 million for 2021, reflecting a $47.4 million improvement from the $66.4 million operating loss incurred in 2020. The Fluids Systems segment operating loss for 2021 includes $5.5 million of charges primarily related to self-insured costs associated with Hurricane Ida damage to our Fourchon, Louisiana Fluids Systems operating base, facility exit, and severance costs, and the operating loss for 2020 included $28.6 million of charges, consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil and $16.9 million of total charges associated with inventory write-downs, severance costs, fixed asset impairments, and facility exit costs. The remaining improvement in the operating loss includes a $20.1 million benefit from North America operations and a $4.2 million benefit from international operations, reflecting the impact of the revenue improvement described above along with the benefit of cost reduction programs implemented in 2020 and 2021.
Industrial Solutions
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
In 2020, customer activity across most end-markets was unfavorably impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the related operational restrictions and market uncertainty, causing delays in purchases and project execution. As a result, revenues from product sales, which typically fluctuate based on the timing of mat orders from customers, increased by $37.6 million in 2021, including a favorable impact from pent-up demand following the COVID-19 pandemic as well as our expanding power transmission customer base.
Rental and service revenues increased by $17.1 million in 2021, as delayed purchases and projects resumed, including a $16.4 million increase from power transmission and other industrial markets. The increase from industrial customers reflects our continued expansion into these markets, both in the U.S. and U.K., including an approximately 22% increase in revenues from the power transmission sector.
Operating income
The Industrial Solutions segment generated operating income of $39.7 million for 2021 compared to $13.5 million for 2020, the increase being primarily attributable to the changes in revenues as described above.
Corporate Office
Corporate office expenses increased $3.9 million to $29.5 million for 2021, compared to $25.7 million for 2020. This increase was primarily driven by higher performance-based incentive and stock-based compensation expense, as well as the restoration of certain U.S. salary and retirement benefits, and higher mergers and acquisitions and other legal and professional costs, partially offset by the benefit of cost reduction programs implemented in 2020 and 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Consolidated Results of Operations
Summarized results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 are as follows:
Revenues
Revenues decreased 40% to $492.6 million for 2020, compared to $820.1 million for 2019. This $327.5 million decrease includes a $263.8 million (43%) decrease in revenues in North America, comprised of a $200.4 million decrease in the Fluids Systems segment and a $63.4 million decrease in the Industrial Solutions segment. Revenues from our North America operations decreased primarily due to the 52% reduction in North American rig count. Revenues from our international operations decreased by $63.7 million (31%), primarily driven by activity disruptions and project delays resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic as well as lower oil prices. Additional information regarding the change in revenues is provided within the operating segment results below.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues decreased 31% to $473.3 million for 2020, compared to $684.7 million for 2019. This $211.5 million decrease was primarily driven by the 40% decrease in revenues described above. Fluids Systems segment cost of revenues for 2020 and 2019 includes $14.1 million and $6.8 million, respectively, of total charges related to inventory write-downs, severance costs, and facility exit costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $26.8 million to $86.6 million for 2020, compared to $113.4 million for 2019. The 2019 expenses included a $4.0 million charge for stock-based compensation expense associated with the February 2019 retirement policy modification and $3.9 million in professional fees related to our long-term strategic planning project and the Cleansorb acquisition. The remaining decrease of $18.9 million was primarily driven by reduced personnel costs and lower spending related to legal matters in 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenues was 17.6% for 2020 compared to 13.8% for 2019.
Other operating (income) loss, net
Other operating income for 2020 primarily relates to gains on sales of assets, including a $1.3 million gain related to our exit from Brazil.
Impairments and other charges
Fluids Systems segment includes non-cash charges for 2020 consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil, as well as $3.0 million attributable to the abandonment of certain property, plant and equipment. Fluids Systems segment for 2019 includes an $11.4 million non-cash impairment charge to write-off the goodwill related to this business.
Foreign currency exchange
Foreign currency exchange was a $3.4 million loss for 2020 compared to a $0.8 million gain for 2019 and reflects the impact of currency translation on assets and liabilities (including intercompany balances) that are denominated in currencies other than functional currencies.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense was $11.0 million for 2020 compared to $14.4 million for 2019. Interest expense for 2020 and 2019 includes $5.2 million and $6.2 million, respectively, in noncash amortization of original issue discount and debt issuance costs. The decrease in interest expense is primarily due to lower debt balances as well as a decrease in interest rates on the ABL Facility.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
The $0.4 million gain for 2020 reflects the difference in the amount paid and the net carrying value of the extinguished debt, including original issue discount and debt issuance costs, related to the repurchase of $33.1 million of our Convertible Notes in the open market for $29.1 million.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
The benefit for income taxes was $11.9 million for 2020, reflecting an effective tax benefit rate of 13%. This result primarily reflects the impact of the $11.7 million non-cash recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil and other nondeductible expenses, as well as the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss, where the tax benefit from losses in the U.S was partially offset by the tax expense related to earnings from our international operations. For 2019, the provision for income taxes was $9.8 million despite reporting a small pretax loss for the year. This result reflects the impact of the $11.4 million non-deductible goodwill impairment and other nondeductible expenses, as well as the impact of the geographic composition of our pretax loss, where tax expense related to earnings from our international operations is only partially offset by the tax benefit from losses in the U.S.
Operating Segment Results
Summarized financial information for our reportable segments is shown in the following table (net of inter-segment transfers):
Fluids Systems
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
North America revenues decreased 47% to $226.8 million for 2020, compared to $427.3 million for 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to a $200.3 million decrease from U.S. land markets driven by the 54% decline in U.S. rig count, partially offset by a $4.0 million increase from offshore Gulf of Mexico, which benefited from our completion fluids product line extension. For 2020, U.S. revenues included $150.2 million from land markets and $48.5 million from offshore Gulf of Mexico.
Internationally, revenues decreased 34% to $127.8 million for 2020, compared to $193.1 million for 2019. The decrease in EMEA was driven by lower activity primarily attributable to COVID-19 disruptions and the impact of lower oil prices in Algeria, Romania, and various other countries, partially offset by the October 2019 acquisition of Cleansorb. The decrease in other international was primarily attributable to lower activity in Australia, including the completion of the Baker Hughes Greater Enfield project in the third quarter of 2019.
Operating income (loss)
The Fluids Systems segment incurred an operating loss of $66.4 million for 2020, reflecting a $70.2 million change from the $3.8 million of operating income generated for 2019. The decrease in operating income includes a $41.6 million decline from North American operations and a $18.8 million decline from international operations, which are primarily attributable to the changes in revenues described above, partially offset by the benefit of cost reduction programs implemented
in 2020. The Fluids Systems operating loss for 2020 also includes $28.6 million of charges, consisting of $11.7 million for the recognition of cumulative foreign currency translation losses related to the substantial liquidation of our subsidiary in Brazil and $16.9 million of total charges associated with inventory write-downs, severance costs, fixed asset impairments, and facility exit costs. The Fluids Systems operating loss for 2019 included $18.8 million of charges, consisting of an $11.4 million non-cash impairment of goodwill and $7.4 million of total charges associated with facility closures and related exit costs, inventory write-downs, and severance costs, as well as the modification of the Company’s retirement policy.
Industrial Solutions
Revenues
Total revenues for this segment consisted of the following:
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in delays to planned projects across customer industries in 2020. Rental and service revenues decreased 29% to $101.3 million for 2020, which includes a $43.6 million decrease from E&P customers, primarily resulting from lower U.S. activity caused by the decline in oil and natural gas prices. This decline was partially offset by a $1.6 million increase from our continued expansion into non-E&P markets, including a 9% increase in revenues from the electrical utility sector, which benefited from increased demand to support repairs of hurricane-damaged utility infrastructure along the U.S. Gulf Coast region. Revenues from product sales, which typically fluctuate based on the timing of mat orders from customers, was negatively impacted in 2020 as certain customers delayed orders due to the uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Operating income
The Industrial Solutions segment generated operating income of $13.5 million for 2020 compared to $47.5 million for 2019, the decrease being primarily attributable to the change in revenues as described above.
Corporate Office
Corporate office expenses decreased $15.2 million to $25.7 million for 2020 compared to $40.9 million for 2019. The 2019 expenses included a $3.4 million charge for stock-based compensation expense associated with the February 2019 retirement policy modification and $3.9 million in professional fees related to our long-term strategic planning project and the Cleansorb acquisition. The remaining decrease of $7.9 million is primarily driven by reduced personnel costs and lower spending related to legal matters in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net cash used in operating activities was $3.0 million for 2021 compared to $55.8 million of net cash provided by operating activities for 2020. Net loss adjusted for non-cash items provided cash of $20.8 million for 2021, reflecting a $43.7 million improvement from 2020 which was more than offset by a net increase in working capital. In 2020, changes in working capital provided cash of $78.7 million, including $71.0 million associated with a decrease in receivables attributable to the decline in revenues. In 2021, changes in working capital used cash of $23.8 million, including a $61.3 million increase in receivables, attributable to the increase in revenues.
Net cash used in investing activities was $17.5 million for 2021, including capital expenditures of $21.8 million and $13.4 million associated with the Lentzcaping acquisition (see Note 2 for additional information), partially offset by $16.0 million in proceeds from the sale of assets. The majority of the proceeds from the sale of assets reflect used mats from our rental fleet, which are a part of the commercial offering of our Site and Access Solutions business. Nearly all of our capital expenditures during 2021 were directed to supporting our Industrial Solutions segment, including $14.3 million of investments in the mat rental fleet, replacing mats sold from the fleet and supporting our strategic growth in the power transmission sector. Net cash used in investing activities was $3.4 million for 2020, including capital expenditures of $15.8 million, partially offset by $12.4 million in proceeds from the sale of assets. Capital expenditures during 2020 included $7.8 million for the Industrial Solutions segment, including investments in the mat rental fleet as well as new products, and $6.2 million for the Fluids Systems segment.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $21.4 million for 2021, which primarily includes $77.6 million of net borrowings on our ABL Facility and foreign lines of credit, $8.1 million of net proceeds from a U.K. term loan facility, and $7.9 million of net proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions accounted for as financing arrangements, partially offset by $66.7 million used for repurchases and repayment of our Convertible Notes. We repaid the Convertible Notes at maturity in December 2021 with borrowings under the ABL Facility.
Substantially all our $24.1 million of cash on hand at December 31, 2021 resides in our international subsidiaries. Subject to maintaining sufficient cash requirements to support the strategic objectives of these international subsidiaries and complying with applicable exchange or cash controls, we expect to continue to repatriate available cash from these international subsidiaries. We anticipate that future working capital requirements for our operations will generally fluctuate directionally with revenues. We expect capital expenditures will remain heavily focused on industrial end-market opportunities, primarily reflecting expansion of our mat rental fleet to further support our growth in the utilities market.
Availability under our ABL Facility also provides additional liquidity as discussed further below. Total availability under the ABL Facility will fluctuate directionally based on the level of eligible U.S. accounts receivable, inventory, and, subject to satisfaction of certain financial covenants as described below, composite mats included in the rental fleet. We expect our available cash on-hand, cash generated by operations, and the expected availability under our ABL Facility and other existing financing arrangements to be adequate to fund our current operations during the next 12 months.
In February 2022, we initiated a plan to wind down our Industrial Blending operations and pursue the sale of the industrial blending and warehouse facility and related equipment, and also made the decision to explore strategic options for our U.S. mineral grinding business. Although the timing of any such transactions is not determinable, we expect to use any proceeds for general corporate purposes in support of our strategic initiatives. We also continue to evaluate additional sources of liquidity to support our longer-term needs.
Our capitalization is as follows:
Asset-Based Loan Facility. In May 2016, we entered into an asset-based revolving credit agreement, which was amended in October 2017 and in March 2019 (as amended, the “ABL Facility”). The ABL Facility provides financing of up to $200.0 million available for borrowings (inclusive of letters of credit) and can be increased up to a maximum capacity of $275.0 million, subject to certain conditions. The ABL Facility terminates in March 2024.
As of December 31, 2021, our total availability under the ABL Facility was $116.3 million, of which $86.5 million was drawn and $1.1 million was used for outstanding letters of credit, resulting in remaining availability of $28.7 million. As of February 24, 2022, our total availability under the ABL Facility was $124.7 million, of which $83.7 million was drawn and $1.1 million was used for outstanding letters of credit, resulting in remaining availability of $39.9 million.
Borrowing availability under the ABL Facility is calculated based on eligible U.S. accounts receivable, inventory, and, subject to satisfaction of certain financial covenants as described below, composite mats included in the rental fleet, net of reserves and limits on such assets included in the borrowing base calculation. To the extent pledged by us, the borrowing base calculation also includes the amount of eligible pledged cash. The lender may establish such reserves, in part based on appraisals of the asset base, and other limits at its discretion which could reduce the amounts otherwise available under the ABL Facility. Availability associated with eligible rental mats will also be subject to maintaining a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.5 to 1.0 and at least $1.0 million of operating income for the Site and Access Solutions business, each calculated based on a trailing twelve-month period.
Under the terms of the ABL Facility, we may elect to borrow at a variable interest rate based on either, (1) LIBOR subject to a floor of zero or (2) a base rate equal to the highest of: (a) the federal funds rate plus 50 basis points, (b) the prime rate of Bank of America, N.A. and (c) LIBOR, subject to a floor of zero, plus 100 basis points, plus, in each case, an applicable margin per annum. The applicable margin ranges from 150 to 200 basis points for LIBOR borrowings, and 50 to 100 basis points for base rate borrowings, based on the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio as defined in the ABL Facility. As of December 31, 2021, the applicable margin for borrowings under our ABL Facility was 150 basis points with respect to LIBOR borrowings and 50 basis points with respect to base rate borrowings. The weighted average interest rate for outstanding borrowings under the ABL Facility was 1.6% at December 31, 2021. In addition, we are required to pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the ABL Facility ranging from 25 to 37.5 basis points, based on the level of outstanding borrowings, as defined in the ABL Facility. As of December 31, 2021, the applicable commitment fee was 37.5 basis points.
The ABL Facility is a senior secured obligation, secured by first liens on substantially all of our U.S. tangible and intangible assets, and a portion of the capital stock of our non-U.S. subsidiaries has also been pledged as collateral. The ABL Facility contains customary operating covenants and certain restrictions including, among other things, those relating to the incurrence of additional debt, liens, dividends, asset sales, investments, mergers, acquisitions, affiliate transactions, stock repurchases and other restricted payments. The ABL Facility also requires a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.0 to 1.0 calculated based on a trailing twelve-month period if availability under the ABL Facility falls below $22.5 million. In addition, the ABL Facility contains customary events of default, including, without limitation, a failure to make payments under the facility, acceleration of more than $25.0 million of other indebtedness, certain bankruptcy events, and certain change of control events.
Other Debt. In August 2021, we completed sale-leaseback transactions related to certain vehicles and other equipment for net proceeds of approximately $7.9 million. The transactions have been accounted for as financing arrangements as they did not qualify for sale accounting. As a result, the vehicles and other equipment continue to be reflected on our balance sheet in property, plant and equipment, net. The financing arrangements have a weighted average annual interest rate of 5.4% and are payable in monthly installments with varying maturities through October 2025. We had $6.7 million in financing obligations outstanding under these arrangements at December 31, 2021.
In February 2021, a U.K. subsidiary entered a £6.0 million (approximately $8.3 million) term loan facility that matures in February 2024. The term loan bears interest at a rate of LIBOR plus a margin of 3.4% per year, payable in quarterly installments of £375,000 plus interest beginning March 2021 and a £1.5 million payment due at maturity. Effective January 1, 2022, the term loan bears interest at a rate of SONIA plus a margin of 3.5% per year. We had $6.1 million outstanding under this arrangement at December 31, 2021.
Certain of our foreign subsidiaries maintain local credit arrangements consisting primarily of lines of credit or overdraft facilities which are generally renewed on an annual basis. We utilize local financing arrangements in our foreign operations in order to provide short-term local liquidity needs. We had $11.8 million and $3.5 million outstanding under these arrangements at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any special purpose entities. At December 31, 2021, we had $45.3 million in outstanding letters of credit, performance bonds, and other guarantees for which certain of the letters of credit are collateralized by $5.4 million in restricted cash. We also enter into normal short-term operating leases for office and warehouse space, as well as rolling stock and other pieces of operating equipment. None of these off-balance sheet arrangements either has, or is expected to have, a material effect on our financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
A summary of our outstanding contractual and other obligations and commitments at December 31, 2021 is as follows:
(1)Financing obligations, finance lease liabilities, and operating lease liabilities represent the undiscounted future payments.
(2)Excludes the current portion of operating lease liabilities.
(3)Table does not allocate by year expected tax payments, asset retirement obligations, and uncertain tax positions due to the inability to make reasonably reliable estimates of the timing of future cash settlements.
We anticipate that the obligations and commitments listed above that are due in less than one year will be paid from available cash on-hand, cash generated by operations, and estimated availability under our ABL Facility and other existing financing arrangements, subject to covenant compliance and certain restrictions as further discussed above. The specific timing of settlement for certain long-term obligations cannot be reasonably estimated.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and disclosures. Significant estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements include estimated cash flows and fair values used for impairments of long-lived assets, including goodwill and other intangibles, and valuation allowances for deferred tax assets. See Note 1 for a discussion of the accounting policies for each of these matters. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on our future expectations that we believe to be reasonable. The combination of these factors forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from our current estimates and those differences may be material.
We believe the critical accounting policies described below affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated balance sheet includes $260.3 million of property, plant and equipment and $24.4 million of finite-lived intangible assets. We review property, plant and equipment, finite-lived intangible assets and certain other assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We assess recoverability based on the undiscounted future net cash flows expected from the use and eventual disposition of such asset.
We began our Industrial Blending operations in the third quarter of 2020. Although we had initial success in leveraging our chemical blending capabilities into the disinfectant and cleaning products market, a key customer experienced a significant decline in product demand and cancelled all orders of products in the third quarter of 2021. While we continued to work to further develop the industrial blending business throughout the remainder of 2021 and into 2022, management began a process late in the fourth quarter of 2021 to evaluate the strategic value of this business. As a result of the above factors, we reviewed these long-lived assets for impairment in December 2021, considering the various strategic alternatives being evaluated at such time, and determined that the probability-weighted estimated undiscounted cash flows exceeded the $19.5 million carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was required.
In addition, in the fourth quarter of 2021, as part of management and the Board of Directors ongoing review of underperforming areas of our business, we evaluated certain strategic options related to our U.S. fluids systems business. As such, we reviewed the long-lived assets related to this business for impairment in December 2021 and determined that the estimated undiscounted cash flows from the ongoing operations exceeded the $78.7 million carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was required.
Estimating future net cash flows requires us to make judgments regarding the likelihood of possible outcomes and long-term forecasts of future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to review. These forecasts are uncertain in that they require assumptions about demand for our products and services, future market conditions, and technological developments. If changes in these assumptions occur, our expectations regarding future net cash flows may change and a material impairment could result.
In February 2022, in consideration of broader strategic priorities and the timeline and efforts required to further develop the industrial blending business, our management recommended and our Board of Directors approved a plan to exit our Industrial Blending operations. As part of the exit plan, we expect to complete the wind down of the Industrial Blending business by the end of the second quarter 2022 and pursue the sale of the industrial blending and warehouse facility located in Conroe, Texas, as well as the sale or other disposal of the blending and packaging equipment and other related assets currently used in these operations. As a result of the plan to exit and dispose of the assets used in the Industrial Blending business, we may incur pre-tax charges in the range of approximately $4 million to $8 million primarily related to the non-cash impairment of long-lived assets, which we expect to recognize in the first quarter of 2022.
In February 2022, our Board of Directors also approved management’s plan to explore strategic options for our U.S. mineral grinding business. We continue to evaluate other under-performing areas of our business, particularly within the U.S. and Gulf of Mexico oil and natural gas markets, which necessitates consideration of broader structural changes to transform this business for the new market realities. In the absence of a longer-term increase in activity levels, we may incur future charges related to these efforts or potential asset impairments, which may negatively impact our future results.
As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated balance sheet includes $47.3 million of goodwill, all of which relates to the Site and Access Solutions reporting unit in the Industrial Solutions segment. Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually as of November 1, or more frequently, if indicators of impairment exists. As part of our annual goodwill review, we first perform a qualitative assessment based on company performance and future business
outlook to determine if indicators of impairment exist. When there are qualitative indicators of impairment, we use an impairment test which includes a comparison of the carrying value of net assets of our reporting units, including goodwill, with their estimated fair values, which we estimate using a combination of a market multiple and discounted cash flow approach (classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy). In completing the annual evaluation during the fourth quarter of 2021, we applied the qualitative assessment and determined that the fair value of the Site and Access Solutions reporting unit was in excess of the net carrying value, and therefore, no impairment was required.
Income Taxes
We had total deferred tax assets of $70.2 million and $56.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, with the increase primarily related to U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards. A valuation allowance must be established to offset a deferred tax asset if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have considered future taxable income and tax planning strategies in assessing the need for our valuation allowance. At December 31, 2021, we had a total valuation allowance of $38.4 million, which includes a valuation allowance on $22.9 million of net operating loss carryforwards for certain U.S. federal, state and foreign jurisdictions, including Australia, as well as a valuation allowance of $5.2 million for certain foreign tax credits recognized related to the accounting for the impact of the Tax Act. Changes in the expected future generation of qualifying taxable income within these jurisdictions or in the realizability of other tax assets may result in an adjustment to the valuation allowance, which would be charged or credited to income in the period this determination was made.
We file income tax returns in the U.S. and several non-U.S. jurisdictions and are subject to examination in the various jurisdictions in which we file. We are no longer subject to income tax examinations for U.S. federal and substantially all state jurisdictions for years prior to 2014 and for substantially all foreign jurisdictions for years prior to 2008.
We are under examination by various tax authorities in countries where we operate, and certain foreign jurisdictions have challenged the amounts of taxes due for certain tax periods. These audits are in various stages of completion. We fully cooperate with all audits, but defend existing positions vigorously. We evaluate the potential exposure associated with various filing positions and record a liability for uncertain tax positions as circumstances warrant. Although we believe all tax positions are reasonable and properly reported in accordance with applicable tax laws and regulations in effect during the periods involved, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could be materially different than that which is reflected in historical income tax provisions and accruals.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.