Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our current plans, estimates and beliefs, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of certain events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including but not limited to those discussed in the sections titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future. Except as otherwise noted, all references to 2021 refer to the year ended December 31, 2021, references to 2020 refer to the year ended December 31, 2020, and references to 2019 refer to the year ended December 31, 2019.
A discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. For a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our final prospectus filed with the SEC on November 5, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
Overview
Our mission is to provide clarity for all of life’s financial decisions.
Our vision is a world where everyone makes financial decisions with confidence.
At NerdWallet, we empower consumers - both individual consumers and small and mid-sized businesses (SMBs) - to make smarter financial decisions with confidence. Technology, paired with the dramatic growth in innovative financial products, has changed the way consumers manage their financial lives; consumers are more comfortable than ever comparing and shopping for financial products online. At NerdWallet, we are leveraging this transformation to democratize access to trustworthy financial guidance by incorporating our proprietary data science models into our platform - ultimately helping to improve the financial well-being of consumers and the financial services industry as a whole. As the financial industry becomes more fragmented and complex, our value proposition as a trusted, independent and centralized platform for consumers only increases.
We deliver guidance to consumers through educational content, tools and calculators, product marketplaces and our app. Our platform delivers unique value across many financial products, including credit cards, mortgages, insurance, SMB products, personal loans, banking, investing and student loans. We expanded our guidance to the UK with our acquisition of Know Your Money (KYM) in 2020, expanded organically into Canada during 2021, and have further plans to expand internationally. Across every touchpoint, the cornerstone of our platform is consumers’ trust in the independent, objective and relevant guidance we provide, free of charge.
This trusted guidance has helped us build a large, loyal and well-informed audience of consumers who turn to us as a resource for many of their money questions and to shop for the best financial products for them. Due to this unique combination of a loyal audience, trusted guidance and tailored recommendations from our underlying machine learning technology, we have become an attractive partner for financial services providers wanting to access these high-value consumers - consumers who might not otherwise trust financial services providers’ recommendations.
By operating at the intersection of consumers and financial services providers, NerdWallet drives value for both. Through our platform, our financial services partners can reach a substantial audience, comprised of 19 million Monthly Unique Users (MUUs) on average in 2021 and 16 million on average in 2020. After doing research on our platform, consumers are better informed about the financial decision they’re about to make, which makes them primed and ready to transact. Consumers who visit NerdWallet tend to share a few other characteristics that make them attractive customers to our financial services partners: we have received feedback from our financial services partners that our users’ approval rates can be significantly higher than those applying through other channels and they are more eager to explore additional opportunities and products, driving demand for NerdWallet’s financial services partners.
Our Financial Model
We built our business to provide unbiased and trusted guidance to consumers. Through this guidance, we attract users to our platform and use data science models to match them with relevant products from our financial services partners.
Given our mission is to provide clarity for all of life’s financial decisions, we take actions that aim to prioritize user experience over revenue per user. We believe that taking a long-term view will increase our revenue and grow our business. In addition, we do not always look to maximize the number of our financial services partners on our platform; we instead aim to have products for consumers available on our platform that enable the best match.
We seek to increase the number of consumers who come to NerdWallet pursuing our financial content, guidance, and tech-driven recommendations. We generate revenue by successfully matching those consumers with our financial services partners, from whom we generate fees. These fees from which we recognize revenue include revenue per action, revenue per click, revenue per lead, and revenue per funded loan.
Initial Public Offering
On November 8, 2021, we completed our initial public offering (the IPO), in which we sold 8.3 million shares of our Class A common stock, which includes the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 1.1 million shares of Class A common stock, at a public offering price of $18.00 per share. We received net proceeds from the IPO of $140.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.1 million.
COVID-19 Impact on our Business
The world has dramatically changed since the World Health Organization categorized COVID-19 as a global pandemic in March 2020. The pandemic caused millions of people to reevaluate many aspects of their lives, with many choosing to pay closer attention to their personal finances. We benefited from industry-wide tailwinds driven by consumers increasingly managing their money online, but also faced the headwinds related to an unstable socioeconomic backdrop, which impacted consumers’ finances. While consumer demand for many financial services products was high in 2020, for portions of the year some of our financial services partners tightened underwriting criteria or were slower to approve applications for certain products and some reduced advertising budgets given the inherent economic uncertainty.
Due to these factors, we experienced lower growth in 2020 as compared to our growth rate in 2019, particularly in the second half of the year. In 2020, our revenue increased 7% versus an increase of 32% in 2019. Our 2020 annual growth was bolstered by a strong first quarter, during which revenue grew 64% when compared to the same period a year prior.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we saw a mix of financial services partner activity across our verticals. Many partners reduced their activity on our platform while others maintained or increased their activity. Credit card approvals slowed during the height of the economic uncertainty and credit card revenue declined 30% compared to 2019. Conversely, revenue from loans and other verticals increased by 44% compared to 2019 as we saw increased demand in investing, mortgages, and insurance. As a result, we benefited from the diversification of the products and providers available on our platform.
We are seeing revenue trends start to return closer to pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels. However, the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our results of operations and cash flows remains uncertain as different variants of the coronavirus emerge. Our credit cards revenue increased 58% for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by increased activity amid recovery from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and higher pricing with our financial services partners. Our credit cards revenue decreased 30% for 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to lower approval rates in the market due to economic uncertainty resulting from the pandemic and tighter underwriting criteria. Our loans revenue increased 55% for 2021 compared to 2020, and 48% for 2020 compared to 2019. Mortgage loans revenue increased due to a sustained low interest rate environment in 2020 and higher demand from consumers in 2021. Our other verticals revenue increased 51% for 2021 compared to 2020, and 41% for 2020 compared to 2019. The other verticals revenue increase in 2021 was primarily attributable to higher SMB revenue following our acquisition of Fundera, and the increase in 2020 was attributable to higher consumer demand for insurance and investing activities.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Ability to Generate High Quality, Engaging Consumer Resources
Delivering financial guidance and resources on a broad set of topics is core to our value proposition. In order to maintain our position as a trusted destination for personal and SMB financial guidance, we produce high-quality financial guidance, which is developed by our independent team of writers and editors. Our editorial and product teams continuously improve our content, tools and resources to ensure that our platform reflects the latest consumer finance trends and related products from our financial services partners. We plan to continue investing in our growing base of high-value content and tools, which enable us to generate more traffic and grow MUUs, enhancing monetizing activities with our financial services partners and ultimately, our financial performance.
Ability to Attract and Engage Consumers
Our ability to increase user engagement, whether by increasing the frequency with which MUUs visit our platform, or the amount of resources they consume on our platform, is critical to the growth of our business. We focus on attracting users to NerdWallet who are interested in multiple financial products that we review and then use machine learning to help them find financial products for their needs. For example, if an individual comes to our platform to learn more about credit cards, we hope to bring that individual back to NerdWallet at a later time to explore other financial products, often via automated contextual “nudges.” Our ability to attract and engage those visitors directly impacts our ability to earn revenue from financial services partners. As such, we plan to continue investing in content, technology and marketing in order to attract and engage consumers.
Ability to Deepen Our Relationships with Our Financial Services Partners
We worked with over 400 financial services partners as of December 31, 2021. These companies are essential to helping us serve consumers and grow our business. Having a broad range of financial services partners across all of our verticals is important in offering consumers a wide selection of attractive products. Furthermore, all of our revenue is generated from our financial services partners, and as such, relationships with new and existing financial services partners are critical to the success of our business. We continuously aim to selectively add new financial services partners to our platform and to add coverage for additional verticals from existing partners. That said, maximizing the number of our financial services partners on our platform isn’t our primary focus - our focus is quality, and we aim to offer all of the top financial products on our platform. The success of our relationships with financial services partners is in large part based on our ability to provide them with interested and qualified consumers.
Economic Conditions and the Financial Well-Being of Consumers
Our business is reliant on economic conditions in the U.S. Any changes in the financial well-being of consumers, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, unemployment, government stimulus, or changes in monetary policy will affect the demand for various financial services products and therefore impact the number of individuals visiting our platform and our ability to earn revenue from matches completed on our platform. In particular, fluctuations in interest rates affect many of the products offered by our financial services partners, especially mortgages, personal loans, and banking products. Typically, when interest rates decline, we see accelerated consumer demand for loans which in turn leads to increased traffic to our platform. Conversely, when interest rates increase, we see slowed consumer demand for loans and accelerated demand for banking products.
Marketing
Our marketing strategy leverages multiple channels across brand marketing, performance marketing and organic marketing. Sales and marketing expense consists of: brand marketing, primarily advertising costs to increase brand awareness; performance marketing, primarily costs to drive traffic directly to our platform; and organic and other, primarily personnel-related costs for content and other marketing and sales teams. In 2021, approximately 35% of our total marketing expense was attributable to brand marketing, 36% to performance marketing, and the remainder to organic marketing and other marketing expenses. In 2020, approximately 39% of our total marketing expense was attributable to brand marketing, 34% to performance marketing, and the remainder to organic marketing and other marketing expenses. We evaluate the success of our brand marketing by measuring aided brand awareness, which has grown consistently on an annual basis since 2019.
We are able to adjust our marketing spend to reflect changes in external factors and consumer behavior. Performance marketing spend can be adjusted more quickly than brand marketing, which typically involves pre-committing to spend in future periods. During the first and second quarters of 2020, we increased brand marketing by over 100% compared to the same periods in 2019 to increase awareness, but reduced our spend as quickly as possible for the third and fourth quarters by approximately 30% compared to the same periods in 2019 due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our business. We reduced performance marketing earlier in the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 by approximately 15% compared to the same periods in 2019 in response to fewer financial services partners choosing to market through our platform in certain verticals. As the COVID-19 headwinds subsided in 2021, we increased both brand and performance marketing to again drive more MUUs to our platform. During 2021, we increased sales and marketing expense by 88% compared to 2020.
In 2021, over 70% of all traffic to NerdWallet came organically through direct or unpaid channels, reflecting the strength of our brand and organic marketing efforts. Our in-house, award-winning and experienced editorial team leverages search-engine optimization best practices and technology, and designs interfaces to help consumers easily find the information they are seeking. Our editorial team also optimizes page structure to increase visibility, not only for organic search results, but also for Google’s premium features such as FAQs, featured snippets, and video results. Personnel-related expenses within organic marketing were up 33% in 2021 compared to 2020, which is a reflection of our continued investment in building a comprehensive set of skills and expertise across our editorial team. We will continue to invest heavily in our marketing channels going forward, and believe that our marketing strategy will continue to position NerdWallet as the trusted brand of choice in personal finance, improve traffic acquisition at all levels of the funnel, drive engagement and enable us to scale quickly across new consumer finance verticals and geographies.
Acquisitions
We have made acquisitions to expand into new verticals; to enter new markets and geographies; and to grow our platform so that our users have better outcomes. In the second half of 2020, we made two acquisitions:
•Fundera. In October 2020, we acquired Fundera, Inc. (Fundera), an online platform which connects SMBs with lenders and other resources. Fundera’s SMB-focused advice and loan comparison offerings, together with its strong brand and consultative sales approach, enables us to better support SMBs. This acquisition is a first step to enable deeper integration within existing verticals, which couples our top of funnel strength with Fundera’s monetization strategy, including recurring revenue from loan renewals. Combining the strengths of each business will allow NerdWallet to accelerate our growth in the SMB market, and will also serve as a playbook for further vertical integrations.
•Know Your Money. In September 2020, we acquired Notice Media Ltd. (doing business as Know Your Money), an online provider of financial guidance and tools geared towards consumers and SMBs in the UK. KYM’s UK expertise and NerdWallet’s existing brand recognition have provided us a strong foothold in the UK region. We believe the acquisition will allow us to accelerate our international growth.
Key Operating Metric and Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We collect, review and analyze operating and financial data of our business to assess our ongoing performance and compare our results to prior period results. In addition to revenue, net income and other results under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), the following sets forth the key operating metric we use to evaluate our business.
Monthly Unique Users
We define a Monthly Unique User (MUU) as a unique user with at least one session in a given month as determined by a unique device identifier. We measure MUUs during a time period longer than one month by averaging the MUUs of each month within that period. We track MUUs to frame the number of users who may transact with the financial services partners on our platform during a given period. During 2021, we grew MUUs by 23% compared to 2020 as we increased our sales and marketing expenditures in light of the continued economic recovery we experienced. During 2020, we grew MUUs by 25% compared to 2019. We experienced the strongest growth in MUUs during the first and second quarters of 2020, and slower growth during the third and fourth quarters as we reduced sales and marketing spend by over 35% as compared to the first half of 2020 due to underlying economic conditions. While we expect MUUs to grow over time, the metric may fluctuate from period to period based on economic conditions and our strategic marketing decisions.
Adjusted EBITDA
We use Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with GAAP measures as part of our overall assessment of our performance, including the preparation of our annual operating budget and quarterly forecasts, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to communicate with our Board of Directors concerning our financial performance.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) from continuing operations adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, interest expense, net, provision (benefit) for income taxes, and further exclude (1) loss (gain) on impairment and on disposal of assets, (2) remeasurement of the embedded derivative in long-term debt, (3) change in fair value of contingent consideration related to earnouts, (4) deferred compensation related to earnouts, (5) stock-based compensation, and (6) acquisition-related costs.
The above items are excluded from our Adjusted EBITDA measure because these items are non-cash in nature, or because the amount is not driven by core operating results and renders comparisons with prior periods less meaningful.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results and in comparing operating results across periods. Moreover, we have included Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because it is a key measurement used by our management internally to make operating decisions, including those related to analyzing operating expenses, evaluating performance, and performing strategic planning and annual budgeting. However, the use of this non-GAAP measure has certain limitations because it does not reflect all items of income and expense that affect our operations. Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as a financial measure, should be considered as supplemental in nature, and is not meant as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. These limitations include the following:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest income (expense) and other gains (losses), net, which include unrealized and realized gains and losses on foreign currency exchange and the derivative previously embedded in long-term debt, as well as certain nonrecurring gains (losses);
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges, such as depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of intangible assets, and although these are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect all cash requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include the impact of impairment of assets previously acquired, acquisition-related transaction expenses, contingent consideration fair value adjustments related to earnouts, and deferred compensation related to earnouts.
In addition, Adjusted EBITDA as we define it may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Key Components of Our Results of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate substantially all of our revenue through fees paid by our financial services partners in the form of either revenue per action, revenue per click, revenue per lead, and revenue per funded loan arrangements. For these revenue arrangements, in which a partner pays only when a consumer satisfies the criteria set forth within the arrangement, revenue is recognized generally when we match the consumer with the financial services partner. For some of our arrangements, the transaction price is considered variable and an estimate of the constrained transaction price is recorded when the match occurs. Our revenue generally includes three product categories: credit cards, loans and other verticals. Credit cards revenue includes revenue from consumer credit cards. Loans revenue includes revenue from home mortgages, personal loans, student loans and auto loans. Other verticals revenue includes revenue from other product sources, including insurance, banking, investing, and SMB products.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of amortization expense and impairment charges associated with capitalized software development costs and developed technology intangible assets related to our acquisitions of Fundera and KYM, credit scoring fees, account linking fees, and third-party data center costs. We expect our cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future to the extent that our business continues to grow. We expect our cost of revenue to decrease over time as a percentage of revenue as we recognize economies of scale. However, this percentage may fluctuate from year to year in the short term.
Research and development
Research and development activities primarily relate to engineering, product management, data enhancement, and improved functionality related to our platform. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel related costs, including stock-based compensation, technology and facility-related expenses and contractor expense for our engineering, product management, data and other personnel engaged in maintaining and enhancing the functionality of our platform.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, primarily for increased headcount to further develop and innovate our platform. Over time, we expect research and development expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as our business grows and recognizes economies of scale. However, this percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and extent of our research and development expenses.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses include advertising and promotion costs, costs related to brand campaign fees, marketing, business operations team, and editorial personnel and related costs, including stock-based compensation.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, primarily to support the growth of our existing business and expansion into new verticals. Over time, we expect sales and marketing expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as our business grows and recognizes economies of scale. However, this percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and extent of our sales and marketing expenses.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel related costs, including stock-based compensation, for certain of our executives as well as our legal, finance, human resources, and other administrative employees; and professional services fees.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future primarily to support the growth of our business and our public company operations. Additional expenses may include increased headcount, enhanced systems, processes, and controls as well as increased expenses in the areas of insurance, compliance, investor relations, and professional services. For these reasons, we expect general and administrative expenses to increase as a percentage of revenue in the near term, but eventually to decrease as a percentage of revenue as our business grows and recognizes economies of scale. This percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on the timing and extent of our general and administrative expenses.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration related to earnouts
Our recent acquisitions include earn-out provisions which require us to pay additional consideration based on the achievement of certain performance measures for a stated period after the acquisition date. We measure this contingent consideration at fair value as of the acquisition date and record it as a liability on our consolidated balance sheet. The fair value of each contingent consideration liability is remeasured at the end of each reporting period, with any changes in fair value recognized as income or expense from operations in our consolidated income statement.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net is comprised of interest income, interest expense, and other gains (losses), net. Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents. Interest expense consists of interest costs related to our revolving credit facility and long-term debt, including amortization of the debt premium on our long-term debt. Other gains (losses), net is primarily related to changes in the fair value of the embedded derivative in our long-term debt, as well as realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and balances. Other gains (losses), net for 2021 includes a gain on extinguishment of debt as well as a nonrecurring gain.
Income tax provision (benefit)
Our income tax provision (benefit) consists of federal and state income taxes. We have federal and state net operating loss carryforwards (NOLs), and federal and California research and development credit carryforwards, certain of which are subject to expiration dates if not utilized. Utilization of our NOLs and tax credit carryforwards, as well as of our other temporary differences, is dependent upon the generation of sufficient future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. Based on our ongoing assessment of all available evidence, both positive and negative, including consideration of our historical profitability and the estimated impact of our operating model on future profitability, we concluded that it is more likely than not that our U.S. deferred tax assets in excess of deferred tax liabilities would not be realized and recorded a valuation allowance against these net U.S. deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021. Our judgment regarding the likelihood of realization of these deferred tax assets could change in future periods, which could result in a material impact to our income tax provision in the period of change.
Comparison of Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
______________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased $134.3 million, or 55%, for 2021 compared to 2020, with revenue increases across all verticals.
Credit cards revenue increased $45.6 million, or 58%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by increased activity amid recovery from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and higher pricing with our financial services partners.
Loans revenue increased $45.1 million, or 55%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by increases of 56% in home mortgages revenue and 94% in personal loans revenue, both reflecting higher consumer demand for loans in the sustained low interest rate environment.
Other verticals revenue increased $43.6 million, or 51%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily attributable to higher SMB revenue following our acquisition of Fundera as well as higher revenue in the UK following our acquisition of KYM. The increase also included a 26% increase in insurance revenue, partially offset by decreases of 10% in investing revenue due to lower consumer demand for investing activities and 5% in banking revenue due to the low interest rate environment.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue increased $7.2 million, or 34%, for 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $6.0 million increase in amortization expense related to capitalized software development costs and intangible assets related to our acquisitions of Fundera and KYM in the second half of 2020, as well as a $0.8 million increase in third-party data center costs in connection with the growth in our traffic and ongoing product and feature development.
Research and development expense
Research and development expenses increased $11.3 million, or 22%, for 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $9.8 million in personnel-related costs for our engineering, data, and product management personnel and contractors to support our continued growth, and $1.8 million in software and technology costs related to our platform, partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in allocated costs due to lower facilities costs from the shift to remote work due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and marketing expense
For 2021 and 2020, our total sales and marketing expense was comprised of approximately 36% and 34% for performance marketing, respectively, and 35% and 39% for brand marketing, respectively, with the remainder for organic and other marketing expenses. We are able to adjust our marketing spend to reflect changes in external factors and consumer behavior.
Sales and marketing expenses increased $127.3 million, or 88%, for 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $49.9 million in performance marketing expenses and $39.2 million in brand marketing expenses. The increase was also attributable to higher organic and other marketing expenses, including a $24.9 million increase in personnel-related costs due to our efforts to grow and increase our user base, and $4.8 million of amortization expense of intangible assets from our acquisitions of Fundera and KYM in the second half of 2020.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expenses increased $10.5 million, or 38%, for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily attributable to increases of $9.2 million in personnel-related costs mainly due to increased headcount and $1.0 million in director and officer liability insurance costs.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration related to earnouts
The change in fair value of contingent consideration relates to our acquisitions of Fundera and KYM in the second half of 2020. The fair value of the estimated contingent considerations is subject to remeasurement at each reporting date until the payments are made. See Note 1 - The Company and its Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding how we estimated the fair value of these contingent considerations.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net increased $2.3 million for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily attributable to a $1.5 million gain on extinguishment of debt and a $1.3 million nonrecurring gain.
Income tax provision (benefit)
We had an income tax provision of $4.8 million for 2021, as compared to an income tax benefit of $4.4 million in 2020. Our effective tax rate was (12.8%) and (488.4%) for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective tax rate for 2021 was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to the increase in the valuation allowance recorded against our net U.S. deferred tax assets. Our effective tax rate for 2020 was lower than the U.S. federal statutory income tax rate of 21% primarily due to excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation, and research and development credits, partially offset by non-deductible stock-based compensation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Adjusted EBITDA as we define it may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
We compensate for these limitations by reconciling Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP financial measure. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods presented:
______________
(1)Represents adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue.
Adjusted EBITDA increased $2.7 million, or 11%, for 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was attributable to a $134.3 million increase in revenue amid recovery from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, substantially offset by higher expenses primarily driven by a $127.3 million increase in sales and marketing expense as we continued to invest in our business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal sources of liquidity to meet our business requirements and plans, both in the short-term (i.e., the next twelve months from December 31, 2021) and long-term (i.e., beyond the next twelve months), have historically been cash generated from operations and, more recently, sales of our common stock, and borrowings under our credit facilities. Our primary liquidity needs are related to the funding of general business requirements, including working capital requirements, research and development, and capital expenditures, as well as other liquidity requirements including, but not limited to, business combinations.
On November 8, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 8.3 million shares of our Class A common stock, which includes the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 1.1 million shares of Class A common stock, at a public offering price of $18.00 per share. We received net proceeds from our IPO of $140.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.1 million.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $167.8 million and $83.4 million, respectively.
Known Contractual and Other Obligations
A description of contractual commitments as of December 31, 2021 is included in Note 8 - Commitments and Contingencies in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
More broadly, we also have purchase obligations under contractual arrangements with vendors and service providers, including for certain web-hosting and cloud computing services, which do not qualify for recognition on our consolidated balance sheets but which we consider non-cancellable. At December 31, 2021, amounts to be spent under non-cancellable purchase obligations were $3.7 million over the next twelve months and annual amounts of approximately $4 million to $5 million from 2023 through 2026.
In addition, as part of the acquisitions of Know Your Money and Fundera, both in 2020, the Company committed to pay additional amounts of up to $11 million and $66 million, respectively, related to contingent earn-out consideration over the succeeding years based, in part, on the achievement of certain financial metrics related to 2021 and 2022. Based on fair value measurements for these contingent consideration liabilities as of December 31, 2021 (see Note 3 - Fair Value Measurements in the notes to the consolidated financial statements), $30.5 million relates to amounts to be paid over the next twelve months and $24.2 million relates to amounts to be settled beyond the next twelve months.
In 2021, there was an inflow of $100.2 million cash from financing activities, primarily driven by net proceeds from our IPO of $140.0 million partially offset by $28.5 million to repay in full our subordinated promissory notes, and an outflow of $23.0 million of cash used in investing activities primarily related to capitalization of software development costs.
Trends, Uncertainties and Anticipated Sources of Funds
In order to grow our business, we intend to increase our personnel and related expenses and to make significant investments in our business. The timing and amount of these investments will vary based on our financial condition, the rate at which we add new personnel and the scale of our development, as well as the extent and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the macro-economic environment. Many of these investments will occur in advance of our experiencing any direct benefit from them, which could negatively impact our liquidity and cash flows during any particular period and may make it difficult to determine if we are effectively allocating our resources. However, we expect to fund our operations, capital expenditures and other investments principally with cash flows from operations, and to the extent that our liquidity needs exceed our cash from operations, we would look to our cash on hand to satisfy those needs.
We believe our current cash and cash equivalents, future cash flow from operations, and access to our credit facility will be sufficient to meet our ongoing working capital, capital expenditure and other liquidity requirements for at least twelve months from the date of this filing. If necessary, we may borrow up to $100 million under our credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank and certain other lenders, subject to borrowing conditions. We had no outstanding balance on our credit facility as of December 31, 2021 or 2020. Our credit facility contains certain financial and non-financial covenants. We were in compliance with all covenants as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. For additional information on these covenants, see Note 7 - Debt in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Our future capital requirements may vary materially from those planned and will depend on certain factors, such as our growth and our operating results. If we require additional capital resources to grow our business or to acquire complementary technologies and businesses in the future, we may seek to sell additional equity or raise funds through debt financing or other sources. We cannot provide assurance that additional financing will be available at all or on terms favorable to us.
Sources and Uses of Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
A discussion and analysis of our changes in cash flows for 2021 compared to 2020 is presented below. For a discussion of our cash flows for 2020 and 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity, Cash Flows, and Obligations” in our final prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended on November 5, 2021.
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $8.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due to a net loss of $42.5 million in 2021, as compared to net income of $5.3 million in 2020, and a $10.9 million increase in net cash outflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities, largely offset by a $50.5 million increase in non-cash charges. The increase in net cash outflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $21.2 million increase in accounts receivable, a $5.8 million decrease in accounts payable, and a $4.8 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, partially offset by a $21.9 million increase in accrued and other current liabilities. The increase in non-cash charges was primarily due to increases of $18.9 million in change in fair value of contingent consideration related to earnouts, $12.0 million in depreciation and amortization, $11.5 million in stock-based compensation and $9.0 million in deferred taxes.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $32.4 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to $36.7 million of cash paid for business combinations, net of cash acquired, in 2020.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $44.5 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to net proceeds from our IPO of $140.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.1 million, partially offset by decreases of $54.3 million from issuances of Class A common stock in 2020, $28.5 million to repay in full our subordinated promissory notes, and $12.4 million for repurchases of Class F common stock.
Other Capital Resource Matters
On October 17, 2021 and October 18, 2021, our Board of Directors and stockholders, respectively, approved a one-for-two reverse stock split of our common and preferred stock which was effectuated on October 20, 2021 upon our filing of an amended and restated certificate of incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State. As a result, each stockholder of record on October 20, 2021 received one share of common or preferred stock for every two shares held on the record date. All share, equity award, and per share amounts presented herein have been retroactively adjusted to reflect this reverse stock split.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting policies as provided within U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies we believe to be most critical to understanding our financial condition and results of operations are discussed below. For a comprehensive list of all significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - The Company and its Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from fees paid by our financial services partners in the form of either revenue per action, revenue per click, revenue per lead and revenue per funded loan arrangements. Services are generally transferred to the customer at a point in time and the performance obligation is a series of distinct actions, leads or clicks.
For some of our arrangements, under ASC 606 (Revenue from Contracts with Customers) our contractual right to fees is not contemporaneous with the satisfaction of the performance obligation to match the consumer with the customer. As a result, the transaction price is considered variable and an estimate of the constrained transaction price is recorded as revenue when the match occurs, subject to a constraint. Constrained revenue is recognized to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. After our initial estimate and constraints are made, we reassess our estimates and constraints at the end of each reporting period. Various factors are analyzed to estimate the constrained revenue, including historical approval rates and historical time between when a consumer request for a financial product is delivered to a financial services partner and when the financial product is approved by such financial services partner.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. We have one reporting unit. We test goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently when an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. As a result of the goodwill impairment assessment in 2021, 2020 and 2019, we determined that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of its single reporting unit was less than its carrying amount. As such, goodwill was not impaired during 2021, 2020 and 2019.
We evaluate intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that they may not be recoverable. Recoverability is assessed by comparing the carrying amount of an asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated. If the carrying amount of an asset group is not recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized if the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset group. We group assets for purposes of such review at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows of the asset group are largely independent of the cash flows of the other groups of assets and liabilities. Unforeseen events, changes in circumstances and market conditions and material differences in estimates of future cash flows could adversely affect the fair value of our assets and could result in future impairment charges.
Contingent consideration
We have recorded contingent consideration in connection with certain business combinations that require us to pay cash consideration to the seller upon achievement of certain metrics during the years ending December 31, 2021 and 2022. We record the fair value of contingent consideration at the date of the acquisition and measure it using unobservable, Level 3 inputs, due to the absence of quoted market prices. Subsequent to the acquisition date, at each reporting date, the contingent consideration liability is remeasured to fair value with changes in fair value recorded in operating expenses, net on the consolidated statement of operations. We value contingent consideration using a Monte Carlo simulation model, which requires critical estimates to be made, including projected financial information, market volatility, risk-adjusted discount rates and timing of contractual payments. Changes in any one of these inputs may result in a significantly different fair value of the contingent consideration.
Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowances
As part of fulfilling the requirement to reduce the measurement of deferred tax assets that are not expected to be realized, we consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of that evidence, a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is needed. In assessing the adequacy of recognized valuation allowances, we consider all available evidence to estimate if sufficient taxable income will be generated in the future to utilize the existing deferred tax assets by jurisdiction. This consideration includes a variety of factors such as historical and projected future taxable income and prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
Based on our ongoing assessment of all available evidence, both positive and negative, including consideration of our historical profitability and the estimated impact of our operating model on future profitability, we concluded that it was more likely than not that our U.S. deferred tax assets in excess of deferred tax liabilities would not be realized and recorded a valuation allowance against these net U.S. deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021. Our judgment regarding the likelihood of realization of these deferred tax assets could change in future periods, which could result in a material impact to our income tax provision in the period of change.
Stock-Based Compensation
Prior to our IPO, as our common shares were not listed on a public marketplace, the calculation of the fair value of our common shares was subject to a greater degree of estimation in determining the basis for share-based awards that were issued. Given the absence of a public market, we were required to estimate the fair value of the common shares at the time of each grant.
Stock Options
We have granted stock-based awards consisting primarily of stock options and RSUs to employees and non-employees. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options granted to employees and nonemployees using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model. The fair value of stock options that is expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is typically the vesting period of the respective awards. We recognize forfeitures as they occur for equity awards with only a service condition, rather than estimate expected forfeitures.
The Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model considers several variables and assumptions in estimating the grant date fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•Fair Value of Class A Common Stock - For periods over which our Class A common stock was not yet publicly traded, we were required to estimate the fair value of our Class A common stock. Our Board of Directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our Class A common stock as discussed in “Common Stock Valuations” below. Subsequent to our IPO in November 2021, the fair value of our Class A common stock is determined on the grant date using the closing price of our Class A common stock.
•Expected Term - The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We estimate the expected term based on the simplified method.
•Expected Volatility - Expected volatility is a measure of the amount by which the stock price is expected to fluctuate. Since we do not have sufficient trading history of our Class A common stock, we estimate the expected volatility by taking the average historical volatility of a group of comparable publicly traded companies over a period equal to the expected term of the awards.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the stock option award.
•Expected Dividend - We utilize a dividend yield of zero, as we do not currently issue dividends, nor do we expect to do so in the future.
Restricted Stock Units
The fair value of RSUs is estimated based on the fair value of our Class A common stock on the date of grant. The fair value of RSUs that are expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period.
ESPP
The fair value of purchase rights granted under its ESPP is estimated using the component measurement approach with valuations of the components based on the Company’s stock price on the date of the grant and/or the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, as appropriate for the applicable components. The fair value of the purchase rights is recognized over the requisite service period. We recognize forfeitures as they occur, rather than estimate expected forfeitures.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our IPO, given the absence of a public trading market for our Class A common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our Board of Directors exercised its reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of fair value of our Class A common stock underlying the stock options and RSUs, including:
•contemporaneous valuations of our Class A common stock by an independent valuation specialist;
•the prices at which others have sold our common and redeemable convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our Class A common stock;
•our financial condition, results of operations and capital resources;
•the industry outlook;
•the fact that option and RSU grants have involved rights in illiquid securities in a private company;
•the valuation of comparable companies;
•the lack of marketability of our Class A common stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company given prevailing market conditions;
•the history and nature of our business, industry trends and competitive environment; and
•general economic outlook including economic growth, inflation, unemployment, interest rate environment and global economic trends.
To determine the fair value of our Class A common stock, we first determined our enterprise value and then allocated that enterprise value among the various classes of our equity securities. Our enterprise value was estimated using two generally accepted approaches: the income approach and the market approach. The income approach estimates enterprise value based on the estimated present value of future cash flows the business is expected to generate over its remaining life. The estimated present value is calculated using a discount rate reflective of the risks associated with an investment in a similar company in a similar industry or having a similar history of revenue growth. The market approach measures the value of a business through an analysis of recent sales or offerings of comparable investments or assets, and in our case, focused on comparing us to a group of our peer companies. In applying this method, valuation multiples are derived from historical operating data of the peer company group. We then apply multiples to our operating data to arrive at a range of indicated values of the company.
In addition, we also considered any secondary transactions, including third party tender offers, involving our capital stock. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange and assigned the transactions an appropriate weighting in the valuation of our Class A common stock. Factors considered include the number of different buyers and sellers; transaction volume; timing relative to the valuation date; whether the transactions occurred between willing and unrelated parties; and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
Application of these approaches and methodologies involves the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows; discount rates; market multiples; the selection of comparable public companies; and the probability of and timing associated with possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our Class A common stock.
For valuations after the completion of our IPO, our Board of Directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying Class A common stock based on the closing price of our Class A common stock as reported on the date of grant.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 - The Company and its Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.