Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
Norris Industries, Inc. (the “Company”, “we”, or “us”) is an oil and natural gas company that focuses on the acquisition, development, and exploration of crude oil and natural gas properties in Texas. As of March 1, 2022 the SEC Non-Escalated Analysis of Estimated Proved Reserve of our various leases in Jack County and Palo-Pinto County, the Ratliff leases, the Marshall-Walden, and the Bend Arch Lion 1A and Bend Arch Lion 1B leaseholds, is a total of 29 Mbbl in oil net reserves, plus 150 MMcf in natural gas net reserves being out of total of BOE equivalent of 54 Mbbl in gross reserves, which is down from prior year by 322 Mbbl due to reduction of expected production as result of well workover issues.
The reserves associated with the report from Kurt Mire , PE have been classified in accordance with the definitions of the Securities and Exchange Commission as found in Part 210 - Form and Content of and Requirements for Financial Statements, Securities Act of 1933, Securities Exchange Act of 1934, Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, Investment Company Act of 1940, Investment Advisers Act of 1940, and Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975, under Rules of General Application § 210.4-10 Financial accounting and reporting for oil and gas producing activities pursuant to the Federal securities laws and the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of 1975.
The Company’s longer term main objective is to actively focus on improving its existing fields and to look for additional reserve oil and gas concessions and production opportunities, aiming to participate with capital partners for a transaction related to buyouts and joint ventures. The Company will continue to conserve capital to be able to focus on smaller oil and natural gas properties in West, Central West, East and South Texas, aiming to increase its revenues via an acquisition. It also will try to improve the existing production revenues of the Bend Arch Lion 1A, Bend Arch Lion 1B, Marshall Walden joint venture property, which includes the purchase of the leases in Jack County and Palo Pinto County, re-entries and EOR methods as mentioned in the Operational Plan section above.
The Company ultimately plans to tap into the high potential leases of the West Texas region of the United States, aiming to obtain reserves for future development, so as to increase its overall oil and gas assets in the Permian Basin. The Permian Basin is a sedimentary basin largely contained in the western part of the U.S. state of Texas and the southeastern part of the U.S. state of New Mexico. It reaches from just south of Lubbock, TX, to just south of Midland and Odessa, TX, extending westward into the southeastern part of New Mexico. It is so named because it has one of the world’s thickest deposits of rocks from the Permiangeologic period. The greater Permian Basin comprises several component basins: of these, Midland Basin is the largest, Delaware Basin is the second largest, and Marfa Basin is the smallest. The Permian Basin extends beneath an area approximately 250 miles (400 km) wide and 300 miles (480 km) long.
Results of Operations
Revenues
The Company generated revenues of $452,291 from oil and gas production sales during the year ended February 28, 2022, compared to $280,160 during the year ended February 28, 2021. The increase in oil and gas sales revenues was primarily due to the dramatic increase in oil and gas prices obtained from buyers due to the increases of energy prices due to recovery of global demand and instability of possible supply disruptions due to Russia invasion of Ukraine.
Because of the disruption to the oil and gas industry caused by recovery of demand from the COVID-19 pandemic and world supply disruptions from Russia the Company expects that there will be continued volatility of energy prices and Company cannot make a prediction of its expected revenues for fiscal year 2023.
Lease Operating Expenses
Lease operating expenses for the years ended February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021, were $599,455 and $552,713, respectively. We incurred slightly higher lease operating expenses in 2022 primarily because of higher costs of operations primarily as a result of the increased prices of oil and gas due to recovering industry caused by the events described above.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021, were $203,682 and $313,515, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to management implementing cost controls to lower the general and administrative expenses incurred by the Company.
Depletion and Accretion Expenses
For the years ended February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021, the Company recorded depletion and accretion expense of $41,109 and $235,001, respectively, related to depletion of oil and gas properties and amortization of asset retirement obligations. The decrease was majorly resulted from higher oil and gas reserves evaluated as of March 1, 2022, which majorly due to higher oil and gas prices in the market. The Company recognized lower depletion expenses for the current fiscal year due to the greater oil and gas reserve as of the fiscal year end to be depleted in future years.
Impairment Expense
For the years ended February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021, the Company recorded impairment of $nil and $196,197, respectively, related to a ceiling test write-down of its oil and gas properties.
Other Income (Expense)
For the years ended February 28, 2022 and February 28, 2021, the Company recorded interest expense of $106,992 and $92,526, respectively. Higher interest expense was incurred in 2022 due to additional debt issuances to related parties in the current year.
Net Loss
Our operations resulted in a net loss in the amount of $498,947 for the year ended February 28, 2022, compared to a net loss of $1,109,792 for the year ended February 28, 2021. The decrease was primarily related to lower SG&A costs recognized during the current fiscal year and lower impairment recognized from our oil and gas properties.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 28, 2022, the Company had cash of $139,569.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended February 28, 2022, was $421,062, compared to cash used in operating activities of $504,650 for the same period in 2021. The decrease was primarily related to slightly lower expenses incurred from our oil and gas properties.
Net cash used in investing activities during years ended February 28, 2022 and 2021, was $-0-.
During the year ended February 28, 2022, cash provided by financing activities was $400,000 related to proceeds from the Company’s related party loans. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended February 28, 2021, was $507,200, related to proceeds of $500,000 from the Company’s line of credit with JBB and proceeds of $7,200 from the exercise of stock options.
The Company will require additional financing to support its operations and to pursue its acquisition program. As of February 28, 2022, the Company had availability of $600,000 on its existing credit line with JBB. If the Company requires additional financing beyond what is available under its existing credit line, it does not have any committed sources of financing at this time. If it is unable to obtain financing, it will have to reduce or curtail its operations and acquisition program. There is no assurance that it will be able to obtain financing in the future, and even if financing is available, it may not be on terms acceptable to the Company.
To date, the funding during the past three fiscal years to support operations and facilitate some acquisitions has been provided by the largest shareholder of the Company. This individual does not have any legal obligation to continue to provide funding to the Company. Yet the majority owner has indicated a willingness, and provided some assurances, to selectively review and determine added funding for certain low risk initiatives on those oil and gas wells in which the Company has either a 100% or a majority working interest in order to increase its existing production. Our majority shareholder expects, but is not legally obligated, to provide funding for the Company’s capital expenditure program for fiscal year 2023. Such funding may be provided in the form of loans, issuance of equity or other means.
The financial statements of the Company have been prepared on a going concern basis. The Company will either have to increase its operating revenues to a point to be able to cover its operating expenses or obtain funding from other investors or lenders. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to increase its revenues or obtain funding. The Company believes that it will experience revenue disruption and declines as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the government response thereto as well as the war and general political instability in Europe due to Russian Federation invasion of Ukraine. If it is not able to do so, it will have to adjust operations or cease operations. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to continue its operations. In such instances, investors will suffer a loss in the value of their investment in the Company.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of February 28, 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K promulgated under the Securities Act of 1934.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe it is helpful to investors to understand the critical accounting policies underlying our financial statements and the following discussion of our company’s financial condition and results of operations.
Significant Accounting Policies.
Our significant accounting policies relate to use of estimates, cash, accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts, property and equipment, revenue recognition, income taxes, impairment or disposal of long-lived assets, asset retirement obligations, and computation of earnings per share.
Use of Estimates.
The nature of our business requires that we make estimates and assumptions in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. These estimates are based on information as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. Significant estimates required to be made by management include, but are not limited to, the valuation of accounts receivable, depletion and accretion, and oil and gas reserves. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has impacted these estimates and assumptions and will continue to do so.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related governmental responses, volatility in commodity prices, and severe weather resulting from climate change have impacted and likely will continue to impact our business. Under earlier state and federal mandates that regulated business closures, our business was deemed as an essential business and, as such, remained open. As U.S. federal, state, and local officials address surging coronavirus cases and roll out COVID-19 vaccines, we expect to continue operating.
In February 2022, Russia invaded neighboring Ukraine. The conflict has caused turmoil in global markets, resulting in higher oil prices, and injected even more uncertainty into a worldwide economy recovering from the effects of COVID-19. Given the evolving conflict, there are many unknown factors and events that could materially impact our operations.
We have instituted various initiatives throughout the company as part of our business continuity programs, and we are working to mitigate risk when disruptions occur. The Russian conflict with Ukraine and the COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve. Therefore, uncertainty around the availability and commodity prices of crude oil, the commodity prices and demand for our refined products, and the general business environment is expected to continue through 2022 and beyond.
We assessed certain accounting matters that generally require consideration of forecasted financial information in context with the information reasonably available to us and the unknown future impacts of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict and COVID-19 as of February 28, 2022 and through the filing date of this report. The accounting matters assessed included, but were not limited to, our allowance for doubtful accounts and related reserves, and the carrying value of long-lived assets.
Oil and Gas Properties, Full Cost Method
The Company follows the full cost method of accounting for its oil gas properties, whereby all costs incurred in connection with the acquisition, exploration for and development of petroleum and natural gas reserves are capitalized. Such costs include lease acquisition, geological and geophysical activities, rentals on non-producing leases, drilling, completing and equipping of oil wells and administrative costs directly attributable to those activities and asset retirement costs. Disposition of oil properties are accounted for as a reduction of capitalized costs, with no gain or loss recognized unless such adjustment would significantly alter the relationship between capital costs and proved reserves of oil and gas, in which case the gain or loss is recognized in the statement of operations.
Depletion and depreciation of proved oil properties will be calculated on the units-of-production method based upon estimates of proved reserves. Such calculations include the estimated future costs to develop proved reserves. Costs of unproved properties are not included in the costs subject to depletion. These costs are assessed periodically for impairment.
At the end of each quarter, the unamortized cost of oil and gas properties, net of related deferred income taxes, is limited to the sum of the estimated future after-tax net revenues from proved properties, after giving effect to cash flow hedge positions, discounted at 10%, and the lower of cost or fair value of unproved properties, adjusted for related income tax effects. Costs in excess of the present value of estimated future net revenues are charged to impairment expense. This limitation is known as the “ceiling test,” and is based on SEC rules for the full cost oil and gas accounting method.
The Company capitalizes pre-acquisition costs directly identifiable with specific properties when the acquisition of such properties is probable. Capitalized pre-acquisition costs are presented in the balance sheet.