Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of NRx Pharmaceuticals’ financial condition and plan of operations together with NRx Pharmaceuticals’ consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere herein. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. NRx Pharmaceuticals’ actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere herein.
Overview
On May 24, 2021, Big Rock Partners Acquisition Group (“BRPA”), a special purpose acquisition company, consummated the Agreement and Plan of Merger (as amended, the “Merger Agreement”) with NeuroRx, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“NeuroRx”), and Big Rock Merger Corp., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned, direct subsidiary of BRPA (“Merger Sub”). Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, on May 24, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), which has been accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, Merger Sub was merged with and into NeuroRx, with NeuroRx surviving the merger (the “Merger” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Business Combination”). On the Closing Date, BRPA changed its name to NRX Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“NRx Pharmaceuticals” or the “Company”).
NRx Pharmaceuticals is a clinical stage pharmaceutical company that is developing, through its wholly-owned operating subsidiary, NeuroRx, NRX-100 and NRX-101, the first oral therapeutic for the treatment of Bipolar Depression in patients with Acute Suicidal Behavior/Ideation (ASIB) and Sub-Acute Suicidal Ideation and Behavior (“SSIB”), and ZYESAMI (aviptadil), an intravenous and inhaled drug to treat respiratory failure in COVID-19 and potentially other respiratory disorders.
NRX-100 and NRX-101 were developed based upon 30 years of basic science and clinical expertise contributed by Dr. Daniel Javitt, MD, PhD, related to the role of the brain’s N-methyl-D-aspartate (“NMDA”) receptor in regulating human thought processes in general and in regulating depression and suicidality. The NRX-100 and NRX-101 therapy begins with a single dose of ketamine (NRX-100), an FDA approved anesthetic, followed by approximately six weeks of daily oral NRX-101. NRX-101 is being developed as a rapid-onset and sustained treatment for bipolar depression with ASIB and SSIB. NRX-101 combines DCS, a NMDA receptor modulator, and lurasidone, a 5-HT2a receptor antagonist.
NRX-101 has been awarded Fast Track designation, Breakthrough Therapy designation, a Biomarker Letter of Support, and a Special Protocol Agreement by the FDA. Peer-reviewed and published results from Phase II clinical studies demonstrate a significant decline and stabilization in symptoms of depression and suicidality following administration of DCS. Findings from one of these studies found that bipolar patients who were already receiving a 5-HT2a antagonist demonstrated more than a 50% reduction in symptoms of depression and a 75% reduction in suicidal ideation when ketamine and DCS were added to their treatment regimen. Side effects for patients in a P2a combination study of DCS and 5HT2a included mild sedation, headaches and hypomania. Breakthrough Therapy designation was awarded based on data from the STABIL-B study (NCT02974010) that demonstrated a statistically significant advantage of NRX-101 vs. lurasidone (the current standard of care) in maintaining remission from depression and suicidality following a single stabilizing dose of ketamine.
In March 2020, NRx Pharmaceuticals initiated development of RLF-100 (aviptadil acetate) (now reformulated as ZYESAMI by NRx Pharmaceuticals) in partnership with Relief Therapeutics Holding AG (“Relief Therapeutics”). ZYESAMI is based on 50 years of research, pioneered by Professor Sami Said, on the role of aviptadil in preventing and treating acute lung injury by protecting the Type II cell in the lung. The rights to Professor Said’s scientific work are licensed by the Company from the Research Foundation for the State University of New York.
NRx Pharmaceuticals and Relief Therapeutics entered into a Binding Collaboration Agreement on September 18, 2020 (the “Collaboration Agreement”) for the clinical development and, if approved, the sale of aviptadil. The Collaboration Agreement provided for funding by Relief Therapeutics of certain clinical trials, formulation and manufacturing of aviptadil, as well as established sales territories for each party and share of the profits in those territories for “Product” as defined in the Collaboration Agreement. Relief Therapeutics has reimbursed the Company approximately $10.9 million for expenses but has subsequently declined to reimburse the Company for additional costs.
On October 6, 2021, Relief Therapeutics filed a complaint in New York State Court, claiming that the Company failed to honor its obligations under the Collaboration Agreement. Relief Therapeutics’ complaint seeks several remedies, including damages for alleged breaches of the terms of the Collaboration Agreement. The Company believes that the claims are baseless and without merit. On January 10, 2022 the Company filed a complaint in New York State Court, claiming Relief Therapeutics breached and repudiated the Collaboration Agreement. The Company’s complaint seeks damages of at least $185.0 million. However, the parties to the lawsuits agreed to engage in an effort to amicably resolve the litigation, held a mediation meeting on February 22, 2022, and plan to hold an additional mediation meeting in the coming months. If the mediation does not resolve the dispute, the Company intends to defend itself vigorously and to prosecute significant claims against Relief Therapeutics.
In an open-label, single center trial at Houston Methodist Hospital, ZYESAMI demonstrated a statistically significant 9-fold advantage in probability of survival and recovery from respiratory failure compared to the standard of care among patients with COVID-19 respiratory failure.
On June 1, 2021, NRx Pharmaceuticals reported Phase IIb/III study results of ZYESAMI in patients with respiratory failure due to critical COVID-19. The study identified a statistically significant increase in the likelihood that patients treated with ZYESAMI would be alive and free of respiratory failure at 60 days, compared to those treated with placebo, and identified a significantly shorter median hospital stay. The clinical study report filed with the FDA further documented statistically significant advantages for ZYESAMI on all major secondary endpoints.
On the basis of these results, NRx Pharmaceuticals applied for FDA Emergency Use Authorization (“EUA”) on May 31, 2021. In November 2021, the FDA notified us that it was unable to issue the EUA at that time due to insufficient data regarding the known and potential benefits of ZYESAMI and the known and potential risks of ZYESAMI in patients suffering from critical COVID-19 with respiratory failure. In response, in February 2022, the Company filed a new request for EUA in patients with COVID-19 respiratory failure who are at immediate risk of death despite treatment with remdesivir and other approved therapies. As of the date of this annual report, that request is still pending.
Should an EUA be granted, this would provide NRx Pharmaceuticals with a one-year period during which ZYESAMI could be marketed for the treatment of COVID-19 in the U.S. in advance of the filing a new drug application (“NDA”) with the FDA for formal approval of ZYESAMI for the treatment of COVID-19 based on the recently completed clinical trial and the additional clinical trials currently underway, including the NIH ACTIV3b/TESICO trial (NCT 04843761). If authorized for use, ZYESAMI would fill a high unmet need in the U.S. specifically for COVID-19 patients who are critically ill with respiratory failure, as current options have only limited applicability in this patient segment.
On October 8, 2021, the Company submitted an updated manufacturing module to its FDA Investigational New Drug file documenting this change in manufacture and stability. On November 8, 2021, the FDA communicated with the Company that the manufacturing update had been reviewed and that no “clinical hold” items had been identified (this is the regulatory language that allows an investigational product to be given to patients). The Company initiated a parallel manufacturing process to conform to EU and UK standards. In October 2021, the Company announced that a European Qualified Person audit was conducted, and no major deficiencies were identified, thus clearing ZYESAMI’s use in EU investigational programs.
Although NRx Pharmaceuticals’ initial focus has been on the use of intravenous ZYESAMI, NRx Pharmaceuticals also received permission from the FDA to test inhaled ZYESAMI in a phase II/III clinical trial for patients with early disease. NRx Pharmaceuticals believes that the inhaled drug may be more convenient for some patients to self-administer than receiving the intravenous drug. This clinical trial commenced in January 2021 but has been temporarily paused
pending a review of technical issues about the optimal delivery of the drug to the trial patients. In July 2021, the Company signed an agreement for a Phase II Inhaled clinical trial of ZYESAMI in the nation of Georgia, but the Company has decided not to proceed with this trial. In addition, a separate inhaled study being conducted by I-SPY was stopped after it showed futility, most likely driven by the challenges of administering nebulized medication to patients receiving high flow oxygen support although other factors may also play a role. Based on the data received from the two incomplete studies, we plan to explore the application of this form in patients with earlier forms of COVID-19 and other respiratory diseases who are still able to inhale normally and do not have inflammatory debris clogging their alveoli.
On July 11, 2021, NRx Pharmaceuticals entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Defense of the State of Israel (the “MoU”) for an exclusive, worldwide license to develop a novel COVID-19 vaccine (BriLifeTM) developed by the Israel Institute for Biological Research (“IIBR”). However, after investigating the manufacturing requirements of the vaccine, the expected regulatory path for approval in Israel and the EU, the commercial opportunity, and the financial commitment required for development of the vaccine, the Company decided not to continue with the project. We plan to effect a transition in consultation with the IIBR. This decision was communicated to the IIBR in a letter dated March 20, 2022.
As part of the Company’s consideration of the vaccine project, the Company entered into a Shareholder Agreement, dated October 15, 2021 (the “Agreement”), with Shimshon Hen and David Sepiashvili, each an Israeli citizen (the “Consultants”), under which the Consultants agreed to provide certain consulting services, and which set out a framework for establishing a potential joint venture between the Consultants and the Company that would have been responsible for the development and commercialization of the BriLife vaccine. Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, the Company issued an aggregate of 4,000,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock to the Consultants on October 20, 2021 under the Company’s 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan. The Company is evaluating its options with respect to the Consultants.
Since inception, NRx Pharmaceuticals has incurred significant operating losses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, NRx Pharmaceuticals’ net loss was $93.1 million and $51.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, NRx Pharmaceuticals had an accumulated deficit of $183.2 million.
COVID-19 Outbreak
On January 30, 2020, the WHO announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (the “COVID-19 Outbreak”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 Outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 Outbreak continues to evolve. As such, NRx Pharmaceuticals cannot estimate the full magnitude, whether positive or negative, that the pandemic will have on our business. If the COVID-19 Outbreak continues, it may have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations for the year ending December 31, 2022 and beyond. Management is actively monitoring the impact of the global pandemic on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, industry, and workforce. Alternatively, the COVID-19 Outbreak could have a material positive effect on market demand for ZYESAMI. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 Outbreak, the uncertainty around the emergence of new strains, the global responses to curb its spread, and the uncertainty of the authorization / approval of ZYESAMI by the FDA, NRx Pharmaceuticals is not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 Outbreak on its results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for the year ending December 31, 2022 and beyond. Aside from our COVID-19 related trials, as a result of the COVID-19 Outbreak, our other trials have been halted, although we expect to resume our trials for NRX-100 and the registrational and NRX-101 study in the second half of 2022. We are currently initiating a Phase II study of NRX-101 in patients with bipolar depression and sub-acute Suicidality (SSIB). This study will enroll patients that do not need to be hospitalized and certain study visits can be done remotely. This will enable us to better prepare for the start of our registrational P2/3 SPA studies of NRX-100 /NRX-101 in patients with severe bipolar depression and acute suicidal ideation and behavior (“ASIB”).
Components of Results of Operations
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
NRx Pharmaceuticals’ research and development expenses consist primarily of costs associated with clinical trials, salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits, and equity-based compensation charges for individuals involved in ongoing research and development efforts. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been used.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, consultant fees, and professional fees for legal and accounting services.
Settlement Expense
Settlement expense consists primarily of settlement expenses related to the GEM Warrant as further discussed in footnote 9 to the Company’s 2021 Audited Financial Statements under “Share Subscription Facility Agreement - GEM”.
Reimbursement of expenses from Relief Therapeutics
Reimbursement of expenses from Relief Therapeutics consists of reimbursable expenses as part of the Collaboration Agreement.
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth NRx Pharmaceuticals’ selected statements of operations data for the following periods (in thousands):
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $20.3 million of research and development expenses compared to $10.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $9.6 million related primarily to an increase of $6.9 million in clinical trials and development expenses related to ZYESAMI; an increase of $2.1 million related to fees paid to regulatory and process development consultants, an increase of $0.9 million in stock-based compensation expense, partially offset by a decrease of $0.3 million in other regulatory and process development costs. The $20.3 million and $10.6 million of research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, include $1.3 million and $0.4 million, respectively, of non-cash stock-based compensation.
General and administrative expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $74.9 million of general and administrative expenses compared to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $63.5 million related primarily to $56.0 million of consultant fees, of which $41.0 million relates to the fair value of common stock issued related to the Shareholder Agreement described in footnote 10 of the Company’s 2021 Audited Financial Statements under “VaccineCo Agreement and Issuance of Shares”, an increase of $6.2 million in stock-based compensation, an increase of $4.0 million in insurance expense, an increase of $1.5 million in legal and professional fees, an increase of $0.8 million for employee expenses, and an increase of $0.4 million in other general and administrative expenses, partially offset by a decrease of $5.4 million of warrant expense for warrants issued to board members for services. The $74.9 million and $11.4 million of general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, include $60.3 million and $5.7 million, respectively, of non-cash stock-based compensation, consulting fees, and warrant expense.
Settlement Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $21.4 million of settlement expense compared to $39.5 million of settlement expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. Settlement expense is a non-cash expense related to the GEM Warrant.
Reimbursement of expenses from Relief Therapeutics
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $0.8 million of reimbursement of expenses from Relief Therapeutics compared to $10.2 million of reimbursement of expenses from Relief Therapeutics for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on extinguishment of debt
For the year ended December 31, 2021, NRx Pharmaceuticals recorded $0.1 million of gain on extinguishment of debt and did not record a gain or loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $0.1 million related to the forgiveness of the PPP Loan which resulted in a gain on extinguishment for the outstanding principal and accrued and unpaid interest.
Interest expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded less than $0.1 million of interest expense compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of less than $0.1 million related primarily to the conversion of convertible notes payable in 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
For the year ended December 31, 2021, NRx Pharmaceuticals recorded a gain of $1.7 million related to the change in fair value of the warrant liability and did not record any gain or loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain related to the decrease in the fair value of the Placement Warrants assumed pursuant to the Merger Agreement.
Change in fair value of Earnout Cash liability
For the year ended December 31, 2021, NRx Pharmaceuticals recorded a gain of $20.9 million related to the decrease in fair value of the Earnout Cash liability and did not record any gain or loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain primarily resulted from a decrease in the probability of achieving the Earnout Cash milestones by December 31, 2022 due to changes to the anticipated re-start date of the NRX-101 Phase III clinical trial, slower enrollment in the NIH’s ZYESAMI clinical trial, and the FDA’s November decision not to approve EUA for ZYESAMI.
Loss on conversion of convertible notes payable
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not record a loss on conversion of convertible notes payable and recorded $0.3 million of loss on conversion of convertible notes payable for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $0.3 million related to the loss on extinguishment for the difference between the carrying value of the convertible notes, unamortized debt discount, and the fair value of the embedded put option, and the fair value of common shares issued.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents selected financial information and statistics as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
We believe our cash will be sufficient to fund our planned operations and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months after the date the financial statements are issued. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong and we could utilize our cash sooner than we currently expect.
NRx Pharmaceuticals has generated no revenues, has incurred operating losses since inception, and expects to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future and may never become profitable. Until such time as NRx Pharmaceuticals is able to establish a revenue stream from the sale of its therapeutic products, NRx Pharmaceuticals is dependent upon obtaining necessary equity and/or debt financing to continue operations. NRx Pharmaceuticals cannot make any assurances that sales of ZYESAMI will commence in the near term or that additional financings will be available to it and, if available, on acceptable terms or at all. This could negatively impact NRx Pharmaceuticals' business and operations and could also lead to the reduction of NRx Pharmaceuticals' operations.
NRx Pharmaceuticals expects to continue to incur operating losses and net cash outflows until such time as it generates a level of revenue from sale or licensing of drug products to support its cost structure. There is no assurance that NRx Pharmaceuticals will achieve profitable operations and if achieved, whether it will be sustained on a continued basis.
NRx Pharmaceuticals intends to fund ongoing activities by raising additional capital through equity or debt financings. There can be no assurance that NRx Pharmaceuticals will be successful in raising that additional capital or that such capital, if available, will be on terms that are acceptable to NRx Pharmaceuticals. If NRx Pharmaceuticals is unable to raise sufficient additional capital, NRx Pharmaceuticals may be compelled to reduce the scope of its operations and planned capital expenditures.
Reverse Recapitalization Merger
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, NeuroRx’s securityholders (including option holders and warrant holders) who own NeuroRx securities immediately prior to the Effective Time will have the contingent right to receive their pro rata portion of (i) an aggregate of 25,000,000 shares of Common Stock (the “Earnout Shares”) if, prior to December 31, 2022, ZYESAMI receives emergency use authorization by the “FDA” and NeuroRx submits and the FDA files for review a new drug application for ZYESAMI (the occurrence of the foregoing, the “Earnout Shares Milestone”), and (ii) an aggregate of $100.0 million in cash (the “Earnout Cash”) upon the earlier to occur of (x) FDA approval of ZYESAMI and the listing of ZYESAMI in the FDA’s “Orange Book” and (y) FDA approval of NRX-100 and NRX-101 and the listing of the NRX-100 and NRX-101 in the FDA’s “Orange Book,” in each case prior to December 31, 2022 (the occurrence of either of clauses (x) or (y), the “Earnout Cash Milestone”). If the Earnout Shares Milestone is achieved, the
Earnout Shares will be issued within five (5) business days after the occurrence of the Earnout Shares Milestone. If the Earnout Cash Milestone is achieved, the Merger Agreement does not require the Earnout Cash to be delivered to NeuroRx securityholders within any specified period of time, and the Board of Directors of NRx Pharmaceuticals will use its good faith judgment to determine the date to pay the Earnout Cash. At December 31, 2021, the fair value of the Earnout Cash liability has been estimated to be $4.6 million. Upon closing of the Merger, the estimated fair value of the Earnout Shares was $253.1 million with such amount recognized as a deemed dividend. As NRx Pharmaceuticals is in an accumulated deficit position as of the measurement date, the resulting deemed dividend is recorded as a reduction of additional paid-in capital with a corresponding offset recorded to additional paid-in capital (i.e., net impact to additional paid-in capital of $0). The benefit of the contingent right to receive Earnout Cash for option and warrant holders occurs through the option exchange ratio and therefore the amount of Earnout Cash for common stockholders is approximately $88.8 million.
In connection with the Merger, a number of subscribers (each, a “PIPE Subscriber”) purchased from NRx Pharmaceuticals an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of Common Stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Investment”) and an aggregate purchase price of $10.0 million (the “PIPE Shares”), pursuant to subscription agreements (each, a “Subscription Agreement”) entered into prior to the Closing Date. NRx Pharmaceuticals received $8.1 million in net proceeds from the PIPE Investment after transaction costs.
Private Placements
On August 23, 2021, the Company completed a private placement (the “2021 Private Placement”) and issued 2,727,273 shares of common stock for a purchase price of $11.00 per share and preferred investment options to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,727,273 shares of common stock for a purchase price of $12.00. NRx Pharmaceuticals received $27.4 million in net proceeds from the 2021 Private Placement.
On February 2, 2022, the Company completed a private placement (the “2022 Private Placement”) and issued 7,824,727 shares of common stock and preferred investment options to purchase up to an aggregate of 7,824,727 shares of common stock. The purchase price for one share of common stock and one preferred investment option was $3.195. The investment options have an exercise price of $3.07 per share. The aggregate gross proceeds to the Company from the 2022 Private Placement were approximately $25.0 million, before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses.
The Company sold 3,642,727 shares of common stock during the year ended December 31, 2021, generating gross proceeds of $37.0 million.
The Company issued 3,830,586 shares of common stock pursuant to warrants and Unit Purchase Options exercised during the year ended December 31, 2021, and received gross proceeds from the warrant exercise of $16.7 million. The Company issued 4,834,045 shares of common stock for consulting services during the year ended December 31, 2021, and recognized non-cash consulting expense in general and administrative expenses of $53.8 million.
The Company sold 556,043 shares of common stock during the year ended December 30, 2020, and received gross proceeds of $2.6 million.
The Company issued 1,138,199 shares of common stock to settle the conversion of notes payable during the year ended December 31, 2020, and recorded a loss of $0.3 million. The Company issued 30,020 shares of common stock with a fair value of $0.1 million in settlement of accounts payable worth $0.1 million.
Milestone Payments
Pursuant to the legal settlement with Sarah Herzog Memorial Hospital Ezrat Nashim (“SHMH”) in September 2018, which included the license of intellectual property rights from SHMH, an ongoing royalty of 1% to 2.5% of NRX-101 gross sales shall be due to SHMH, together with milestone payments upon completion of Phase II trials, Phase III trials and commercial sale of NRX-101. The milestone payments for developmental and commercial milestones range from $0.1 million to $0.8 million. Annual maintenance fees range up to $0.2 million.
NRx Pharmaceuticals is not party to any off-balance sheet transactions. NRx Pharmaceuticals has no guarantees or obligations other than those which arise out of normal business operations.
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $37.7 million of cash, primarily resulting from a net loss of $93.1 million reduced by (a) non-cash charges of $60.3 million, including (i) $53.8 million of non-cash consulting fees paid in common stock, (ii) $21.4 million of non-cash settlement expense related to GEM Warrant, (iii) $7.8 million of stock-based compensation expense, (iv) $20.9 million in change in fair value of Earnout Cash liability, partially offset by (i) gains for the change in fair value of the warrant liability of $1.7 million and (ii) $0.1 million in extinguishment of debt related to the PPP loan, and (b) changes in operating assets and liabilities of $4.9 million, including increases of $4.8 million and less than $0.1 million in prepaid expenses and other assets and accounts payable, respectively, partially offset by decreases of $0.9 million and $0.8 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities and accounts receivable, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $2.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from a net loss of $51.8 million reduced by non-cash charges of $46.1 million, including $39.5 million of non-cash settlement expense related to the GEM Warrant, $5.4 million of warrant expense for warrants issued to board members for services, $0.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, $0.3 million of loss on conversion of notes payable, and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $3.5 million, including increases of $3.2 million in accrued expenses and other liabilities, $0.1 million in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, financing activities provided $63.5 million of cash, primarily resulting from $27.4 million from the issuance of shares of our common stock and warrants in private placement, $16.7 million proceeds from issuance of common stock for exercise of the GEM Warrants, $11.1 million for the effect of the Merger, PIPE financing, net of transaction costs, $9.6 million from proceeds from issuance of shares of NRx Pharmaceuticals’ common stock, partially offset by $1.1 million from repayment of notes payable assumed in the Merger, and a $0.2 million repayment of a note payable plus accrued and unpaid interest with a vendor.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided $3.2 million of cash, primarily resulting from $2.6 million of proceeds from the issuance of shares of NRx Pharmaceuticals’ common and preferred stock, and $0.6 million in proceeds from notes payable.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
NRx Pharmaceuticals’ management’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations is based on its financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires NRx Pharmaceuticals to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, NRx Pharmaceuticals evaluates its estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. The most significant estimates relate to the valuation of Earnout Cash Liability, conversion features of convertible notes and Common Stock and the valuation of stock options and warrants. NRx Pharmaceuticals bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experiences, and various other factors that NRx Pharmaceuticals believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
NRx Pharmaceuticals defines its critical accounting policies as those accounting principles that require it to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on its financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which NRx Pharmaceuticals applies those principles. While its significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to its financial statements appearing
elsewhere in this annual report, NRx Pharmaceuticals believes the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of its financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments.
Earnout Cash Liability
The fair value of the Earnout Cash liability has been estimated using probability-weighted discounted cash flow models (DCFs) with significant inputs that are not observable in the market and thus represents a Level 3 fair value measurement as defined in ASC 820. The most significant inputs include whether (a) the FDA approves the Company’s NDAs for ZYESAMI and/or NRX-101, (b) if such approval is granted, whether such approval will be received on or before December 31, 2022, and (c) if such approval is granted, whether ZYESAMI and/or NRX-101 will be listed in the FDA’s Orange Book on or before December 31, 2022. The DCFs incorporate Level 3 inputs including estimated discount rates that we believe market participants would consider relevant in pricing and the projected timing and amount of cash flows, which are estimated and developed in consideration of the uncertainties associated with the obligations. Changes in the estimated fair value of the Earnout Cash Liability are recognized as a gain or loss in the statements of operations.
Fair Value of Common and Preferred Stock
Prior to the Merger, in order to determine the fair value of shares of its Common Stock, the Board of NRx Pharmaceuticals considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of its Common Stock and preferred stock based on arms-length transactions with third party investors. Subsequent to the Merger, the Board determines the fair value of the Common Stock based on the closing market price on the date of grant.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock option awards granted to employees and directors based on the fair value of the award on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The straight-line method of expense recognition is applied to awards with service-only conditions. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock-based awards, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock-based awards, and our expected dividend yield. Therefore, we estimate our expected volatility based on the implied volatility of publicly traded warrants on our common stock and historical volatility of a set of our publicly traded peer companies. We estimate the expected term of our options using the "simplified" method for awards that qualify as "plain-vanilla" options. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award. Expected dividend yield is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends on common stock and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The assumptions used in determining the fair value of stock-based awards represent reasonable estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Warrant Liability
NRx Pharmaceuticals accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Common Stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the control of NRx Pharmaceuticals, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The fair value of the Placement Warrants was estimated using a Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model, which requires the use of subjective assumptions that could materially impact the estimation of fair value and related expense to be recognized. These assumptions include (i) the expected volatility of our stock price, (ii) the period of time over which the holders are expected to hold their Placement Warrants prior to exercise (expected lives), (iii) expected dividend yield on our common stock, and (iv) risk-free interest rates, which are based on quoted U.S. Treasury rates for securities with maturities approximating the options’ expected lives. Developing these assumptions requires the use of judgment. NRx Pharmaceuticals, both prior to and after the Merger, lacks company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimate our expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies. Expected lives are principally based on our historical exercise experience with previously issued stock-based awards. The expected dividend yield is zero as we have never paid dividends and do not currently anticipate paying any in the foreseeable future.