Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis together with the financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth in the section of this report captioned “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Throughout this discussion, unless the context specifies or implies otherwise, the terms “NanoString”, “we”, “us” and “our” refer to NanoString Technologies, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
The discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 and the comparison of the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019 have been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K and is incorporated by reference from our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021, under the section titled “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
We develop, manufacture and market technologies that unlock scientifically valuable and clinically actionable information from minute amounts of biological material, primarily for life science researchers in the fields of genomics and proteomics. Our mission is to provide a portfolio of solutions that allow our customers to map the universe of biology, enabling scientific exploration that may lead to new therapies that can improve the human condition.
Our technologies include proprietary chemistries that enable the labeling and counting of single molecules. Our product platforms are used for scientific discovery and clinical research applications, often in connection with pharmaceutical product development and human clinical trials of potential new therapies. Our proprietary chemistries may reduce the number of steps required to conduct certain types of scientific experiments and allow for multiple experiments to be conducted at once. Our product platforms are also able to extract information from multiple types of biological samples, including those that are often challenging to work with using other scientific methods or platforms. As a result, we are able to develop tools that are easier for researchers to use and that may generate faster and more consistent scientific results.
We currently offer two commercially available product platforms, our nCounter Analysis System, or nCounter, and our GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiler, or GeoMx DSP, system. We have one additional product platform under development, our CosMx Spatial Molecular Imager, or CosMx SMI, system. All NanoString product platforms include instruments, related consumables, software and services, and all NanoString product platforms have the versatility to detect both RNA and protein expression and are able to generate reliable and reproduceable data in a variety of biological sample types, including FFPE. Our product platforms allow our customers to progress their research in areas such as oncology, immunology and neurology. We market and sell our instruments and related consumables to researchers in academic, government and biopharmaceutical laboratories for research use, both through our direct sales force and through selected distributors in certain markets.
Our nCounter platform, which was commercially launched in 2008, is used to conduct what is known as bulk gene expression analysis, whereby biological samples are first reduced, and then gene expression, specifically quantities of selected RNA or proteins, are measured at their average levels throughout the totality of the sample. nCounter can be used to analyze the activity of up to 800 genes in a single experiment. As of December 31, 2021, we had an installed base of approximately 1,050 nCounter systems, which our customers have used to publish more than 5,200 peer-reviewed papers.
GeoMx DSP, which was commercially launched in 2019, is a pioneering product platform in the emerging field of spatial biology. While nCounter and other common gene expression analysis technologies use bulk analysis approaches, GeoMx DSP is used to analyze selected regions of an intact biological sample without the need to reduce or destroy the sample, enabling researchers to see how gene expression might vary across those regions. After a researcher selects regions of interest, GeoMx DSP arranges the biological information extracted from these regions to be subsequently quantified and analyzed, or “read out,” by a platform such as nCounter, whereby researchers can obtain information on up to 96 biological targets per selected region of interest, or by a next generation sequencer, or NGS, system, such as systems manufactured by Illumina, Inc., whereby researchers can obtain information on up to 18,000 biological targets, or the whole possible universe of potential RNA targets, per selected region of interest. As of December 31, 2021, we had an installed approximately 255 GeoMx DSP systems, which customers have used to publish approximately 90 peer-reviewed scientific papers.
We have discovered other novel applications that utilize our core technologies. CosMx SMI, which is expected to become commercially available in the second half of 2022, is a new product platform under development in the field of spatial biology. CosMx SMI is being developed to compliment GeoMx DSP. While GeoMx DSP offers researchers the ability to profile gene expression activity in a selected region of interest that may contain multiple cells or cell types, CosMx SMI is designed to enable multiplexed spatial profiling of RNA and protein targets at a single and sub-cellular resolution level. While GeoMx allows for more rapid, higher throughput analysis of gene expression activity in selected regions of interest, CosMx is designed to allow researchers to “drill down” into a specific single cell or sub-cellular area in a region of interest to gather more
information as desired or required. At the time of commercial launch, CosMx SMI is expected to enable the analysis of up to 1,000 RNA targets, or up to 100 protein targets, at a single or sub-cellular level of resolution within morphologically intact tissue samples.
In advance of and subsequent to our commercial launch of GeoMx DSP and in advance of our commercial launch of CosMx SMI, we have provided selected customers in-house sample testing services whereby customers send biological samples to our Seattle facilities to be analyzed using our product platforms and selected consumables under our technology access program, or TAP. Upon completion of each project, the raw data and analysis report is provided to the customer. As of December 31, 2021, we have conducted over 770 TAP projects for approximately 340 customers.
We derive a substantial majority of our revenue from the sale of our products, which consist of our nCounter and GeoMx DSP instruments and related proprietary consumables. Our instruments are designed to work only with our consumable products. Accordingly, as the installed base of instruments grows, we expect recurring revenue from consumable sales to become an increasingly important driver of our operating results. Our consumables include our standardized nCounter and GeoMx DSP panel products, nCounter custom codeset products that contain a specific set of targets for scientific analysis as requested by a customer, and the Prosigna breast cancer assay which is manufactured for our partner Veracyte Inc, or Veracyte. We also derive revenue from processing fees related to proof-of-principle studies, including from our GeoMx DSP TAP and in future periods, for our CosMx TAP, which we conduct for potential customers. For nCounter, GeoMx DSP, and in future periods, for our CosMx SMI, we offer extended service contracts and generate service revenue.
We use third-party contract manufacturers to produce our instruments and certain raw materials for our consumables. We build our consumables, including our panels, custom code sets and reagent packages, at our greater Seattle, Washington area facilities.
We focus a substantial portion of our resources on developing new technologies, products and solutions. Research and development expense totaled $69.5 million, $62.9 million and $68.0 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We intend to make significant investments in research and development to support our existing instrument platforms and related consumable offerings, as well as research and development of new technologies.
In December 2019, we entered into a License and Asset Purchase Agreement, or LAPA, and service and supply agreements, or SSAs, with Veracyte, Inc, or Veracyte. Pursuant to the LAPA, we completed a license of intellectual property and a sale of certain assets to Veracyte relating to our nCounter FLEX system for use in clinical diagnostic applications. Veracyte also acquired certain intellectual property rights and worldwide distribution rights relating to our Prosigna Breast Cancer Assay and our LymphMark assay and certain clinical diagnostic assay software modules that operate with the nCounter FLEX system. Pursuant to the terms of the LAPA, Veracyte paid us $50.0 million, consisting of $40.0 million in cash, paid in connection with the entry into the LAPA, and 376,732 shares of Veracyte common stock valued at $10.0 million, which shares were issued in connection with the entry into the LAPA. Additionally, we may receive future potential milestone payments of up to $10.0 million in the aggregate, to be paid upon the launch of additional clinical diagnostic tests by Veracyte for our nCounter FLEX platform. Pursuant to the SSAs, we agreed to supply to Veracyte nCounter FLEX systems, and to manufacture and supply Prosigna kits, LymphMark kits and any additional clinical diagnostic tests that Veracyte may develop in the future for nCounter, for a period of at least four years subsequent to the transaction date. Pursuant to the SSAs, Veracyte will pay the designated transfer prices for nCounter FLEX systems, Prosigna kits, LymphMark kits and any other nCounter-based diagnostic tests developed by Veracyte.
Our product and service revenue increased 29% to $144.0 million in 2021, compared to $111.4 million in 2020. The increase was driven primarily by increased revenues from our sales of GeoMx DSP systems and related consumables as well as increases in nCounter consumables resulting from increased lab activity by our customers, as the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic was less severe in 2021 as compared to 2020. Our product and service revenue increased 7% to $111.4 million in 2020, compared to $103.7 million in 2019. The increase was driven primarily by increased revenues from our sales of GeoMx DSP systems and related consumables. The increases were offset by declines in sales of nCounter consumables primarily as a result the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on lab activity with our customers during 2020. In addition, while greater unit sales of Prosigna kits were recorded in 2020 as compared to 2019, our revenues recorded from the sale of Prosigna kits were lower, as our Prosigna supply agreement entered into as part of the transaction with Veracyte completed in December 2019 reduced our average selling price received on Prosigna kits, which in prior periods had been sold directly to end user customers or distributors.
Our total revenue in 2021 was $145.1 million, compared to $117.3 million in 2020 and $125.6 million in 2019. During 2021, our total revenue was not materially different than our product and service revenue, due primarily to reduced activity associated with certain collaboration agreements in 2021 as compared to previous periods. However, historically our total revenue has varied more significantly as compared to our product and service revenue, as a result of the timing of revenue recognition associated with our collaboration agreements. Revenue recognition relating to these agreements, which is recorded as collaboration revenue, consists primarily of recognizing deferred revenue relating to cash payments received previously from
our collaborators. Collaboration revenue recognized may vary significantly depending on the timing and cost of certain research and development activities relating to a collaboration, the expected time frame for completing certain collaboration activities, the outcome of research and development activities being conducted pursuant to a collaboration, the contractual terms of a particular collaboration agreement and other factors.
We have never been profitable and had net losses of $115.3 million, $110.1 million and $40.7 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $649.8 million.
Key Financial Metrics
We are organized as, and operate in, one reportable segment: the development, manufacture and commercialization of instruments, consumables and services for efficiently profiling the activity of hundreds of genes and proteins simultaneously from a single tissue sample. Our chief operating decision maker is the chief executive officer, who manages our operations and evaluates our financial performance on a total company basis. Our principal operations and decision-making functions are located at our corporate headquarters in the United States.
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sale of our products and related services and collaborations. For a description of our revenue recognition policies, see the section of this report captioned “-Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates-Revenue Recognition.”
Product Revenue
Our product revenue consists of sales of our nCounter Analysis Systems and related consumables and our GeoMx DSP systems and related consumables. Our nCounter MAX Analysis System typically consists of one nCounter Digital Analyzer and one nCounter Prep Station, having a U.S. list price of $235,000. The U.S. list price of the similarly configured nCounter FLEX Analysis System is $265,000. Our nCounter SPRINT Profiler has a reduced footprint and combines the function of the prep station with the digital analyzer in a single instrument. It has a U.S. list price of $149,000. Our GeoMx DSP system has a U.S. list price of $295,000.
Outside the United States, depending on the country, list prices are generally higher. In certain cases, customers may pay less than the list price for our various instruments. For example, some of our systems are sold to customers through independent distributors, and these distributors may purchase systems from us at a discount to list price. In certain regions outside of the US, we sell through distribution partners who typically receive discounted prices. In addition, in some cases we may sell an nCounter system and a GeoMx DSP system together as a bundle, or we may sell a system together with an initial order of consumables for a single price, in which cases we may offer discounted prices for instruments as compared to list prices.
Our customer base is primarily composed of academic institutions, government laboratories, biopharmaceutical companies and clinical laboratories that perform analyses or testing using our nCounter Analysis and GeoMx DSP systems and purchase related consumables.
For our research customers, related consumables include standardized and pre-manufactured kits, or panels, that are designed to measure the expression of a pre-selected set of genes. For nCounter, we also offer custom CodeSets, which we manufacture to the specific requirements of an individual researcher, and Master Kits, cartridges and reagents, which are ancillary reagents, cartridges, tips and reagent plates required to setup and process samples in our instruments.
Pursuant to the LAPA with Veracyte entered into in 2019, we now sell our nCounter Prosigna in vitro diagnostic kits to Veracyte, who then sells Prosigna to end user customers or distributors.
Our average annualized consumables revenue per installed nCounter Analysis System was approximately $55,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which includes our nCounter consumable sales and sales of our Prosigna kits. Our average annualized consumables revenue per installed GeoMx DSP was approximately $97,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Service Revenue
Service revenue consists of fees associated with service contracts and fees for conducting various forms of data analysis studies, including providing services under our Technology Access Programs, or TAP. We include a one-year warranty with the sale of our instruments and offer service contracts, which are purchased by a majority of our customers. We selectively provide TAP services and other data analysis studies to prospective customers in order to help them better understand the benefits primarily of our GeoMx DSP system or other technologies under development, for which we generate data and perform analysis services on their behalf.
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue has been derived primarily from our historical collaborations with Lam and our terminated collaborations with Celgene and Merck. We recorded collaboration revenue of $1.1 million, $5.9 million and $21.9 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we do not expect to receive further development funding from Lam in future periods, and the original commitment from Lam to provide up to $50.0 million in development funding was fully satisfied in 2019. Collaboration revenue also includes revenue recognized under several smaller collaborations.
Revenue by Geography
We sell our products through our own sales forces in the United States, Canada, certain European countries and also various countries within the Asia Pacific region, including China, India, Japan and Singapore, among others. We also sell through distributors in other parts of the world. As we have expanded our European direct sales force and entered into agreements with distributors of our products in Europe, the Middle East, Asia Pacific and South America, the amount of revenue generated outside of North America has generally increased, although there have been significant quarter-to-quarter fluctuations. In the future, we intend to continue to expand our sales force and establish additional distributor relationships outside the United States to better access international markets.
The following table reflects total revenue by geography based on the geographic location of our customers, distributors and collaborators. For sales to distributors, their geographic location may be different from the geographic locations of the ultimate end customer. Americas consists of the United States, Canada, Mexico and South America; and Asia Pacific includes Japan, China, South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, India and Australia.
Most of our revenue is denominated in U.S. dollars. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates have not materially affected us to date; however, they may become material to us in the future if our operations outside of the United States expand.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue
Cost of product and service revenue consists primarily of costs incurred in the production process, including costs of purchasing instruments from third-party contract manufacturers, consumable component materials and assembly labor and overhead, packaging and delivery, installation, warranty and any follow-on servicing related costs. In addition, cost of product and service revenue includes royalty costs for licensed technologies included in our products, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory and non-cash expenses including depreciation and amortization associated with various assets used in the production of our products and stock-based compensation expense. We provide a one-year warranty on each nCounter Analysis System and GeoMx DSP system and we establish a reserve for warranty repairs based on historical warranty repair costs incurred.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and benefits, occupancy costs, laboratory supplies, engineering services, consulting fees, costs associated with licensing molecular diagnostics rights expenses and non-cash expenses including depreciation and amortization associated with various assets used in the research and development of our products and stock-based compensation expense.
We have made substantial investments in research and development since our inception. Our research and development efforts have focused primarily on the tasks required to enhance our technologies and to support development and commercialization of new and existing products and applications. We believe that our continued investment in research and development is essential to our long-term competitive position and expect to continue to make investments in research and development activities, with an expected focus on spatial genomics.
To date, we have found that it has been effective for us to manage our research and development activities on a departmental basis. Accordingly, other than pursuant to terms of certain of our collaborations, we have neither required employees to report their time by project nor allocated our research and development costs to individual projects.
Research and development expense by functional area was as follows:
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of costs for our sales and marketing, finance, human resources, information technology, business development, legal and general management functions, as well as professional fees for legal, consulting and accounting services and non-cash expenses including primarily stock-based compensation expense.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our financial performance has been and in the foreseeable future will continue to be primarily driven by the following factors. While each of these factors presents significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address the factors below is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors.”
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to impact our ability to solicit and fulfill customer orders and record related product and service revenue, with the impact being more significant in certain geographies and within certain segments of our customer base. The slower pace at which we received and delivered system, consumable and service orders in 2020, and to a lesser extent in 2021, has negatively impacted our revenues, including the comparability of revenue recorded to historical periods. While all revenue categories have been impacted due to lab closures and lower customer activity, nCounter-related consumables revenue has been impacted most substantively given our current higher installed base of nCounter systems. To the extent the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a negative impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research, or our ability to actively engage with our customers or to receive and fulfill customer orders, we expect our near term revenues will continue to be negatively impacted. We expect consumables revenue to be more severely impacted by COVID-19, as consumables revenue more closely correlates with day-to-day customer research activity. We cannot predict with any certainty if, or how quickly, our customers will return to previous activity or product order levels, if any increase in activity or product order levels will be maintained, or our ability to resume our activities and operations and maintain them at levels consistent with past performance. Until the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic more fully subside, we expect our near-term revenues may continue to be negatively impacted. With consideration to these near-term negative impacts on our business, we expect our product and service revenue may continue to increase in future periods, primarily as a result of the growth in sales of GeoMx DSP instruments and consumables, and from sales of new products in our development pipeline such as CosMx SMI, for which commercial shipments are expected to commence in the second half of 2022.
Instrument Installed Base
Our future financial performance will be driven by continued adoption and utilization of our systems and related consumables. As of December 31, 2021, we had an installed base of approximately 1,050 nCounter Analysis Systems and approximately 255 GeoMx DSP systems. In addition, future product and service revenue may be impacted by the introduction of new product platforms, such as CosMx SMI.
We will continue to employ other strategies to increase the adoption rate of our instrument platforms, including expanding our sales channel in both direct and distributor territories, developing new consumable content for our nCounter and GeoMx platforms and enhancing certain features of our nCounter and GeoMx platforms. As part of this strategy, we have continued to add incremental sales territories and have augmented our field sales team, and have continued to grow our base of distributors. As our installed base of instruments grows, we solicit feedback from our customers and focus certain of our research and development efforts on improving our systems or enabling applications, which in turn helps to drive additional sales of our instruments.
Our instruments require a significant capital investment and, as a result, our instrument sales process involves numerous interactions with multiple individuals within an organization, and often includes in-depth analysis by potential
customers of our products, performance of proof-of-principle studies, preparation of extensive documentation and a lengthy review process. As a result of these factors, the significant capital investment required in purchasing our instruments and the budget cycles of our customers, the time from initial contact with a customer to our receipt of a purchase order can vary significantly, and may be up to 12 months or longer. Given the length and uncertainty of our sales cycle, we have in the past experienced, and likely will in the future experience, fluctuations in our instrument sales on a period-to-period basis.
Recurring Consumables Revenue
Our instruments are designed to be used only with our consumables. This closed system model generates recurring revenue from each instrument we sell. Management focuses on recurring consumable revenue per system as an indicator of the continuing value generated by each system. Quarterly, we calculate recurring annualized consumables revenue per system (also known as pull-through) by dividing related annualized consumables revenue recognized in a particular quarter (other than consumables revenue related to proof-of-principle studies) by the total number of installed systems as of the last day in the immediately preceding quarter. We calculate the average annualized consumable pull-through per instrument by dividing related consumables revenue recognized during the year (other than consumables revenue related to proof-of-principle studies) by the average total number of installed systems as of the last day in the immediately preceding quarter for each of the preceding four quarters. Historically, the majority of our systems and related consumables have been sold to research customers.
Our average annualized consumable pull-through per installed nCounter system was approximately $55,000 and $51,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The lower nCounter consumable pull-through in 2020 was due primarily to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our customers’ ability to access their laboratories to conduct research, complete purchases and receive product shipments for a substantial portion of 2020.
Our average annualized consumable pull-through per installed GeoMx DSP system was approximately $97,000 and $82,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in GeoMx DSP pull-through in 2021 was driven primarily by the introduction of new GeoMx DSP consumables using NGS read-out, which sell for higher average prices per experiment as compared to GeoMx DSP consumables that use nCounter for data read-out.
As the installed base of our instrument platforms expands, consumables revenue is expected to increase. Our consumables revenue per installed system may fluctuate in the future, reflecting the mix of our installed instruments, and potential shifts in the mix, or type, of consumables sold to our installed customer base. In addition, subsequent to entering into the LAPA with Veracyte in December 2019, we are no longer selling Prosigna kits directly to third parties and are now manufacturing and supplying Prosigna kits exclusively to Veracyte at designated transfer prices, which has and will continue to result in a decrease in revenue and gross margins associated with Prosigna kits.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our consumables revenue most substantively, given the impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research or our ability to actively engage with our customers or to receive and fulfill customer orders. We expect our consumables revenue may continue to be more severely impacted by COVID-19, as consumables revenue more closely correlates with day-to-day customer research activity. We cannot predict with any certainty if, or how quickly, our customers will return to previous activity or product order levels, if any increase in activity or product order levels will be maintained, or our ability to resume our activities and operations and maintain them at levels consistent with past performance. With consideration to these near-term negative impacts on our business, we expect our consumables revenue may continue to increase in future periods, as a result of the growth in sales of GeoMx DSP systems, the introduction of new nCounter and GeoMx DSP consumable products, the continued growth of the installed base of our nCounter and GeoMx DSP systems and the expected commercial launch of CosMx SMI and related consumables.
Other Revenue Sources
We derive service revenue from service contracts, which are purchased by a majority of our customers. Additionally, we selectively provide and generate revenue from services such as TAP or other proof-of-principle studies, which are designed to demonstrate for prospective customers the performance of our existing product platforms and certain new technologies that are under development.
Collaboration revenue has been derived primarily from our collaboration with Lam, and historically, our terminated collaborations with Celgene and Merck. We expect collaboration revenue to remain a significantly smaller portion of our total revenues in future periods due to the conclusion or termination of the substantial majority of our previous collaboration agreements.
Revenue Mix and Gross Margin
Our product revenue is derived from sales of nCounter and GeoMx DSP instruments and related consumables. Generally, our consumables have higher gross margins than our instruments. Our GeoMx DSP instruments, which commenced shipping during 2019, contribute a higher average gross margin as compared to our nCounter instrument platforms. There may be fluctuations in sales mix between instruments and consumables from period to period.
Our future gross margins may vary from period to period depending upon the composition of revenue among our platforms, as well as our overall sales mix. For example, if consumables constitute a larger percentage of total product revenue, such a mix shift may increase our gross margins. Such gross margin increases may be offset by the mix of consumable products sold, the introduction of new instrument product platforms that become increasing components of our product sales, such as CosMx SMI, or investment in additional manufacturing capacity to support the growth of our business. In certain regions outside of the US, we sell through distribution partners who typically receive discounted prices. Future instrument selling prices and gross margins may fluctuate as we grow our volume of distribution partners in geographies outside of the United States, as we introduce new products and reduce our product costs, and from variability in the timing of new product introductions.
We will continue to employ other growth strategies in addition to introducing new product platforms, including expanding our sales channel in both direct and distributor territories, developing new consumable content for our product platforms and enhancing certain features of our product platforms. As part of this strategy we have added incremental sales territories and augmented our field sales team, and have continued to grow our base of distribution partners.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Instrument revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased as compared to the prior year, due primarily to increased commercial shipments of our GeoMx DSP system. For 2020, GeoMx DSP and nCounter instrument shipments were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 global pandemic, where certain of our customers experienced full or partial closures of their operations or facilities, which reduced their ability to complete purchases or receive product shipments.
Consumables revenue includes sales of consumables for both nCounter and GeoMx DSP, and also includes sales of Prosigna in vitro diagnostic kits to our partner Veracyte. Consumables revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 due primarily to growth of GeoMx DSP consumables, which was driven by our larger GeoMx DSP installed base as well as higher consumables sales per installed GeoMx DSP system as compared to 2020. In addition, our nCounter consumables revenue increased in 2021, as we experienced improvement in customer lab activity and more consistent purchasing patterns from customers during most periods of 2021 as compared to 2020. Our consumables revenue was more significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, where our customers’ ability to access their laboratories to conduct research, complete purchases and receive product shipments was more limited as compared to 2021. The pandemic, and the resulting lower customer activity, had the most significant impact on our nCounter consumables revenue during the second quarter of 2020. In 2021, while customer activity and consumables sales recovered, consumables sales per installed system for nCounter have not recovered to levels recorded prior to 2020 due to the continued impact of the pandemic, more specifically in certain of our larger pharmaceutical industry customers that are focused on oncology-related biomarker studies in human clinical trials and where enrollment in certain trials using nCounter has continued to lag pre-pandemic levels.
Service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased as compared to 2020, due to growth in the installed bases and the corresponding GeoMx DSP and nCounter service contracts as compared to 2020, as well as increased revenue generated from our GeoMx DSP TAP, as compared to 2020.
During 2020 and 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our ability to solicit and fulfill customer orders and record related product and service revenue. While all revenue categories have been impacted due to lab closures and lower customer activity, nCounter-related consumables revenue has been impacted most substantively, given our higher installed base of nCounter systems. The business effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have more recently shown improvement, and we have begun to see resumption in customer activity. However, a resurgence of COVID-19 or a variant thereof, such as the Delta and Omicron variants, could recur at any time, with a resulting negative impact on our business. To the extent there is a resurgence in cases of COVID-19 (or a variant thereof), we expect any such resurgence to have a negative impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research and our ability to actively engage with our customers and receive and fulfill customer orders. As in the past, we would expect our revenue to be negatively impacted overall, and our consumables revenue to be more severely impacted as consumables revenue more closely correlates with day-to-day customer research activity. However, we cannot predict with any certainty the extent to which any resurgence in COVID-19 or a variant thereof would impact our business, and it is possible that the effects of such a resurgence would have different or more severe impacts on our business than we have experienced in the past.
With consideration to these potential negative impacts on our business related to COVID-19, we expect our product and service revenue may continue to increase in future periods, as a result of the growth in sales of GeoMx DSP and related consumables, the launch of CosMx SMI and related consumables, and the introduction of new GeoMx DSP and nCounter consumables, services, or other products.
Collaboration revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, due primarily to decreased activity levels associated with our Lam collaboration which was fully funded by the end of 2019 and all remaining revenue was recognized during 2020. We recognized no collaboration revenue related to our agreement with Lam in 2021 and $4.8 million of collaboration revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue; Gross Profit; and Gross Margin
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of product revenue increased as compared to 2020, due to increased costs associated with increased commercial sales and shipments of GeoMx DSP and nCounter systems, and investments made to support growth of our consumable manufacturing capabilities. Cost of service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased as compared to 2020 due primarily to increased costs associated with providing service for our growing installed based of systems and additional costs incurred to support our GeoMx DSP TAP.
Our gross margin on product and service revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was comparable to 2020, as the favorable gross margin impact of increased consumables revenue in the current year was offset by increased sales of GeoMx DSP instruments, which have a lower gross margin as compared to consumables, as well as by investments made in our manufacturing capacity, increased costs associated with providing our GeoMx DSP TAP services, and increased costs associated with service contracts and product warranties resulting from our growing instrument installed bases.
With consideration to the potential negative impact any future resurgence of COVID-19 (or a variant thereof) may have on our business, which may impact our product and service revenue growth and the related costs incurred, we expect our cost of product and service revenue to increase in future periods. These potential increases would be coincident with anticipated growth in sales of GeoMx DSP instruments, nCounter and GeoMx consumables and our TAP services, as well as the expected launch of our CosMx SMI instrument and related consumables. We also expect to continue making investments in our operations to support the growth of our business.
We expect our gross margin on product and service revenue may fluctuate in future periods. Variability will depend in part on the level of our consumables revenue, for which we operate the manufacturing process directly, as well as on our mix of instrument sales, for which we typically record lower gross margins, as compared to our sales of consumable products. Our gross margins may also vary depending on potential expenses we may incur for regulatory compliance, quality assurance or activities related to the expansion of our manufacturing capacity. In addition, as business activity begins to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, the cost and global availability of certain raw materials and other supplies have been impacted. While to date our operations, supply chain or costs have not been materially impacted, our gross margins could be affected in the future by changes in the cost or availability of certain raw materials or supplies. Notwithstanding the foregoing, we expect our gross
margins may increase in the longer term as consumable sales become a larger percentage of our total revenue, which may lead to greater absorption of our investment in fixed manufacturing costs.
Research and Development Expense
The increase in research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 is due primarily to higher personnel-related costs and consulting costs related to the development of our CosMx SMI platform, as well as continued development of new features and improvements associated with our GeoMx DSP instrument.
We expect research and development expense may increase in future periods, reflecting the impact of increasing investments in GeoMx DSP, CosMx SMI and other future projects and technologies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
The increase in selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, is due primarily to increased investments made to expand our commercial sales team to support our spatial biology-related commercial initiatives, as well as increases in stock compensation expense, investments in software and professional fees. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in certain state and local taxes for which we received a partial refund of previously paid amounts, as well as lower travel and trade show related costs resulting from reduced activities due to ongoing impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.
With consideration to the potential negative impact any future resurgence of COVID-19 (or a variant thereof) may have on our business, which may impact our product and service revenue growth and the related costs incurred, we expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods as the number of sales, technical support, marketing and administrative personnel grows to support the expected growth in our business and the introduction of new products and product platforms.
Other Income (Expense), net
Interest income decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, due primarily to lower investment yields in our portfolio of fixed income investments. We continue to maintain a cash preservation investment strategy and, as a result, held the majority of our cash and cash equivalents in money market or other short duration fixed income positions for which yields were very low. In general, investment yields have been constrained by the COVID-19 pandemic and other broader macroeconomic conditions, and we expect this trend may continue until there are more clear signs of general economic recovery and stability.
Interest expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 due primarily to lower effective interest rates compared to the “as adjusted” period in 2020. The prior period adjustments reflect our adoption of ASU 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) effective January 1, 2021, and in turn resulted in a one-time adjustment to eliminate certain non-cash interest expense
recorded in the prior year related to our outstanding convertible debt. In addition, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded lower amortization of certain debt issuance costs compared to the “as adjusted” prior period, also resulting from the adoption of ASU 2020-06.
Other expense, net was not material for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expense, net was comprised primarily of certain expenses for pending state and local tax obligations, as well as the unfavorable impact of fair value declines associated with our previous holdings of Veracyte common stock. There was no similar activity for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In conjunction with closing our convertible debt financing, we terminated our existing term loan facility with Capital Royalty Group and our revolving credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and as a result we recorded a one-time charge of $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing certain fees and prepayment penalties associated with these facilities. These costs were included in loss on extinguishment of debt and termination of revolving loan facility as presented above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Changes in Cash Flow
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities in 2021 consisted of our net loss of $115.3 million and net increases in our operating assets and liabilities of $16.5 million, partially offset by $41.2 million of net non-cash income and expense items, such stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, increased provisions for inventory obsolescence and bad debts and amortization of right-of-use assets.
Net cash used in operating activities in 2020 consisted of our net loss of $110.1 million and net increases in our operating assets and liabilities of $14.5 million. Included in our 2020 net loss were $43.0 million of net non-cash expense items such as the loss on extinguishment of debt, payment of accrued interest on the 2018 Term Loan, stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of our right-of-use assets, deferred interest costs; and provisions for inventory obsolescence and bad debt.
Investing Activities
Our most significant investing activities for 2021 and 2020, were related to the purchase, maturity and sale of short-term investments. Because we manage our cash usage with respect to our total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, we do not consider cash flows related to management of our short-term investments to be important to an understanding of our liquidity and capital resources.
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we purchased property and equipment totaling $6.3 million and $7.5 million respectively, which we believe will be required to support the growth and expansion of our operations.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 consisted primarily of $6.3 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options and other equity awards and our Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds of $222.6 million from the issuance of 2.625% Convertible Senior Notes, net proceeds of $215.8 million from an underwritten public offering of our common stock, and $18.9 million of net proceeds from the vesting and exercise of employee stock awards and from proceeds associated with our Employee Stock Purchase Plan. These cash inflows were partially offset by payments related to the termination of our term loan agreement and revolving loan facility of $84.8 million.
Short-term Investments
Our cash, cash equivalents, and investments are held in a variety of non-interest bearing bank accounts and interest-bearing instruments subject to investment guidelines allowing for holdings in U.S. government and agency securities, corporate securities, taxable municipal bonds, commercial paper and money market accounts. Our investment portfolio is structured to provide for investment maturities and access to cash to fund our anticipated working capital needs. However, if our liquidity needs should be accelerated for any reason in the near term, or investments do not pay at maturity, we may be required to sell investment securities in our portfolio prior to their scheduled maturities, which may result in a loss.
Convertible Notes
In March 2020, we issued $230.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 2.625% Convertible Senior Notes due 2025, or the Convertible Notes, in a private offering. The Convertible Notes are governed by an indenture dated March 9, 2020 between us and U.S. Bank, National Association, as trustee. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate of 2.625% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1, beginning on September 1, 2020. Upon conversion, the Convertible Notes will be convertible into cash, shares of common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at our election. We may not redeem the Convertible Notes prior to March 5, 2023, and no sinking fund is provided for the Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes do not contain any financial or operating covenants or any restrictions on the issuance of other indebtedness or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us. See Note 10. Long-Term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.
Equity Financings
In October 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of 5,750,000 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 750,000 additional shares of common stock. Our total gross proceeds were $230.0 million. After underwriters’ commissions and other expenses of the offering, our aggregate net proceeds were approximately $215.8 million.
In March 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering of 3,175,000 shares of our common stock, including the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 675,000 additional shares of common stock. An additional 2,000,000 shares were sold by a related party stockholder. Our total gross proceeds were $73.0 million. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock by the related party stockholder. After underwriter’s commissions and other expenses of the offering, and net of proceeds received by the related party stockholder, our aggregate net proceeds were approximately $68.3 million.
2019 Sale of Business
In December 2019, we entered into a License and Asset Purchase Agreement, or LAPA, and service and supply agreements, or SSAs, with Veracyte, Inc, or Veracyte. Pursuant to the LAPA, we completed a license of intellectual property and a sale of certain assets to Veracyte relating to our nCounter FLEX system for use in clinical diagnostic applications. For additional information regarding our agreement with Veracyte, see Item 1. Business - License Agreements - Veracyte, Inc.
Financial Condition
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities, borrowings under term loan agreements and convertible notes, licensing of intellectual property and, to a lesser extent, sales of certain assets. As of December 31, 2021, we held cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $348.9 million, compared to $440.7 million as of December 31, 2020.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and cash generated from operations will be sufficient to meet these material cash requirements and fund our operating requirements for the next 12 months and beyond, including working capital requirements, capital expenditures and other operational investments.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our ability to solicit and fulfill customer orders and record related product and service revenue at levels comparable to historical periods. We believe the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are beginning to
subside. However, to the extent the COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a negative impact on our customers’ ability to conduct research or our ability to actively engage with our customers and take or fulfill customer orders, we expect our revenues, and consequently our liquidity and capital resources, in the near term may be negatively impacted. We cannot predict with any certainty if, or how quickly, our customers will return to previous levels of activity or product order levels, or our ability to resume our activities and operations at levels consistent with past performance. Until the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic more fully subside, we expect our near term revenues, as well as our use of our liquidity and capital resources, to be negatively impacted.
Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Any future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including: the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on our customer and operational activity; market acceptance and the level of sales of our existing products and new product candidates; the nature and timing of any additional research, product development or other partnerships or collaborations we may establish; the cost and timing of establishing additional sales, marketing, and distribution capabilities; the cost of our research and development activities; the cost and timing of regulatory clearances or approvals; the effect of competing technological and market developments; and the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions. We may require additional funds in the future and we may not be able to obtain such funds on acceptable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt or additional equity financing that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through partnership, collaboration or licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or our products, or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. If we are unable to raise adequate funds, we may have to liquidate some or all of our assets; delay or reduce the scope of or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs, launch activities, or commercialization of our products; license to third parties the rights to commercialize products or technologies that we would otherwise seek to commercialize; reduce marketing, customer support or other resources devoted to our products; or cease operations.
Material Cash Requirements
Our principal uses of cash are funding our operations, capital expenditures, working capital requirements and satisfaction of any outstanding obligations under our debt agreements. Over the past several years, our product and service revenue has increased significantly from year to year and, as a result, our cash flows from customer collections have increased. Our operating expenses have also increased as we have invested in our sales and marketing activities and in research and development of new product platforms and technologies that we believe have the potential to drive the long-term growth of our business.
Our material cash requirements for fiscal 2022 include non-cancelable purchase commitments for long-lead time inventory, research and development items, software development for internal-use projects and property and equipment; lease payments for office, laboratory and manufacturing space; and interest payments related to our convertible notes. We expect capital expenditures to increase in fiscal year 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021, primarily related to investments in manufacturing capacity, and in software development for internal-use projects. As of December 31, 2021, we had future long-term interest payment obligations of $21.1 million, of which $6.0 million is payable within 12 months and total operating and financing lease obligations of $32.3 million, of which $6.9 million is payable within 12 months. In addition, our purchase commitments as of December 31, 2021 are $54.9 million, of which $43.8 million is payable within 12 months. See Note 5. Leases and Note 10. Long-term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.
Our material cash requirements may increase in the future as we invest in research and development related to existing or new product platforms, as well as in manufacturing capacity, sales and marketing and administrative activities. We cannot be certain our revenue will grow sufficiently to offset our operating expense increases. As a result, we may need to raise additional funds to support our operations, and such funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, our operations and ability to execute our business strategy could be adversely affected.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting policies and estimates include those related to:
•revenue recognition;
•stock-based compensation;
•inventory valuation;
•fair value measurements; and
•income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
We generate the majority of our revenue from sales of products and services. Our products consist of our nCounter Analysis System and GeoMx DSP system, and related consumables. Services consist of instrument service contracts and service fees for assay processing.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract price to the distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. Performance obligations are considered satisfied once control of a product or service has transferred to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the product or service. Revenue is recognized for satisfied performance obligations only when there are no uncertainties regarding payment terms or transfer of control.
Revenue from instruments and consumables, including in vitro diagnostic kits, is recognized generally upon shipment to the end customer, which is when control of the product has been transferred to the customer. Performance obligations related to instrument sales are reviewed on a contract-by-contract basis, as individual contract terms may vary, and may include installation and calibration services. Such services can also be provided by our distribution partners and other third parties. Performance obligations for consumable products are generally completed upon shipment to the customer.
Instrument service contracts are sold with contract terms ranging from 12-36 months and cover periods after the end of the initial 12-month warranty. These contracts include services to maintain performance within our designed specifications and a minimum of one preventative maintenance service procedure per year during the contract term. Revenue from services to maintain designed specifications is considered a stand-ready obligation and recognized evenly over the contract term and service revenue related to preventative maintenance of instruments is recognized when the procedure is completed. Revenue from service fees for assay processing is recognized upon the rendering of the related performance obligation.
For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract price in proportion to each performance obligation’s stand-alone selling price. We use our best estimate of stand-alone selling price for our products and services based on historical sales and adjusted for similar products, geographies, and differences in customers and review our stand-alone prices annually.
Product and service revenues from sales to customers through distributors are recognized consistent with the policies and practices for direct sales to customers, as described above.
We have historically entered into collaboration agreements that may generate upfront fees, and may enter into such agreements in the future, and in some cases subsequent milestone payments that may be earned upon completion of certain product development milestones or other designated activities. We are able to estimate the total expected cost of product development and other services under these arrangements and recognize collaboration revenue using a contingency-adjusted proportional performance model. Costs incurred to date compared to total expected costs are used to determine proportional performance, as this is considered to be representative of the delivery of outputs under the arrangements. Revenue recognized at any point in time is limited to cash received, amounts contractually due, or the amounts of any product development or other contractual milestone payments when achievement of a milestone is deemed to be probable. Changes in estimates of total expected collaboration product development or other costs are accounted for prospectively as a change in estimate. From period to period, collaboration revenue can fluctuate substantially based on the achievement or probable achievement of product development or other milestones, or as estimates of total expected collaboration product development or other costs are changed or updated. We may recognize revenue from collaboration agreements that do not include upfront or milestone-based payments.
Amounts due to collaboration partners are recognized when the related activities have occurred and are classified in the statement of operations, generally as research and development expense, based on the nature of the related activities.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation at fair value. Stock-based compensation costs for restricted stock units, or RSUs, and for performance stock units, or PSUs, are recognized based on their grant date fair value estimated using the intrinsic method. Stock-based compensation costs for stock option awards are recognized based on their grant date fair value estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Stock-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations is based on awards ultimately expected to vest using actual forfeitures when incurred. We use the straight-line method of allocating compensation cost over the requisite service period of the related award, for awards with only service-based vesting requirements. For awards with service and performance-based vesting requirements, we use an accelerated method of allocating compensation cost, over the vesting period. The percentage achievement and vesting of PSU awards are contingent upon the achievement of predetermined performance goals, which include tiered revenue targets. We record compensation expense over the estimated service period for each performance goal when we believe the performance goal is considered probable, which we assess at each reporting date. Once a performance goal is considered probable, we record compensation expense ratably over the estimated service period. Any updates to our estimates during the service period are recorded cumulatively and remaining compensation expense, if any, is recognized over the remaining estimated service period.
We have transitioned from granting stock options awards to primarily granting RSUs and PSUs, however, we may grant stock options in the future. Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date under the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires judgment, including estimating the value per share of our common stock, risk-free interest rate, expected term and dividend yield and volatility. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates based on management judgment and subjective future expectations. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model significantly change, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially from the awards granted previously.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory consists of raw materials, certain component parts to be used in manufacturing our products, and finished goods. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or market. Cost is determined using a standard cost system, whereby the standard costs are updated periodically to reflect current costs and market represents the lower of replacement cost or estimated net realizable value. We record adjustments to inventory for potentially excess, obsolete, slow-moving, or impaired items. The business environment in which we operate is subject to rapid changes in technology and customer demand. We regularly review inventory for excess and obsolete products and components taking into account product life cycle and development plans, product expiration and quality issues, historical experience, and our current inventory levels. If actual market conditions are less favorable than anticipated, additional inventory adjustments could be required.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The recorded amounts of certain financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable and accrued liabilities approximate fair value due to their relatively short maturities. Investments that are classified as available-for-sale are recorded at fair value. The fair value for debt securities held is determined using quoted market prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. The recorded amount of our long-term debt approximates fair value because the related interest rates approximate rates currently available to us.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the liability method. Under the liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and income tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the tax rates that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is recorded when it is more likely than not that some of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We determine whether a tax position is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the tax amount recognized in the financial statements is reduced by the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this report.