Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a Minnesota, United States based full-service global EMS contract manufacturer in the Medical, Aerospace & Defense and Industrial markets offering a full range of value-added engineering, technical and manufacturing services and support including project management, design, testing, prototyping, manufacturing, supply chain management and post-market services. Our products are complex electromedical and electromechanical products including medical devices, wire and cable assemblies, printed circuit board assemblies, higher-level assemblies, and other box builds for a wide range of industries. We serve three major markets within the EMS industry: Aerospace and Defense, Medical, and the Industrial market which includes industrial capital equipment, transportation, vision, agriculture, oil and gas. As of December 31, 2020, we have facilities in Minnesota: Bemidji, Blue Earth, Mankato, Milaca and Maple Grove. We also have facilities in Monterrey, Mexico and Suzhou, China.
Our revenue is derived from complex designed products built to the customers’ specifications. The products we manufacture are engineered and designed products that require sophisticated manufacturing support. Quality, on time delivery, and reliability are of upmost importance. Our goal is to expand and diversify our customer base by focusing on sales and marketing efforts that fit our value-added service, early engagement design, and development strategy. We continue to focus on lean manufacturing initiatives, quality and on-time delivery improvements to increase asset utilization, reduce lead times and provide competitive pricing.
Our strategic investments have positioned us to capitalize on growth opportunities in the medical markets and improve our competitiveness by expanding our global footprint. Our industrial and defense markets are focused on improving our asset utilization and profitability while transforming to a value added, solution-sell business model that supports early engagement, design for manufacturability and rapid prototyping.
Recent Developments
Global Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization recognized the outbreak of a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) as a pandemic. While the COVID-19 pandemic has had an impact on our operations, we have been able to continue to operate our manufacturing facilities and provide essential services to our customers. Additionally, in an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees and in compliance with state regulations, we have instituted a work-from-home policy for employees who can perform their job functions offsite, implemented social distancing requirements and other measures to allow manufacturing and other personnel essential to production to continue work within our manufacturing facilities, and suspended all non-essential employee travel.
The full extent to which COVID-19 will directly or indirectly impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. The ultimate impact of COVID-19 depends on factors beyond our knowledge or control, including the duration and severity of the outbreak, as well as third-party actions taken to contain its spread and mitigate its public health effects. As a result, we are unable to estimate the extent to which COVID-19 will negatively impact our financial results or liquidity.
We will continue to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, and results of operations. We actively manage our cash and working capital to preserve adequate liquidity and ensure that our business can continue to operate during these uncertain times.
Facility Consolidation
To further improve operational efficiencies and lower overhead costs, the Company approved on August 7, 2020, the closure of our Merrifield, Minnesota, production facility, shifting wire and cable assembly, system-level assembly and printed circuit board (PCB) manufacturing to Nortech’s other Minnesota locations. The Merrifield production facility consolidation was completed in the first quarter of 2021, and impacted approximately 60 employees, who were offered positions at other Nortech facilities in Minnesota. This closure did not qualify for held for sale nor discontinued operations accounting.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of our consolidated financial statements, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods presented, as well as our disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions, including, but not limited to, long-lived assets impairment, allowance for doubtful accounts and inventory reserves.
We base our estimates and assumptions on our historical experience and on various other information available to us at the time that these estimates and assumptions are made. We believe that these estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the circumstances and form the basis for our making judgments about the carrying values of our assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and outcomes could differ from our estimates primarily due to incorrect sales forecasting. We utilize a pipeline generated by our sales team and speak directly with all departments regarding estimates and assumptions. If, for any reason, those estimates, and assumptions vary substantially it would also impact our financial results.
Our significant accounting policies are described in “Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following discussion addresses our critical accounting policies and reflects those areas that require more significant judgments and use of estimates and assumptions in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is comprised of product, engineering services and repair services. All revenue is recognized when the Company satisfies its performance obligation(s) under the contract by transferring the promised product or service to our customer either when (or as) our customer obtains control of the product or service, with the majority of our revenue being recognized over time including goods produced under contract manufacturing agreements and services revenue. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct product or service to a customer. A contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation. Revenue is recorded net of returns, allowances and customer discounts. Our net sales for services were less than 10% of our total sales for all periods presented, and accordingly, are included in net sales in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income. Sales, value add, and other taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are accounted for on a net (excluded from revenues) basis. Shipping and handling costs charged to our customers are included in net sales, while the corresponding shipping expenses are included in cost of goods sold.
Long-Lived Assets Impairment
We evaluate long-lived assets, primarily property and equipment, whenever current events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability for assets to be held and used is based on our projection of the undiscounted future operating cash flows of the underlying assets. To the extent such projections indicate that future undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover the carrying amounts of related assets, a charge might be required to reduce the carrying amount to equal estimated fair value. In 2020, we did evaluate that there was a triggering event, largely driven by the impacts of COVID-19, that indicated that the carrying amount of the asset group may not be recoverable. We performed the recoverability test and determined there was no impairment at December 31, 2020. In 2021, we evaluated that we did not have a triggering event occur. See Note 4, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
When evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts, we analyze accounts receivable, historical write-offs of bad debts, customer concentrations, customer credit-worthiness, current economic trends and changes in customer payment terms. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts at an amount estimated to be sufficient to provide adequate protection against losses resulting from collecting less than full payment on outstanding accounts receivable. An amount of judgment is required when assessing the ability to realize accounts receivable, including assessing the probability of collection and the current credit-worthiness of each customer. If the financial condition of our customers was to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, an additional provision for uncollectible accounts may be required. We believe the reserve is adequate for any exposure to loss in the December 31, 2021 accounts receivable. At December 31, 2021, our allowance for doubtful accounts was $0.3 million.
Inventory Reserves
Inventory reserves are maintained for the estimated value of the inventory that may have a lower value than stated or quantities in excess of future production needs. We have an evaluation process to assess the value of the inventory that is slow moving, excess or obsolete on a quarterly basis. We evaluate our inventory based on current usage and the latest forecasts of product demand and production requirements from our customers. We believe the total reserve at December 31, 2021 of $1.3 million is adequate.
Operating Results
The following table presents our statements of operations data as percentages of total net sales for the years indicated:
Net Sales
Our net sales in 2021 were $115.2 million, compared to $104.1 million in 2020, an increase of $11.1 million or 10.7% that was driven by increases in our industrial and medical markets. The industrial market increased by $7.1 million or 25.0% in 2021 as compared to 2020. The medical market increased by $8.0 million or 14.5% with medical devices accounting for 22% of the increase and medical component products 78% of the increase. Net sales from the aerospace and defense markets decreased by $4.0 million or 19.4% in 2021 as compared to 2020. The overall revenue improvement was primarily due to higher production volume resulting from actions to scale the direct labor workforce and strengthen the supply chain for parts.
Net sales by our major EMS industry markets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Net sales by timing of transfer of goods and services for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2010 are as follows (in millions):
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Backlog
Our 90-day backlog at December 31, 2021 increased to $36.9 million as compared to $24.3 million at the end of 2020. The 90-day backlog by our major EMS industry markets are as follows:
Our 90-day backlog varies due to order size, manufacturing delays, inventory programs, contract terms and conditions and changes in timing of customer delivery schedules and releases. These variables cause inconsistencies in comparing the backlog from one period to the next. Our total shipment backlog was $95.0 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $48.7 million at the end of December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit as a percentage of net sales was 13.8% and 9.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The gross profit improvement relates primarily to the $4.7 million reduction in payroll and medical expenses related to the ERC and from an increase in utilization as a result of the sales increase.
Selling
Selling expenses were $2.4 million, or 2.0% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $2.5 million, or 2.4% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $10.0 million, or 8.7% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $9.3 million, or 8.9% of net sales, for the year ended 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses compared to the prior year relates to an increase in professional service fees.
Restructuring Charges
Restructuring charges related to the closure of the Merrifield facility were $0.3 million or 0.3% of net sales for year ended December 31, 2021. There were no restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expenses were $0.5 million or 0.4% of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021. There were minimal to no research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impairment of Goodwill
The loss on impairment of goodwill was $0 and $2.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In our impairment test of goodwill in the fourth quarter of 2020, we concluded that goodwill was impaired due to a significant reduction of results from operations during the fourth quarter of 2020 largely a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See Note 4, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets.
Loss on Abandonment of Intangible Asset
Abandonment charges were approximately $0.6 million or 0.5% of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021. There were no abandonment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020. The charges relate to the abandonment of the Devicix tradename.
Gain on Sale of Property and Equipment
The gain on sale of property and equipment was $0.1 million and $3.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This 2020 gain was due to the sale leaseback transaction relating to the manufacturing facilities in Bemidji and Mankato, Minnesota.
Income (Loss) from Operations
Our income from operations for the 2021 fiscal year was $2.3 million, an increase of $2.9 million from the 2020 fiscal year loss of $0.6 million. Income from operations was positively affected by the 2021 employee retention credits of $5.2 million along with increased utilization as a result of increased sales.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.4 million, compared with $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Loan Forgiveness
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we received forgiveness from the Small Business Association (SBA) for the $6.1 million Promissory Note under the PPP. We recorded a PPP loan forgiveness gain of $6.2 million which is included in other income (expense) on the consolidated statement of operations and other comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.9 million. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.3 million. The effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was 12.0% and 20%, respectively. Our 2021 tax rate was driven by the nontaxable PPP loan forgiveness. Our 2020 tax rate was driven by the nontaxable goodwill impairment loss, the tax on global intangible low-taxed income provisions and additional valuation allowance created due to deferred tax assets generated in 2020.
The statutory reconciliation for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows (in millions):
Net Income (Loss)
Our net income in 2021 was $7.2 million or $2.54 per diluted common share and $2.68 per basic common share. Our net loss in 2020 was $1.5 million or $(0.58) per diluted and basic common share.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our existing financing arrangements, anticipated cash flows from operations, funds expected to be received for the ERC and cash on hand will be sufficient to satisfy our working capital needs, capital expenditures and debt repayments.
Credit Facility
We have a credit agreement with Bank of America which was entered into on June 15, 2017 and provides for a line of credit arrangement of $16,000 that was to expire on June 15, 2022. On December 31, 2021, we renewed the credit agreement through June 15, 2026.
Under the Bank of America credit agreement, the line of credit is subject to variations in the Bloomberg Short-Term Bank Yield (BSBY) index rate. Our line of credit bears interest at a weighted-average interest rate of 3.5% and 4.0% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We had borrowings on our line of credit of $9.0 million and $3.3 million outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. There are no subjective acceleration clauses under the credit agreement that would accelerate the maturity of our outstanding borrowings. The line of credit is shown net of debt issuance costs of $57 thousand on the consolidated balance sheet for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The line of credit with Bank of America contains certain covenants which, among other things, require us to adhere to regular reporting requirements, abide by shareholder dividend limitations, maintain certain financial performance, and limit the amount of annual capital expenditures.
The Bank of America Credit Agreement provides for, among other things, a Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio of not less than 1.0 to 1.0, for the twelve months ending December 31, 2021 and each Fiscal Quarter end thereafter subject only during a trigger period commencing when our availability under our line is less than $2.0 million until availability is above that amount for 30 days. The Company met the covenants for the period ended December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had unused availability under our line of credit of $3.5 million and $8.1 million, respectively, supported by our borrowing base. The line is secured by substantially all of our assets. In the first quarter of 2022, we amended our credit agreement to include the Employee Retention Credit Receivable as security in our line of credit which improves our unused availability.
On April 15, 2020, we entered into a Promissory Note with Bank of America, N.A., which provides for an unsecured loan of $6.1 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act and applicable regulations (the “CARES Act”) of which funds were received on April 22, 2020. The loan was accounted for as debt until November 3, 2021 when the $6.1 million loan and $0.1 million accrued interest was fully forgiven by the SBA. As a result, we recorded a PPP loan forgiveness gain of $6.2 which is included in other income (expense) on the consolidated statements of operations and other comprehensive income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our China operation has a financing agreement with China Construction Bank which provides for a line of credit arrangement of 10,000,000 Renminbi (RMB) (approximately 1.6 million USD) that will expire on June 22, 2022. This line of credit bears an interest rate of 4.5% and we had no amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized as follows:
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.6 million compared to cash provided by operations of $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Increases in working capital due to higher sales backlog as well as actions taken to address the global supply chain shortages drove the use of cash from operating activities, primarily increased inventories of $4.6 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and net cash provided by investing activities was $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities in 2021 relates primarily to the purchase of $1.3 million of property and equipment offset by the sale of $0.6 million of property and equipment related to the Merrifield plant closure. Cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was due to the $6.0 million received from our sales leaseback transaction.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 of $3.9 million consisted primarily of increased borrowing on the line of credit of $5.7 million offset by payments on long-term debt and capital leases or $1.7 million. The cash used of $3.8 million in 2020 consisted primarily of the paydown of debt from funds received from our sales leaseback.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Item 7, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We may also make forward-looking statements in other reports filed with the SEC, in materials delivered to stockholders and in press releases. Such statements generally will be accompanied by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “intend,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” or other similar words that convey the uncertainty of future events or outcomes. Although we believe these forward-looking statements are reasonable, they are based upon a number of assumptions concerning future conditions, any or all of which may ultimately prove to be inaccurate. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the forward-looking statements include, without limitation:
♦ Volatility in the marketplace which may affect market supply, demand of our products or currency exchange rates;
♦ Increased competition from within the EMS industry or the decision of OEMs to cease or limit outsourcing;
♦ Changes in the reliability and efficiency of our operating facilities or those of third parties;
♦ Risks related to availability of labor;
♦ Increases in certain raw material costs such as copper and oil;
♦ Commodity and energy cost instability;
♦ Risks related to FDA noncompliance;
♦ The loss of a major customer;
♦ General economic, financial and business conditions that could affect our financial condition and results of operations;
♦ Increased or unanticipated costs related to compliance with securities and environmental regulation;
♦ Disruption of global or local information management systems due to natural disaster or cyber-security incident;
♦ Outbreaks of epidemic, pandemic, or contagious diseases, such as the recent novel coronavirus that affect our operations, our customers' operations or our suppliers' operations.
The factors identified above are believed to be important factors (but not necessarily all of the important factors) that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statement made by us. Discussion of these factors is also incorporated in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” and should be considered an integral part of Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” Unpredictable or unknown factors not discussed herein could also have material adverse effects on forward-looking statements. All forward-looking statements included in this Form 10-K are expressly qualified in their entirety by the forgoing cautionary statements. We undertake no obligations to update publicly any forward-looking statement (or its associated cautionary language) whether as a result of new information or future events.