ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations (MD&A) of Northern Trust Corporation (Corporation) for the year ended December 31, 2021. The following should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related footnotes included in this report. Investors also should read the section entitled “Forward-Looking Statements.”
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
The Corporation is a leading provider of wealth management, asset servicing, asset management and banking solutions to corporations, institutions, families and individuals. The Corporation focuses on managing and servicing client assets through its two client-focused reporting segments: Corporate & Institutional Services (C&IS) and Wealth Management. Asset management and related services are provided to C&IS and Wealth Management clients primarily by the Asset Management business.
The Corporation conducts business through various U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries, including The Northern Trust Company (the Bank). The Corporation was formed as a holding company for the Bank in 1971. The Corporation has a global presence with offices in 23 U.S. states and Washington, D.C., and across 23 locations in Canada, Europe, the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region. Except where the context requires otherwise, the terms “Northern Trust,” “we,” “us,” “our,” “its,” or similar terms refers to the Corporation and its subsidiaries on a consolidated basis.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC AND RECENT EVENTS
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Northern Trust has remained focused on the health and well-being of its workforce, meeting its clients’ needs and supporting its communities. The majority of Northern Trust’s workforce continues to work remotely and the Corporation continues to adjust its response to the pandemic as needed. The timing of any return to office for our workforce will be driven by the operational, business, and client needs of each location, and will be guided by health and safety guidelines and relevant government mandates. In addition, as the prolonged public health crisis has unfolded, Northern Trust has responded by providing additional health and well-being resources to its employees, including expanded virtual access to health care and well-being programs and diversity, equity, and inclusion resources; a well-being learning center with tools for working effectively in a virtual environment; and virtual focus groups allowing employees to provide feedback and build connections with colleagues. Northern Trust also provided additional paid-time-off for a COVID-19 diagnosis and supported all employees electing to receive the COVID-19 vaccine with additional paid-time-off to obtain and recover from the primary series vaccine or booster shot. To facilitate COVID-19 vaccinations in India and the Philippines, Northern Trust hosted on-site vaccine drives (in India) and participated in a program which provided access to vaccines for our employees (in the Philippines). Northern Trust also reimbursed vaccine costs for employees and their immediate family members in India.
During the pandemic, Northern Trust offered credit assistance to impacted clients under a government lending program and provided payment deferrals. In addition, there have been two forms of relief provided to lenders exempting certain loan modifications which would otherwise be classified as troubled debt restructuring from such classification. Northern Trust elected to apply each of these forms of relief, when applicable, in providing borrowers with qualifying loan modifications, including payment deferrals, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Both of these assistance measures have declined since the start of the pandemic. For further information, please refer to Note 6, “Loans and Leases,” provided in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
30 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
TABLE 4: FINANCIAL HIGHLIGHTS
Net Income increased $336.0 million, or 28%, to $1.55 billion in 2021 from $1.21 billion in 2020. Earnings per diluted common share was $7.14 in 2021 compared to $5.46 in 2020. Return on average common equity increased to 13.9% in 2021 from 11.2% in 2020.
Revenue increased $363.7 million to $6.46 billion in 2021 from $6.10 billion in the prior year, primarily driven by increases in Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees of 9% and Other Operating Income of 26%, partially offset by a decrease in Net Interest Income of 4%.
Client assets under custody/administration (AUC/A) increased 12% from $14.53 trillion as of December 31, 2020 to $16.25 trillion as of December 31, 2021, primarily reflecting favorable markets and net inflows, partially offset by unfavorable currency translation. Client assets under custody, a component of AUC/A, increased 12% from $11.26 trillion as of December 31, 2020 to $12.61 trillion as of December 31, 2021. Client assets under custody included $8.24 trillion of global custody assets as of December 31, 2021, which increased 11% from $7.42 trillion as of December 31, 2020. Client assets under management increased 14% to $1.61 trillion as of December 31, 2021 from $1.41 trillion at December 31, 2020 due to favorable markets and net inflows.
The Provision for Credit Losses in 2021 was a release of credit reserves of $81.5 million as compared to a provision of $125.0 million in 2020. The release of credit reserves during 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis, which relates to pooled financial assets sharing similar risk characteristics, and was driven by improvements in projected economic conditions and portfolio credit quality, partially offset by portfolio growth. The decrease in the collective basis reserve was primarily reflected in the commercial and institutional portfolio. The prior-year provision primarily reflected an increase in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis. The increase in the collective basis reserve was primarily driven by current and projected economic conditions at the time and downgrades in the portfolio, both resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related market and economic impacts. Increases in the collective basis reserve were primarily in the commercial and institutional and commercial real estate portfolios. In addition, a $13.7 million increase in the allowance for credit losses, with a corresponding cumulative effect adjustment to decrease retained earnings by $10.1 million, net of income taxes, was recorded on January 1, 2020 upon adoption of the Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.”
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 31
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Noninterest Expense of $4.54 billion in 2021 increased $187.7 million, or 4%, from $4.35 billion in 2020, primarily reflecting increased Outside Services, Compensation, Equipment and Software and Employee Benefits, partially offset by lower Other Operating Expense and Occupancy. Employee Benefits expense in 2021 included pension settlement charges of $27.9 million.
The Provision for Income Taxes in 2021 totaled $464.8 million, representing an effective tax rate of 23.1%. The Provision for Income Taxes in 2020 totaled $418.3 million, representing an effective tax rate of 25.7%. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by the lower net tax impact from international operations and $26.8 million of prior-year tax expense related to the reversal of tax benefits previously recognized through earnings.
Northern Trust continued to maintain a strong capital position during 2021, with all capital ratios exceeding those required for classification as “well-capitalized” under federal bank regulatory capital requirements. For additional information, please refer to the “Capital Management” section.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following information summarizes our consolidated results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020. For a discussion related to the consolidated results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (2020 Form 10-K), which was filed with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission on February 23, 2021.
Revenue
Northern Trust generates the majority of its revenue from Noninterest Income that primarily consists of Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees. Net Interest Income comprises the remainder of revenue and consists of Interest Income generated by earning assets, net of Interest Expense on deposits and borrowed funds.
Revenue in 2021 of $6.46 billion increased $363.7 million, or 6%, from $6.10 billion in 2020. Noninterest Income represented 79% and 76% of total revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and totaled $5.08 billion in 2021, which increased $424.2 million, or 9%, from $4.66 billion in 2020.
Noninterest Income in 2021 increased primarily reflecting higher Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees and Other Operating Income. Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees of $4.36 billion in 2021 increased $366.1 million, or 9%, from $4.00 billion in 2020, primarily due to favorable markets and new business, partially offset by higher money market mutual fund fee waivers. Other Operating Income of $243.9 million in 2021 increased $49.9 million, or 26%, from $194.0 million in the prior year, primarily due to higher banking and credit-related service charges, distributions from investments in community development projects and gains from property sales.
Net Interest Income on a fully taxable equivalent (FTE) basis in 2021 of $1.42 billion decreased $59.3 million, or 4%, from $1.48 billion in 2020, due to a decreased net interest margin, partially offset by higher levels of average earning assets. The net interest margin on an FTE basis decreased to 0.99% in 2021 from 1.19% in 2020, primarily due to lower average interest rates, partially offset by favorable balance sheet volume and mix shift. Average earning assets increased $19.7 billion, or 16%, from $124.1 billion in 2020 to $143.9 billion in 2021, primarily reflecting higher levels of short-term interest bearing deposits, Securities, and Loans and Leases.
32 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Additional information regarding Northern Trust’s revenue by type is provided in the following table.
TABLE 5: REVENUE
(1) Net Interest Income stated on a GAAP basis. Net Interest Income on an FTE basis includes FTE adjustments of $35.6 million, $34.4 million, and $32.8 million for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. A reconciliation of total consolidated revenue, Net Interest Income and net interest margin on a GAAP basis to revenue, Net Interest Income and net interest margin on an FTE basis, respectively, (each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure) is provided in “Supplemental Information-Reconciliation to Fully Taxable Equivalent” within this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section.
Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees
Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees were $4.36 billion in 2021 compared with $4.00 billion in 2020, and are based primarily on the market value of assets held in custody, managed or serviced; the volume of transactions; securities lending volume and spreads; and fees for other services rendered. Certain market value calculations on which fees are based are performed on a monthly or quarterly basis in arrears. Low-interest-rate environments have historically had a negative impact on fees earned on certain products.
Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, the Corporation began to waive a portion of certain fees associated with money market mutual funds due to the low-interest-rate environment. Northern Trust voluntarily waived $287.8 million and $29.3 million of money market mutual fund fees for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These fee waivers are impacted by the level of yields earned and account balances in certain funds, as the yields in these funds remain insufficient to pay the stated fees associated with such funds. If the level of short-term interest rates were to increase as currently expected, fee waivers would likely decline.
The components of Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees are provided in the following table.
TABLE 6: TRUST, INVESTMENT AND OTHER SERVICING FEES
Corporate & Institutional Services
C&IS Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees are primarily attributable to services related to custody, fund administration, investment management, and securities lending. Custody and Fund Administration fees, the largest component of C&IS fees, are driven primarily by values of client assets under custody/administration, transaction volumes and the number of accounts. The asset values used to calculate these fees vary depending on the individual fee
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 33
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
arrangements negotiated with each client. Custody fees related to asset values are client specific and are priced based on month-end market values, quarter-end market values, or the average of month-end market values for the quarter. The fund administration fees that are asset-value-related are priced using month-end, quarter-end, or average daily balances. Investment Management fees are based generally on market values of client assets under management throughout the period. Typically, the asset values used to calculate fee revenue are based on a one-month or one-quarter lag.
Securities Lending revenue is affected by market values; the demand for securities to be lent, which drives volumes; and the interest rate spread earned on the investment of cash deposited by investment firms as collateral for securities they have borrowed. The other services fee category in C&IS includes such products as investment risk and analytical services, benefit payments, and other services. Revenue from these products is based generally on the volume of services provided or a fixed fee.
Custody and Fund Administration fees increased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to favorable markets, new business and favorable currency translation. Investment Management fees decreased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to higher money market mutual fund fee waivers, partially offset by favorable markets and new business.
The following tables provide a breakdown of the C&IS assets under custody and under management.
TABLE 7: C&IS ASSETS UNDER CUSTODY
TABLE 8: C&IS ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT
Cash and other assets deposited by investment firms as collateral for securities borrowed from custody clients are managed by Northern Trust and are included in assets under custody and under management. This securities lending collateral totaled $195.6 billion and $186.9 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Wealth Management
Wealth Management fee income is calculated primarily based on market values and is impacted by both one-month and one-quarter lagged asset values. Fee income in the regions (Central, East and West) increased from 2020 to 2021, primarily due to favorable markets and new business, partially offset by higher money market mutual fund fee waivers. Global Family Office fee income decreased slightly primarily due to higher money market mutual fund fee waivers, partially offset by favorable markets and new business. The following tables provide a summary of Wealth Management assets under custody and under management.
TABLE 9: WEALTH MANAGEMENT ASSETS UNDER CUSTODY
34 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
TABLE 10: WEALTH MANAGEMENT ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT
The Wealth Management regions shown are comprised of the following: Central includes Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio and Wisconsin; East includes Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, and Washington, D.C.; West includes Arizona, California, Colorado, Nevada, Texas and Washington. Global Family Office provides customized services, including but not limited to investment consulting, global custody, fiduciary, and private banking, to meet the complex financial needs of ultra-high-net-worth individuals and family offices across the globe.
Market Indices
The following tables present selected market indices and the percentage changes year over year to provide context regarding equity and fixed income market impacts on the Corporation’s results.
TABLE 11: EQUITY MARKET INDICES
TABLE 12: FIXED INCOME MARKET INDICES
Client Assets
Northern Trust, in the normal course of business, holds assets under custody/administration and management in a fiduciary or agency capacity for its clients. In accordance with GAAP, these assets are not assets of Northern Trust and are not included in its consolidated balance sheets. AUC/A and assets under management are a driver of our Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees. For the purposes of disclosing AUC/A, to the extent that both custody and administration services are provided, the value of the assets is included only once in this amount.
At December 31, 2021, AUC/A increased from December 31, 2020, primarily reflecting favorable markets and net inflows, partially offset by unfavorable currency translation. Assets under custody, a component of AUC/A, at December 31, 2021, increased from December 31, 2020, and included $8.24 trillion of global custody assets, compared to $7.42 trillion at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents AUC/A by reporting segment.
TABLE 13: ASSETS UNDER CUSTODY/ADMINISTRATION BY REPORTING SEGMENT
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 35
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents assets under custody, a component of AUC/A, by reporting segment.
TABLE 14: ASSETS UNDER CUSTODY BY REPORTING SEGMENT
Consolidated assets under custody increased from the prior year, primarily reflecting favorable markets and net inflows, partially offset by unfavorable currency translation.
The following table presents the investment allocation of Northern Trust’s custodied assets by reporting segment.
TABLE 15: ALLOCATION OF ASSETS UNDER CUSTODY
The following table presents Northern Trust’s assets under custody by investment type.
TABLE 16: ASSETS UNDER CUSTODY BY INVESTMENT TYPE
The following table presents Northern Trust’s assets under management by reporting segment.
TABLE 17: ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT BY REPORTING SEGMENT
Assets under management at the end of 2021 increased from 2020. The increase primarily reflected favorable markets and net inflows.
36 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following tables present the investment allocation and management style of Northern Trust’s assets under management by reporting segment.
TABLE 18: ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT BY INVESTMENT TYPE
TABLE 19: ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT BY MANAGEMENT STYLE
Other Noninterest Income
The components of other noninterest income, and a discussion of significant changes during 2021 and 2020, are provided below.
TABLE 20: OTHER NONINTEREST INCOME
Foreign Exchange Trading Income
Northern Trust provides foreign exchange services in the normal course of business as an integral part of its global custody services. Active management of currency positions, within conservative limits, also contributes to foreign exchange trading income. Foreign Exchange Trading Income in 2021 increased from 2020, primarily driven by higher client volumes, partially offset by lower foreign exchange swap activity in Treasury.
Treasury Management Fees
Treasury Management Fees, generated from cash and treasury management products and services provided to clients, in 2021 decreased from 2020.
Security Commissions and Trading Income
Security Commissions and Trading Income, generated primarily from securities brokerage services provided by Northern Trust Securities, Inc., in 2021 increased from 2020, primarily driven by higher revenue from core brokerage, partially offset by lower revenue from interest rate swaps.
Other Operating Income
Other Operating Income in 2021 increased from 2020 primarily due to higher banking and credit-related service charges, distributions from investments in community development projects and gains from property sales.
Please refer to Note 20, “Other Operating Income” included under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional details related to other operating income.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 37
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Investment Security Losses, Net
ASU 2016-13, adopted on January 1, 2020, replaced the legacy OTTI model with an estimated credit loss model. Refer to the caption "Investment Security Gains and Losses” in Note 4, “Securities,” and the caption “Allowance for Held to Maturity Debt Securities Portfolio” in Note 7, “Allowance for Credit Losses” included under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Net Interest Income
Net Interest Income is defined as the total of Interest Income and amortized fees on earning assets, less Interest Expense on deposits and borrowed funds, adjusted for the impact of interest-related hedging activity. Earning assets - including Federal Funds Sold, Securities Purchased under Agreements to Resell, Interest-Bearing Due From Banks, Federal Reserve and Other Central Bank Deposits and Other, Securities, and Loans and Leases - are financed by a large base of interest-bearing funds that include client deposits, short-term borrowings, Senior Notes and Long-Term Debt. Short-term borrowings include Federal Funds Purchased, Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase, and Other Borrowings. Earning assets also are funded by noninterest-related funds, which include demand deposits and Stockholders’ Equity. Net Interest Income is subject to variations in the level and mix of earning assets and interest-bearing funds and their relative sensitivity to interest rates. In addition, the levels of nonaccruing assets and client compensating deposit balances used to pay for services impact Net Interest Income.
Net interest margin is the difference between what we earn on our assets and what we pay for deposits and other sources of funding. The direction and level of interest rates are important factors in our earnings. Net interest margin is calculated by dividing annualized Net Interest Income by average interest-earning assets.
Net Interest Income stated on an FTE basis is a non-GAAP financial measure that facilitates the analysis of asset yields. Management believes an FTE presentation provides a clearer indication of net interest margins for comparative purposes. When adjusted to an FTE basis, yields on taxable, nontaxable, and partially taxable assets are comparable; however, the adjustment to an FTE basis has no impact on Net Income. A reconciliation of Net Interest Income on a GAAP basis to Net Interest Income on an FTE basis is provided in “Supplemental Information-Reconciliation to Fully Taxable Equivalent” within this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section.
38 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following tables present an analysis of average daily balances and interest rates affecting Net Interest Income and an analysis of Net Interest Income changes.
TABLE 21: AVERAGE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS WITH ANALYSIS OF NET INTEREST INCOME (INTEREST AND RATE ON A FULLY TAXABLE EQUIVALENT BASIS)(1)
(1) Northern Trust’s non-U.S. activities are primarily related to its asset servicing, asset management, foreign exchange, cash management, and commercial banking businesses. The operations of Northern Trust are managed on a reporting segment basis and include components of both U.S and non-U.S. source income and assets. Non-U.S. source income and assets are not separately identified in Northern Trust’s internal management reporting system. However, Northern Trust is required to disclose non-U.S. activities based on the domicile of the customer. Due to the complex and integrated nature of Northern Trust’s activities, it is difficult to segregate with precision revenues, expenses and assets between U.S. and non-U.S.-domiciled customers. On the basis of averages, the percentage of total assets attributable to foreign activities was 19%, 20% and 23% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. On the basis of averages, the percentage of total liabilities attributable to foreign activities was 58%, 56% and 53% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. For additional information, refer to the Geographic Area Information section of Note 32, “Reporting Segments and Related Information,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
(2) Federal Reserve and Other Central Bank Deposits and Other includes collateral deposits with certain securities depositories and clearing houses, which are classified in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
(3) Interest-Bearing Due from and Deposits with Banks includes the interest-bearing component of Cash and Due from Banks and Interest-Bearing Deposits with Banks as presented on the consolidated balance sheets.
(4) Other securities include certain community development investments and Federal Home Loan Bank and Federal Reserve stock, which are classified in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
(5) Average balances include nonaccrual loans. Lease financing receivable balances are reduced by deferred income.
(6) Cash and Due from Banks and Other Central Bank Deposits includes the noninterest-bearing component of Federal Reserve and Other Central Bank Deposits on the consolidated balance sheets.
(7) Rate calculations are based on actual balances rather than the rounded amounts presented in the Average Consolidated Balance Sheets with Analysis of Net Interest Income.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 39
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
TABLE 22: ANALYSIS OF NET INTEREST INCOME CHANGES DUE TO VOLUME AND RATE(1)
(1) Changes not due solely to average balance changes or rate changes are allocated proportionately to average balance and rate based on their relative absolute magnitudes.
Notes: Net Interest Income (FTE Adjusted), a non-GAAP financial measure, includes adjustments to a fully taxable equivalent basis for loans and securities. The adjustments are based on a federal income tax rate of 21.0%, where the rate is adjusted for applicable state income taxes, net of related federal tax benefit. Total taxable equivalent interest adjustments amounted to $35.6 million in 2021, $34.4 million in 2020 and $32.8 million in 2019. A reconciliation of net interest income and net interest margin on a GAAP basis to net interest income and net interest margin on an FTE basis (each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure) is provided in “Supplemental Information-Reconciliation to Fully Taxable Equivalent” within this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section. Net interest margin is calculated by dividing annualized net interest income by average interest-earning assets.
Interest revenue on cash collateral positions is reported above within Interest-Bearing Due from and Deposits with Banks and within Loans and Leases. Interest expense on cash collateral positions is reported above within Non-U.S. Offices Interest-Bearing Deposits. Related cash collateral received from and deposited with derivative counterparties is recorded net of the associated derivative contract in Other Assets and Other Liabilities, respectively.
Net Interest Income in 2021 decreased from 2020. Net Interest Income, stated on an FTE basis, decreased from 2020, due to a lower net interest margin, partially offset by higher levels of average earning assets. Average earning assets increased in 2021 from 2020, primarily reflecting higher levels of short-term interest bearing deposits, Securities, and Loans and Leases. Funding of the balance sheet reflected higher levels of client deposits.
The net interest margin in 2021 decreased from 2020. The net interest margin on an FTE basis in 2021 decreased from 2020, primarily due to lower average interest rates, partially offset by favorable balance sheet volume and mix shift.
Federal Reserve and Other Central Bank Deposits and Other averaged $39.0 billion in 2021, which increased $11.1 billion, or 40%, from $27.9 billion in 2020, which resulted from significant deposit inflows. The higher level of client deposits were primarily placed with the Federal Reserve and other central banks and in the securities portfolio and the loan portfolio. Average Securities were $60.8 billion and increased $4.7 billion, or 8%, from $56.1 billion in the prior-year period and include certain community development investments, Federal Home Loan Bank stock, and Federal Reserve stock of $925.5 million, $158.0 million and $70.0 million, respectively, which are recorded in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets. Average taxable Securities were $57.8 billion in 2021 and $50.9 billion in 2020. Average
40 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
nontaxable Securities, which represent securities that are primarily exempt from U.S. federal and state income taxes, were $3.0 billion in 2021 and $5.2 billion in 2020. Interest-Bearing Due From and Deposits with Banks averaged $5.8 billion in 2021 and $5.4 billion in 2020.
Loans and Leases averaged $37.2 billion, which increased $3.7 billion, or 11%, from $33.5 billion in 2020, primarily reflecting higher levels of private client, commercial real estate, non-U.S. loans, commercial and institutional, and residential real estate loans. Private client loans averaged $13.7 billion and increased $2.2 billion, or 20%, from $11.5 billion for the prior-year period. Commercial real estate loans averaged $4.0 billion and increased $723.3 million, or 22%, from $3.3 billion for the prior-year period. Non-U.S. loans averaged $2.5 billion and increased $557.6 million, or 28%, from $2.0 billion for the prior-year period. Commercial and institutional loans averaged $10.4 billion and increased $81.5 million, or 1%, from $10.3 billion for the prior-year period. Residential real estate loans averaged $6.2 billion and increased $74.3 million, or 1%, from $6.1 billion for the prior-year period.
Northern Trust utilizes a diverse mix of funding sources. Average Interest-Bearing Deposits increased $13.8 billion, or 16%, to $98.9 billion in 2021 from $85.1 billion in 2020. Average Interest-Related Funds increased $11.2 billion, or 11%, to $108.7 billion in 2021 from $97.5 billion in 2020. The balances within short-term borrowing classifications vary based on funding requirements and strategies, interest rate levels, changes in the volume of lower-cost deposit sources, and the availability of collateral to secure these borrowings. Average net noninterest-related funds increased $8.5 billion, or 32%, to $35.2 billion in 2021 from $26.7 billion in 2020, primarily resulting from higher levels of Demand and Other Noninterest-Bearing Deposits. Average Demand and Other Noninterest-Bearing Deposits increased $7.7 billion , or 33%, to $31.1 billion in 2021 from $23.4 billion in 2020. The average rate on total source of funds was 0.02% in 2021 and 0.16% in 2020.
Interest expense for Interest-Bearing Deposits in the current year was driven by low and negative interest rates for Non-U.S. Offices Interest-Bearing Deposits and low interest rates on domestic Interest-Bearing Deposits. Average Non-U.S. Offices Interest-Bearing Deposits comprised 70% of total average Interest-Bearing Deposits for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Stockholders’ Equity
Stockholders’ Equity averaged $11.7 billion in 2021, compared with $11.2 billion in 2020. The increase in average Stockholders’ Equity of $504.4 million, or 5%, was primarily attributable to Retained Earnings, partially offset by lower Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income since the prior year, repurchases of common stock pursuant to the Corporation’s share repurchase program and decreased Additional Paid-in Capital. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Corporation maintained its quarterly common stock dividend at $0.70 per share and repurchased 2,527,544 shares of common stock, returning $861.5 million in capital to common stockholders, compared to $891.8 million in 2020.
The share repurchases were predominantly made pursuant to the repurchase program authorized by the Board of Directors in July 2018. In October 2021, this program was terminated and replaced with a new repurchase program, under which the Board of Directors authorized the Corporation to repurchase up to 25.0 million shares of the Corporation’s common stock. Shares are repurchased by the Corporation to, among other things, manage the Corporation’s capital levels. Repurchased shares are used for general purposes, including the issuance of shares under stock option and other equity incentive plans. The repurchase authorization approved by the Board of Directors has no expiration date, thus the Corporation retains the ability to resume repurchases thereunder when circumstances warrant and applicable regulations permit. Please refer to Note 15, “Stockholders’ Equity,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Provision for Credit Losses
There was an $81.5 million release of credit reserves in 2021, as compared to a provision of $125.0 million in 2020. The release of credit reserves during 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis, which relates to pooled financial assets sharing similar risk characteristics, and was driven by improvements in projected economic conditions and portfolio credit quality, partially offset by portfolio growth. The decrease in the collective basis reserve was primarily reflected in the commercial and institutional portfolio. The prior-year provision primarily reflected an increase in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis. The increase in the collective basis reserve was primarily driven by current and projected economic conditions at the time and downgrades in the portfolio, both resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and related market and economic impacts. Increases in the collective basis reserve were primarily in the commercial and institutional and commercial real estate portfolios. In addition, a $13.7 million increase in the allowance for credit losses, with a corresponding cumulative effect adjustment to decrease retained earnings by $10.1 million, net of income taxes, was recorded on January 1, 2020 upon adoption of the Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.”
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 41
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net recoveries in 2021 totaled $6.3 million resulting from $0.7 million of charge-offs and $7.0 million of recoveries, compared to net charge-offs of $3.2 million in the prior-year resulting from $9.7 million of charge-offs and $6.5 million of recoveries.
Nonaccrual assets at December 31, 2021 decreased 5% from the prior year-end. Commercial real estate, residential real estate, and commercial and institutional accounted for 54%, 30%, and 16%, respectively, of total nonaccrual loans and leases at December 31, 2021. Residential real estate, commercial real estate, commercial and institutional, and private client loans accounted for 47%, 31%, 20%, and 2%, respectively, of total nonaccrual loans and leases at December 31, 2020. For additional discussion of the Allowance for Credit Losses, refer to the “Asset Quality” section.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest Expense for 2021 increased from 2020, primarily reflecting increased Outside Services, Compensation, Equipment and Software and Employee Benefits, partially offset by lower Other Operating Expense and Occupancy. Employee Benefits expense in 2021 included pension settlement charges of $27.9 million.
The components of Noninterest Expense and a discussion of significant changes during 2021 and 2020 are provided below.
TABLE 23: NONINTEREST EXPENSE
Compensation
Compensation expense, the largest component of Noninterest Expense, increased in 2021 from 2020, primarily reflecting higher incentives and salary expense. The prior year reflects $52.5 million of severance-related charges. Staff on a full-time equivalent basis totaled approximately 21,100 at December 31, 2021, up 1% from approximately 20,900 at December 31, 2020.
Employee Benefits
Employee Benefits expense in 2021 increased from 2020, primarily reflecting higher retirement plan expenses, medical costs and payroll taxes. There were $27.9 million of pension settlement charges in 2021.
Outside Services
Outside Services expense in 2021 increased from 2020, primarily due to higher technical services costs, third-party advisory fees and sub-custodian expenses.
Equipment and Software
Equipment and Software expense in 2021 increased from 2020, primarily reflecting higher software support and rental costs and higher amortization.
Occupancy
Occupancy expense in 2021 decreased from 2020, primarily due to early lease exits arising from workplace real estate strategies in the prior year, which included $11.9 million of expense related to an early lease exit.
Other Operating Expense
Other Operating Expense in 2021 decreased from 2020 primarily due to lower charges associated with account servicing activities and a decline in other miscellaneous expenses. The account servicing activities in the prior year included a $43.4 million charge related to a corporate action processing error. Please refer to Note 21, “Other Operating Expense” included under Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for additional details related to other operating expenses.
42 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Provision for Income Taxes
The 2021 Provision for Income Taxes was $464.8 million, representing an effective rate of 23.1%. This compares with a Provision for Income Taxes of $418.3 million and an effective rate of 25.7% in 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by the lower net tax impact from international operations and $26.8 million of prior-year tax expense related to the reversal of tax benefits previously recognized through earnings.
See Note 22, “Income Taxes,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for more information on income taxes.
REPORTING SEGMENTS AND RELATED INFORMATION
The following information summarizes our consolidated results of operations by reporting segment for 2021 compared to 2020. For a discussion related to the consolidated results of operations by reporting segment for 2020 compared to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2020 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on February 23, 2021.
Northern Trust is organized around its two client-focused reporting segments: C&IS and Wealth Management. Asset management and related services are provided to C&IS and Wealth Management clients primarily by the Asset Management business. The revenue and expenses of Asset Management and certain other support functions are allocated fully to C&IS and Wealth Management.
Reporting segment financial information, presented on an internal management-reporting basis, is determined by accounting systems used to allocate revenue and expense to each segment, and incorporates processes for allocating assets, liabilities, equity and the applicable interest income and expense utilizing a funds transfer pricing (FTP) methodology. Under the methodology, assets and liabilities receive a funding charge or credit that considers interest rate risk, liquidity risk, and other product characteristics on an instrument level. Additionally, segment information is presented on an FTE basis as management believes an FTE presentation provides a clearer indication of net interest income. The adjustment to an FTE basis has no impact on Net Income.
Equity is allocated to the reporting segments based on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, risk, regulatory considerations, and internal metrics. Allocations of capital and certain corporate expense may not be representative of levels that would be required if the segments were independent entities. The accounting policies used for management reporting are consistent with those described in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.” Transfers of income and expense items are recorded at cost; there is no consolidated profit or loss on sales or transfers between reporting segments. Northern Trust’s presentations are not necessarily consistent with similar information for other financial institutions.
Revenues, expenses and average assets are allocated to C&IS and Wealth Management, with the exception of non-recurring activities such as certain costs associated with acquisitions, divestitures, litigation, restructuring, and tax adjustments not directly attributable to a specific reporting segment, which are reported within the Other segment.
Reporting segment results are subject to reclassification when organizational changes are made. The results are also subject to refinements in revenue and expense allocation methodologies, which are typically reflected on a prospective basis.
Effective January 1, 2021, Northern Trust implemented enhancements to its FTP methodology, including enhancements impacting the allocation of net interest income between C&IS and Wealth Management. These methodology enhancements affect the results of each of these reporting segments. Due to the lack of historical information, segment results for periods ended prior to January 1, 2021 have not been revised to reflect the methodology enhancements.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 43
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents the earnings and average assets for the Corporation.
TABLE 24: CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
(1) Non-GAAP financial measures stated on an FTE basis. The consolidated figures include $35.6 million, $34.4 million, and $32.8 million of FTE adjustments for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. A reconciliation of total consolidated revenue, Net Interest Income and net interest margin on a GAAP basis to revenue, Net Interest Income and net interest margin on an FTE basis, respectively, (each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure) is provided in “Supplemental Information-Reconciliation to Fully Taxable Equivalent” within this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section.
Corporate & Institutional Services
C&IS is a leading global provider of asset servicing and related services to corporate and public retirement funds, foundations, endowments, fund managers, insurance companies, sovereign wealth funds, and other institutional investors around the globe. Asset servicing and related services encompass a full range of capabilities including but not limited to: custody; fund administration; investment operations outsourcing; investment management; investment risk and analytical services; employee benefit services; securities lending; foreign exchange; treasury management; brokerage services; transition management services; banking; and cash management. Client relationships are managed through the Bank and the Bank’s and the Corporation’s other subsidiaries, including support from locations in North America, Europe, the Middle East, and the Asia-Pacific region. The following table summarizes the results of operations of C&IS for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 on a management-reporting basis.
TABLE 25: C&IS RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(1) Non-GAAP financial measures stated on an FTE basis.
C&IS Net Income
Net Income increased in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily reflecting higher Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees, a release of credit reserves in the current year as compared to a provision in the prior year and higher Other Noninterest
44 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Income, partially offset by higher Noninterest Expense, lower Net Interest Income and an increase in the Provision for Income Taxes.
C&IS Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees
For an explanation of C&IS Trust, Investment, and Other Servicing Fees, please see the “Trust, Investment, and Other Servicing Fees” section within the Consolidated Results of Operations section of the MD&A.
C&IS Foreign Exchange Trading Income
Foreign Exchange Trading Income in 2021 increased from 2020, primarily driven by higher client volumes, partially offset by lower foreign exchange swap activity in Treasury.
C&IS Other Noninterest Income
Other Noninterest Income for 2021 increased from 2020, primarily due to Other Operating Income and Security Commissions and Trading Income.
C&IS Net Interest Income
Net Interest Income on an FTE basis decreased in 2021 from 2020, due to a lower net interest margin, partially offset by an increase in average earning assets. Net interest margin on an FTE basis decreased to 0.60% from 0.75%. Average earning assets of $111.0 billion, increased $16.4 billion, or 17%, from $94.6 billion in the prior year. The earning assets in C&IS consisted primarily of intercompany assets and Loans and Leases. Funding sources were primarily comprised of non-U.S. custody-related interest-bearing deposits, which averaged $69.7 billion in 2021 as compared to $60.5 billion in 2020.
C&IS Provision for Credit Losses
There was a release of credit reserves of $33.8 million for 2021 compared to a provision of $38.1 million for 2020. The release of credit reserves during 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis, which relates to pooled financial assets sharing similar risk characteristics. The decrease in the collective basis reserve was driven by improvements in projected economic conditions and portfolio credit quality. The 2020 provision reflected an increase in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis driven by current and projected economic conditions at the time and downgrades in the portfolio, both resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related market and economic impacts on the commercial and institutional portfolio.
C&IS Noninterest Expense
Total C&IS Noninterest Expense, which includes the direct expense of the reporting segment, indirect expense allocations for product and operating support, and indirect expense allocations for certain corporate support services, increased in 2021 from 2020. The increase primarily reflects higher expense allocations, Outside Services expense and Compensation expense including incentives.
Wealth Management
Wealth Management focuses on high-net-worth individuals and families, business owners, executives, professionals, retirees, and established privately-held businesses in its target markets. In supporting these targeted segments, Wealth Management provides trust, investment management, custody, and philanthropic services; financial consulting; guardianship and estate administration; family business consulting; family financial education; brokerage services; and private and business banking. Wealth Management also includes Global Family Office, which provides customized services, including but not limited to: investment consulting; global custody; fiduciary; and private banking to meet the complex financial needs of ultra-high-net-worth individuals and family offices across the globe. Wealth Management is one of the largest providers of advisory services in the United States with assets under custody/administration, assets under custody, and assets under management of $1.07 trillion, $1.06 trillion, and $416.1 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2021. Wealth Management services are delivered by multidisciplinary teams through a network of offices in 19 U.S. states and Washington, D.C., as well as offices in London, Guernsey, and Abu Dhabi.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 45
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table summarizes the results of operations of Wealth Management for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 on a management-reporting basis.
TABLE 26: WEALTH MANAGEMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(1) Non-GAAP financial measures stated on an FTE basis.
Wealth Management Net Income
Wealth Management Net Income increased in 2021, primarily reflecting higher Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees, a release of credit reserves in the current year as compared to a provision in the prior year and higher Other Noninterest Income, partially offset by higher Noninterest Expense, lower Net Interest Income and an increase in the Provision for Income Taxes.
Wealth Management Trust, Investment and Other Servicing Fees
For an explanation of Wealth Management Trust, Investment, and Other Servicing Fees, please see the “Trust, Investment, and Other Servicing Fees” section within the Consolidated Results of Operations section of the MD&A.
Wealth Management Other Noninterest Income
Other Noninterest Income for 2021 increased from 2020, primarily due to higher Other Operating Income driven by gains on property sales.
Wealth Management Net Interest Income
Net Interest Income on an FTE basis for 2021 decreased from 2020, primarily attributable to a decrease in the net interest margin, partially offset by an increase in earning assets. Net interest margin on an FTE basis decreased to 2.47% from 2.94%. Average earning assets of $32.8 billion in 2021, increased $3.3 billion, or 11%, from $29.5 billion in 2020. Earning assets and funding sources for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily comprised of loans and domestic interest-bearing deposits, respectively.
Wealth Management Provision for Credit Losses
There was a release of credit reserves of $47.7 million for 2021 compared to a provision of $86.9 million in 2020. The release of credit reserves during 2021 was primarily due to a decrease in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis, which relates to pooled financial assets sharing similar risk characteristics. The decrease in the collective basis reserve was driven by improvements in projected economic conditions and portfolio credit quality, partially offset by portfolio growth. The decrease in the collective basis reserve was primarily reflected in the commercial and institutional and private client portfolios. The 2020 provision reflected an increase in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis driven by current and projected economic conditions at the time and downgrades in the portfolio, both resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related market and economic impacts, primarily impacting the commercial real estate and commercial and institutional portfolios.
Wealth Management Noninterest Expense
Noninterest Expense, which includes the direct expense of the reporting segment, indirect expense allocations for product and operating support, and indirect expense allocations for certain corporate support services, increased in 2021 from 2020.
46 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The increase primarily reflects higher expense allocations, Compensation expense including incentives and Employee Benefits.
Other
Income and expenses associated with non-recurring activities such as certain costs associated with acquisitions, divestitures, litigation, restructuring, and tax adjustments are included within Other. The following table summarizes the results of operations of the Other segment for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 on a management-reporting basis.
TABLE 27: OTHER RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
(1) Non-GAAP financial measures stated on an FTE basis.
Other-Noninterest Income
Noninterest Income in 2021 decreased from 2020 due to higher expenses for existing swap agreements related to Visa Inc. Class B common shares.
Other-Noninterest Expense
Noninterest Expense in 2021 decreased from 2020, primarily due to lower costs arising from prior-year workplace real estate strategies and a one-time supplemental payment to employees in response to COVID-19 pandemic in the prior year, offset by pension settlement charges in 2021.
Asset Management
Asset Management, through the Corporation’s various subsidiaries, supports the C&IS and Wealth Management reporting segments by providing a broad range of asset management and related services and other products to clients around the world. Investment solutions are delivered through separately managed accounts, bank common and collective funds, registered investment companies, exchange traded funds, non-U.S. collective investment funds, and unregistered private investment funds. Asset Management’s capabilities include active and passive equity; active and passive fixed income; cash management; multi-asset and alternative asset classes (such as private equity and hedge funds of funds); and multi-manager advisory services and products. Asset Management’s activities also include overlay services and other risk management services. Asset Management operates internationally through subsidiaries and distribution arrangements and its revenue and expense are allocated fully to C&IS and Wealth Management.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 47
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
At December 31, 2021, Northern Trust managed $1.61 trillion in assets for personal and institutional clients, including $1.19 trillion for C&IS clients and $416.1 billion for Wealth Management clients. The following table presents consolidated assets under management as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 by investment type.
TABLE 28: CONSOLIDATED ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT BY INVESTMENT TYPE
Assets under management increased at year-end 2021 from year-end 2020. The increase primarily reflected favorable markets and net inflows. The following table presents activity in consolidated assets under management by product during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
TABLE 29: ACTIVITY IN CONSOLIDATED ASSETS UNDER MANAGEMENT BY PRODUCT
48 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET REVIEW
The following tables summarize selected consolidated balance sheet information.
TABLE 30: SELECT CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET INFORMATION
(1) Federal Reserve and Other Central Bank Deposits and Other includes collateral deposits with certain securities depositories and clearing houses for the purpose of presenting earning assets; such deposits are presented in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
(2) Interest-Bearing Due from and Deposits with Banks includes the interest-bearing component of Cash and Due from Banks and Interest-Bearing Deposits with Banks as presented on the consolidated balance sheets.
(3) Total Securities includes certain community development investments and Federal Home Loan Bank and Federal Reserve stock, which are classified in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
TABLE 31: SELECT AVERAGE CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET INFORMATION
(1) Federal Reserve and Other Central Bank Deposits and Other includes collateral deposits with certain securities depositories and clearing houses for the purpose of presenting earning assets; such deposits are presented in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
(2) Interest-Bearing Due from and Deposits with Banks includes the interest-bearing component of Cash and Due from Banks and Interest-Bearing Deposits with Banks as presented on the consolidated balance sheets.
(3) Total Securities includes certain community development investments and Federal Home Loan Bank and Federal Reserve stock, which are classified in Other Assets on the consolidated balance sheets.
Average balances are considered to be a better measure of balance sheet trends, as period-end balances can be impacted by the timing of deposit and withdrawal activity involving large client balances. The current growth in both the period-end and average consolidated balance sheets was primarily driven by higher customer deposit balances.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 49
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Short-Term Borrowings. Short-term borrowings includes Federal Funds Purchased, Securities Sold under Agreements to Repurchase, and Other Borrowings. Securities Sold under Agreements to Repurchase are accounted for as collateralized financings and recorded at the amounts at which the securities were sold plus accrued interest. To minimize any potential credit risk associated with these transactions, the fair value of the securities sold is monitored, limits are set on exposure with counterparties, and the financial condition of counterparties is regularly assessed. Securities Sold under Agreements to Repurchase are held by the counterparty until the repurchase.
During the third quarter of 2021, Northern Trust became a Government Securities Division (GSD) netting and sponsoring member in the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC) sponsored member program. FICC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation, is a central counterparty and provides netting and settlement for the U.S. Government securities marketplace. Northern Trust nets securities sold under repurchase agreements against those purchased under resale agreements when FICC is the counterparty. See Note 5, “Securities Purchased Under Agreements to Resell and Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase,” Note 26, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” and Note 28, “Offsetting of Assets and Liabilities” to the consolidated financial statements provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on Northern Trust’s repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.
Stockholders’ Equity. The increase in average Stockholders’ Equity was primarily attributable to Retained Earnings, partially offset by lower Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income since the prior year, repurchases of common stock pursuant to the Corporation’s share repurchase program and decreased Additional Paid-in Capital.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Corporation declared cash dividends totaling $593.9 million to common stockholders and repurchased 2,527,544 shares of common stock, including 394,326 shares withheld related to share-based compensation, at a total cost of $267.6 million ($105.90 average price per share).
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Corporation declared cash dividends totaling $41.8 million to preferred stockholders.
50 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Asset Quality
Securities Portfolio
The following table presents the remaining maturity and average yield of Northern Trust's held to maturity (HTM) debt securities and available for sale (AFS) debt securities by security type as of December 31, 2021.
TABLE 32: REMAINING MATURITY AND AVERAGE YIELD OF HELD TO MATURITY AND AVAILABLE FOR SALE DEBT SECURITIES
Note: Yield is calculated on amortized cost and presented on a taxable equivalent basis giving effect to the applicable federal and state tax rates.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 51
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Northern Trust maintains a high quality debt securities portfolio. Debt securities not explicitly rated were grouped where possible under the credit rating of the issuer of the security. The following tables provide the fair value of AFS debt securities and amortized cost of HTM debt securities by credit rating.
TABLE 33: FAIR VALUE OF AVAILABLE FOR SALE DEBT SECURITIES BY CREDIT RATING
As of December 31, 2021, the 1% of AFS debt securities not rated by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. (Moody’s), S&P Global Ratings (S&P Global) or Fitch Ratings, Inc. (Fitch Ratings) consisted of corporate debt securities and covered bonds.
As of December 31, 2020, the 1% of AFS debt securities not rated by Moody’s, S&P Global or Fitch Ratings consisted of corporate debt, covered bonds, and other asset-backed securities.
52 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
TABLE 34: AMORTIZED COST OF HELD TO MATURITY DEBT SECURITIES BY CREDIT RATING
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the 5% and 7%, respectively, of HTM debt securities not rated by Moody’s, S&P Global or Fitch Ratings consisted of certificates of deposit with a remaining life of less than six months, as well as investments purchased by Northern Trust to fulfill its obligations under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Northern Trust fulfills its obligations under the CRA by making qualified investments for purposes of supporting institutions and programs that benefit low-to-moderate income communities within Northern Trust’s market area.
Net unrealized losses within the investment securities portfolio totaled $187.1 million at December 31, 2021, compared to net unrealized gains of $872.6 million as of December 31, 2020. Net unrealized losses as of December 31, 2021 were comprised of $345.1 million and $532.2 million of gross unrealized gains and losses, respectively. Net unrealized gains as of December 31, 2020 were comprised of $981.9 million and $109.3 million of gross unrealized gains and losses, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the $38.0 billion AFS debt securities portfolio had unrealized losses of $110.2 million related to government-sponsored agency, which are primarily attributable to changes in market interest rates and credit spreads since their purchase. As of December 31, 2020, the $42.0 billion AFS debt securities portfolio had unrealized losses of $26.9 million related to government-sponsored agency, which are primarily attributable to changes in market interest rates and credit spreads since their purchase. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, 14% and 16%, respectively, of the AFS corporate debt securities portfolio was backed by guarantees provided by U.S. and non-U.S. government entities.
As of December 31, 2021, the $23.6 billion HTM debt securities portfolio had an unrealized loss of $106.1 million, $80.0 million and $71.6 million related to government sponsored agency, sub-sovereign, supranational and non-U.S. agency bonds, and other residential mortgage-backed securities, respectively, which are primarily attributable to changes in overall market interest rates and credit spreads since their purchase. As of December 31, 2020, the $17.8 billion HTM debt securities portfolio had an unrealized loss of $76.5 million related to other residential mortgage-backed securities, which is primarily attributable to changes in overall market interest rates and credit spreads since their purchase.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 53
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
HTM debt securities consist of securities that management intends to, and Northern Trust has the ability to, hold until maturity. During the year ended December 31, 2021, $6.9 billion of government sponsored agency securities were transferred from AFS to HTM for capital management purposes, all of which were transferred in the second quarter of 2021. Upon transfer of a debt security from the AFS to HTM classification, the amortized cost is reset to fair value. Any net unrealized gain or loss at the date of transfer will remain in AOCI and be amortized into net interest income over the remaining life of the securities using the effective interest method. The amortization of amounts retained in AOCI will offset the effect on interest income of the amortization of the premium or discount resulting from transferring the securities at fair value. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $301.5 million of securities reflected in U.S. government were transferred from AFS to HTM, all of which were transferred in the second quarter of 2020.
For additional information relating to the securities portfolio, refer to Note 4, “Securities,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Securities purchased under agreements to resell and securities sold under agreements to repurchase are accounted for as collateralized financings and recorded at the amounts at which the securities were acquired or sold plus accrued interest. To minimize any potential credit risk associated with these transactions, the fair value of the securities purchased or sold is monitored, limits are set on exposure with counterparties, and the financial condition of counterparties is regularly assessed. It is Northern Trust’s policy to take possession, either directly or via third-party custodians, of securities purchased under agreements to resell. Securities sold under agreements to repurchase are either directly held by, or pledged to the counterparty until the repurchase.
For additional information relating to the securities sold under agreements to repurchase, refer to Note 5, “Securities Purchased Under Agreements to Resell and Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Loans and Leases
For additional information relating to the loan and leases portfolio, refer to Note 6, “Loans and Leases,” and Note 8, “Concentrations of Credit Risk” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
The following table presents the remaining maturity of loans and leases by segment and class as of December 31, 2021.
TABLE 35: REMAINING MATURITY OF LOANS AND LEASES
Note: Non-U.S. loans primarily include short duration exposures related to custodied client investments.
54 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
TABLE 36: INTEREST RATE SENSITIVITY OF LOANS AND LEASES
Nonaccrual Assets and 90 Days Past Due Loans
Nonaccrual assets consist of nonaccrual loans and leases and other real estate owned (OREO). OREO is comprised of commercial and residential properties acquired in partial or total satisfaction of loans. Loans that are delinquent 90 days or more and still accruing interest can fluctuate widely at any reporting period based on the timing of cash collections, renegotiation and renewals. For additional information relating to nonaccrual loans, refer to Note 6, “Loans and Leases,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 55
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table presents nonaccrual assets and loans that were delinquent 90 days or more and still accruing interest at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
TABLE 37: NONACCRUAL ASSETS
Nonaccrual assets as of December 31, 2021 decreased from December 31, 2020, primarily due to net payoffs in the residential real estate and commercial and institutional portfolios, partially offset by a net increase in the commercial real estate portfolio. In addition to the negative impact on net interest income and the risk of credit losses, nonaccrual assets also increase operating costs due to the expense associated with collection efforts. Changes in the level of nonaccrual assets may be indicative of changes in the credit quality of one or more loan classes. Changes in credit quality impact the allowance for credit losses through the resultant adjustment of the allowance evaluated on an individual basis and the quantitative and qualitative factors used in the determination of the allowance evaluated on a collective basis within the allowance for credit losses.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The allowance for credit losses-which represents management’s best estimate of lifetime expected credit losses related to various portfolios subject to credit risk, off-balance sheet credit exposure, and specific borrower relationships-is determined by management through a disciplined credit review process. Northern Trust measures expected credit losses of financial assets with similar risk characteristics on a collective basis. A financial asset is measured individually if it does not share similar risk characteristics with other financial assets and the related allowance is determined through an individual evaluation.
Management’s estimates utilized in establishing an appropriate level of allowance for credit losses are not dependent on any single assumption. In determining an appropriate allowance level, management evaluates numerous variables, many of which are interrelated or dependent on other assumptions and estimates, and takes into consideration past events, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts.
The results of the credit reserve estimation methodology are reviewed quarterly by Northern Trust’s Credit Loss Reserve Committee, which receives input from Credit Risk Management, Treasury, Corporate Finance, the Economic Research group, and each of Northern Trust’s business units.
As of December 31, 2021, the allowance for credit losses related to loans and leases, undrawn loan commitments and standby letters of credit, HTM debt securities, and other financial assets, was $138.4 million, $34.1 million, $11.2 million, and $1.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses related to loans and leases, undrawn loan commitments and standby letters of credit, HTM debt securities, and other financial assets, was $190.7 million, $61.1 million, $7.3 million, and $0.8 million, respectively. For additional information relating to the allowance for credit losses and the changes in the allowance for credit losses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 due to charge-offs, recoveries and provisions for credit losses, refer to Note 7, “Allowance for Credit Losses,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
56 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table shows the net recoveries (charge-offs) to average loans and leases by segment and class at December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
TABLE 38: NET RECOVERIES (CHARGE-OFFS) TO AVERAGE LOANS AND LEASES
Net recoveries (charge-offs) for the following segments were zero and therefore excluded from the above table as the ratio of net recoveries (charge-offs) to average loans and leases is also zero: Lease Financing, net, Other, and Non-U.S. The average loans and leases balances were also not provided in the table for Lease Financing, net, Other, and Non-U.S.
Total average loans and leases for all loan portfolio categories were $37.2 billion, $33.5 billion, and $31.1 billion for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
The SEC requires the disclosure of the Allowance for Credit Losses that is applicable to international operations. The disclosure has been prepared in compliance with this disclosure requirement and is used in determining non-U.S. operating performance. The amounts disclosed should not be construed as being the only amounts that are available for non-U.S. loan charge-offs, since the entire Allowance for Credit Losses assigned to Loans and Leases is available to absorb losses on both U.S. and non-U.S. loans. In addition, these amounts are not intended to be indicative of future charge-off trends. Please refer to the following table for the non-U.S. allowance balances.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 57
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table shows the allowance evaluated on an individual and collective basis for the loans and leases portfolio by segment and class at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
TABLE 39: ALLOCATION OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR CREDIT LOSSES
Allowance Related to Credit Exposure Evaluated on an Individual Basis: The allowance is determined through an individual evaluation of loans, leases, and lending-related commitments that have defaulted, generally those with Borrower Ratings of 8 and 9, that is based on expected future cash flows, the value of collateral, and other factors that may impact the borrower’s ability to pay.
The allowance evaluated on an individual basis for Loans and Leases decreased $0.6 million from $10.7 million at December 31, 2020 to $10.1 million at December 31, 2021, primarily attributable to a decrease in outstanding loans in the commercial real estate and residential real estate portfolios, partially offset by an increase in outstanding loans in the commercial and institutional portfolio.
Allowance Related to Credit Exposure Evaluated on a Collective Basis: Expected credit losses are measured on a collective basis as long as the financial assets included in the respective pool share similar risk characteristics. If financial assets are deemed to not share similar risk characteristics, an individual assessment is warranted.
The allowance evaluated on a collective basis for Loans and Leases decreased $78.7 million to $162.4 million at December 31, 2021, compared with $241.1 million at December 31, 2020, primarily due to a decrease in the reserve evaluated on a collective basis, which relates to pooled financial assets sharing similar risk characteristics, and was driven by improvements in projected economic conditions and portfolio credit quality, partially offset by portfolio growth. The decrease in the collective basis reserve was primarily reflected in the commercial and institutional portfolio.
Overall Allowance: The evaluation of the reserve evaluated on an individual and collective basis resulted in a total allowance for credit losses of $184.7 million at December 31, 2021, compared with $259.9 million at the end of 2020. The allowance of $138.4 million assigned to Loans and Leases, as a percentage of total Loans and Leases, was 0.34% at December 31, 2021, which decreased from a $190.7 million allowance assigned to Loans and Leases, representing 0.56% of total Loans and Leases at December 31, 2020. Allowances assigned to undrawn loan commitments and standby letters of credit totaled $34.1 million and $61.1 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and are included in Other Liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets.
58 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures in 2021 included continued investments to enhance Northern Trust’s software and hardware capabilities, the opening of new offices, and the renovation of several existing offices. Capital expenditures for 2021 totaled $515.1 million, of which $419.6 million was for software, $40.2 million was for building and leasehold improvements, $52.6 million was for computer hardware, and $2.7 million was for furnishings. These capital expenditures principally support, enhance, and protect Northern Trust’s investment management, asset servicing and wealth management systems and capabilities, with focus on delivering innovative solutions to better serve our clients. Additional capital expenditures committed for technology platforms will result in future expense for the depreciation of hardware and amortization of software. Software amortization and depreciation on computer hardware are charged to Equipment and Software expense. Depreciation on building and leasehold improvements and on furnishings is charged to Occupancy expense and equipment expense, respectively. Capital expenditures for 2020 totaled $560.4 million, of which $424.6 million was for software, $66.6 million was for building and leasehold improvements, $65.4 million was for computer hardware, and $3.8 million was for furnishings.
Deposits
The following table provides the scheduled maturity of total time deposits in denominations of $250,000 or greater at December 31, 2021. For additional information, refer to Note 12, “Deposits,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
TABLE 40: REMAINING MATURITY OF TIME DEPOSITS $250,000 OR MORE
Deposits not insured by the FDIC as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 totaled $150.3 billion and $135.5 billion, respectively. These deposit amounts are derived by adding estimated domestic office uninsured deposits as allowed by Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council instructions to all foreign office deposits. Estimated uninsured domestic office deposits are determined by calculating and totaling the deposits in excess of the deposit insurance limit on an individual account basis.
Short-Term Borrowings
During the third quarter of 2021, Northern Trust became a Government Securities Division (GSD) netting and sponsoring member in the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC) sponsored member program. FICC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation, is a central counterparty and provides netting and settlement for the U.S. Government securities marketplace. Northern Trust nets securities sold under repurchase agreements against those purchased under resale agreements when FICC is the counterparty.
Securities purchased under agreements to resell and securities sold under agreements to repurchase are accounted for as collateralized financings and recorded at the amounts at which the securities were acquired or sold plus accrued interest. To minimize any potential credit risk associated with these transactions, the fair value of the securities purchased or sold is monitored, limits are set on exposure with counterparties, and the financial condition of counterparties is regularly assessed. It is Northern Trust’s policy to take possession, either directly or via third-party custodians, of securities purchased under agreements to resell. Securities sold under agreements to repurchase are either directly held by, or pledged to the counterparty until the repurchase. See Note 5, “Securities Purchased Under Agreements to Resell and Securities Sold Under Agreements to Repurchase,” Note 26, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” and Note 28, “Offsetting of Assets and Liabilities” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional information on our repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 59
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Geographic Area Information
Northern Trust’s non-U.S. activities are primarily related to its asset servicing, asset management, foreign exchange, cash management, and commercial banking businesses. The operations of Northern Trust are managed on a reporting segment basis and include components of both U.S and non-U.S. source assets. Non-U.S. source assets are not separately identified in Northern Trust’s internal management reporting system. However, Northern Trust is required to disclose non-U.S. activities based on the domicile of the customer. Due to the complex and integrated nature of Northern Trust’s activities, it is difficult to segregate with precision assets between U.S. and non-U.S.-domiciled customers. Therefore, certain subjective estimates and assumptions have been made to allocate assets between U.S. and non-U.S. operations.
The following tables present selected average assets and liabilities attributable to non-U.S. operations (based on the obligor’s domicile) and the percent of those balances to total consolidated average assets. For additional information refer to Note 32, “Reporting Segments and Related Information,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
TABLE 41: SELECTED AVERAGE ASSETS AND LIABILITIES ATTRIBUTABLE TO NON-U.S. OPERATIONS
Non-U.S. Outstandings
As used in this discussion, non-U.S. outstandings are cross-border outstandings as defined by the SEC. They consist of loans, securities, interest-bearing deposits with financial institutions, accrued interest and other monetary assets. Not included are letters of credit, loan commitments, and non-U.S. office local currency claims on residents. Non-U.S. outstandings related to a country are net of guarantees given by third parties resident outside the country and the value of tangible, liquid collateral realizable outside the country. However, transactions with branches of non-U.S. banks are included in these outstandings and are classified according to the country location of the non-U.S. bank’s head office.
Short-term interbank time deposits with non-U.S. banks represent the largest category of non-U.S. outstandings. Northern Trust actively participates in the interbank market with U.S. and non-U.S. banks.
Northern Trust places deposits with non-U.S. counterparties that have strong internal (Northern Trust) risk ratings and external credit ratings. These non-U.S. banks are approved and monitored by Northern Trust’s Capital Markets Credit Committee, which has credit authority for exposure to all non-U.S. banks and approves credit limits. This process includes financial analysis of the non-U.S. banks, use of an internal risk rating system and consideration of external market indicators. Each counterparty is reviewed at least annually and potentially more frequently based on credit fundamentals or general market conditions. Separate from the entity-specific review process, the average life to maturity of deposits with non-U.S. banks is deliberately maintained on a short-term basis in order to respond quickly to changing credit conditions. Northern Trust also utilizes certain risk mitigation tools and agreements that may reduce exposures through use of collateral and/or balance sheet netting. Additionally, the Capital Markets Credit Committee oversees country-risk analyses and imposes limits on country exposure. For additional information refer to Note 32, “Reporting Segments and Related Information,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
60 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
The following discusses the statement of cash flow activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
TABLE 42: CASH FLOW ACTIVITY SUMMARY
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to period earnings and the impact of higher non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization, partially offset by higher net collateral deposited with derivative counterparties and in receivables.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities of $1.9 billion primarily reflected period earnings and the impact of higher non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization and provision for credit losses.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $18.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to increased levels of deposits with the Federal Reserve and other central banks, higher levels of loans and leases and net purchases of AFS debt securities, partially offset by lower levels of interest-bearing deposits with banks.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $29.9 billion primarily reflected higher levels of deposits with the Federal Reserve and other central banks, net purchases of HTM debt securities, higher levels of loans and leases, and net purchases of AFS debt securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $16.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to higher levels of total deposits and securities sold under agreements to repurchase, partially offset by dividends paid on common stock, repayment of the 3.375% senior notes previously issued by the Corporation that matured in August 2021, lower short-term other borrowings, and the repayment of floating rate capital debt. The increase in total deposits was primarily attributable to higher levels of savings, money market and other interest-bearing deposits, non-U.S. interest-bearing deposits, and demand and other noninterest-bearing deposits.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $27.9 billion primarily reflected higher levels of total deposits and proceeds from the issuance by the Corporation of 1.95% senior notes, partially offset by lower short-term other borrowings, dividends paid on common stock, repayment of the 3.45% senior notes previously issued by the Corporation that matured in November 2020, lower securities sold under agreements to repurchase, and the redemption of the Series C Non-Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock. The increase in total deposits was primarily attributable to higher levels of non-U.S. office noninterest-bearing deposits, non-U.S. interest-bearing deposits, savings, money market and other interest-bearing deposits, and demand and other noninterest-bearing deposits.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 61
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
One of Northern Trust’s primary objectives is to maintain a strong capital position to merit the confidence of clients, counterparties, creditors, regulators and stockholders. A strong capital position helps Northern Trust execute its strategies and withstand unforeseen adverse developments.
Senior management, with oversight from the Capital Governance Committee and the full Board of Directors, is responsible for capital management and planning. Northern Trust manages its capital on both a total Corporation basis and a legal entity basis. The Capital Committee is responsible for measuring and managing capital metrics against levels set forth within the Capital Policy approved by the Capital Governance Committee of the Board of Directors. In establishing the metrics related to capital, a variety of factors are taken into consideration, including the unique risk profiles of Northern Trust’s businesses, regulatory requirements, capital levels relative to peers, and the impact on credit ratings.
Capital levels strengthened in 2021 as average stockholders’ equity increased $504.4 million, or 5%, reaching $11.7 billion. Total stockholders’ equity was $12.0 billion at December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.7 billion at December 31, 2020. Preferred dividends totaling $41.8 million were declared in 2021. During 2021, the Corporation maintained its quarterly common stock dividend of $0.70 per common share. Common dividends totaling $593.9 million were declared in 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Corporation repurchased 2,527,544 shares of common stock, including 394,326 shares withheld related to share-based compensation, at an average price per share of $105.90.
62 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In accordance with Basel III requirements, capital ratios are calculated using both the standardized and advanced approaches. For each ratio, the lower of the result calculated under the standardized approach and the advanced approach serves as the effective ratio for purposes of determining capital adequacy. The following table provides a reconciliation of the Corporation’s common stockholders’ equity to total risk-based capital and its risk-based capital ratios, under the applicable U.S. regulatory rules as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
TABLE 43: CAPITAL ADEQUACY
(1) Risk-weighted assets exclude, as applicable under each regulatory approach, amounts primarily related to goodwill, certain other intangible assets, and net unrealized gains or losses on securities and reflect adjustments for excess allowances for credit losses that have been excluded from Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital, if any.
(2) Adjusted average fourth quarter assets exclude amounts primarily related to goodwill, other intangible assets, and net unrealized gains or losses on securities.
(3) In November 2019, the Federal Reserve Board and other U.S. federal banking agencies adopted a final rule that established a deduction for central bank deposits from the total leverage exposures of custodial banking organizations, including the Corporation and the Bank, equal to the lesser of (i) the total amount of funds the custodial banking organization and its consolidated subsidiaries have on deposit at qualifying central banks and (ii) the total amount of client funds on deposit at the custodial banking organization that are linked to fiduciary or custodial and safekeeping accounts. The rule became effective on April 1, 2020.
Further, on April 1, 2020, the Federal Reserve Board issued an interim final rule that requires bank holding companies, including the Corporation, to deduct, on a temporary basis, deposits with the Federal Reserve Board and investments in U.S. Treasury securities from their total leverage exposure. The U.S. Treasury securities deduction is applied in addition to the central bank deposits relief referred to above. This rule became effective on April 1, 2020 and expired on April 1, 2021.
On May 15, 2020, the U.S. federal banking agencies released an interim final rule that permits insured depository institutions of bank holding companies also to temporarily exclude deposits with the Federal Reserve Board and investments in U.S. Treasury securities from their total leverage exposure. The Bank did not elect to take this deduction.
The supplementary leverage ratios at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 for the Corporation and the Bank reflect the impact of these final rules.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 63
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Corporation’s capital ratios exceeded the requirements for classification as “well-capitalized” under applicable U.S. regulatory requirements. As a result of the stress test results published by the Federal Reserve on June 25, 2020, Northern Trust’s stress capital buffer requirement for the 2020 Capital Plan cycle was set at 2.5%. The 2020 stress capital buffer became effective October 1, 2020, and resulted in an effective Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio minimum requirement of 7.0% inclusive of this buffer. The results of the 2021 stress test, published by the Federal Reserve Board on June 24, 2021, resulted in Northern Trust’s stress capital buffer and effective Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio minimum requirement remaining in effect for the 2021 Capital Plan cycle, which began on October 1, 2021.
Further information regarding the Corporation’s and the Bank’s capital ratios and the minimum requirements for classification as “well-capitalized” is provided in the “Supervision and Regulation-Capital Adequacy Requirements” section of Item 1, “Business,” and Note 33, “Regulatory Capital Requirements,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The use of estimates and assumptions is required in the preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP and actual results could differ from those estimates. The SEC has issued guidance relating to the disclosure of critical accounting estimates. Critical accounting estimates are those that require management to make subjective or complex judgments about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Changes that may be required in the underlying assumptions or estimates in these areas could have a material impact on Northern Trust’s future financial condition and results of operations.
For Northern Trust, accounting estimates that are viewed as critical are those relating to the allowance for credit losses and pension plan accounting. Management has discussed the development and selection of each critical accounting estimate with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors (Audit Committee).
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Corporation adopted Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments-Credit Losses: Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments” (ASU 2016-13) on January 1, 2020, which significantly changes the way impairment of financial instruments is recognized by requiring immediate recognition of estimated credit losses expected to occur over the remaining life of financial instruments. Upon adoption of ASU 2016-13, the Corporation recorded a $13.7 million increase in the allowance for credit losses with a corresponding cumulative effect adjustment to decrease retained earnings $10.1 million, net of income taxes. For more information on the adoption of ASU 2016-13, please refer to Note 2, “Recent Accounting Pronouncements,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
The allowance for credit losses - which represents management’s estimate of lifetime expected credit losses related to various portfolios subject to credit risk, off-balance sheet credit exposure, and specific borrower relationships - is determined by management through a disciplined credit review process. Northern Trust measures expected credit losses of financial assets with similar risk characteristics on a collective basis. A financial asset is measured individually if it does not share similar risk characteristics with other financial assets and the related allowance is determined through an individual evaluation.
Management’s estimates utilized in establishing an appropriate level of allowance for credit losses are not dependent on any single assumption. In determining an appropriate allowance level, management evaluates numerous variables, many of which are interrelated or dependent on other assumptions and estimates, and takes into consideration past events, current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. Due to the inherent imprecision in accounting estimates, other estimates or assumptions could reasonably have been used in 2021 and changes in estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period.
The allowance for credit losses consists of the following components:
Evaluated on a Collective Basis. Expected credit losses are measured on a collective basis as long as the financial assets included in the respective pool share similar risk characteristics. If financial assets are deemed to not share similar risk characteristics, an individual assessment is warranted.
The allowance estimation methodology for the collective assessment is based on data representative of the Corporation’s financial asset portfolio from a historical observation period that includes both expansionary and recessionary periods. The estimation methodology and the related qualitative adjustment framework segregate the loan and lease portfolio into segments based on loan and obligor-specific factors, including loan type, borrower type, collateral type, loan size, and borrower credit quality. For each segment, the probability of default and loss given default are derived for each quarter of the remaining life of each instrument. For the first two years (the reasonable and supportable period), these
64 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
factors are derived by applying quarterly macroeconomic projections using models developed from historical data on macroeconomic factors and loans with similar factors. For periods beyond the reasonable and supportable period, Northern Trust reverts to its long-run historical loss experiences on a straight-line basis over four quarters. The projected exposure at default for every quarter is based on contractual balance projections as of each quarter-end, with adjustments made for potential draws on off-balance sheet commitments.
For each of the different parameters, specific credit models for the individual loan segments were developed. For each segment, the probability of default and the loss given default are applied to the exposure at default for each projected quarter to determine the quantitative component of the allowance. The quantitative allowance is then reviewed within the qualitative adjustment framework, through which management applies judgment by assessing internal risk factors, potential limitations in the quantitative methodology, and environmental factors that are not fully contemplated in the forecast to compute adjustments to the quantitative allowance that may impact individual or multiple segments of the loan portfolio.
ASU 2016-13 requires the use of projected macroeconomic factors. The Corporation uses multiple forecasts approved by Northern Trust’s Macroeconomic Scenario Development Committee (MSDC). The baseline forecast aligns with the Corporation’s latest thinking on macroeconomic projections for the next eight quarters. The forecasts are weighted at each evaluation period and are management’s best estimate of future economic projections at that time.
The allowance estimate is sensitive to changes in portfolio composition, portfolio quality, and macroeconomic forecasts. Increases in the amount of borrowing and material downgrades to the quality of the lending portfolio will increase the reserve, all else equal. Similarly, deteriorating projections for macroeconomic conditions will increase the reserve. Macroeconomic factors that are particularly correlated to Northern Trust’s loan and lease portfolio are equity market values, market volatility, corporate profits, residential and commercial real estate price indices, unemployment, and disposable income. To demonstrate the sensitivity to changes in macroeconomic conditions, Northern Trust applied a 100% probability weighting to downturn conditions, resulting in an increase to the collective component of the allowance for the loan and lease portfolio of approximately $128.3 million. The investment security and other financial assets portfolios are less sensitive to macroeconomic factors in terms of overall reserve impact due to factors such as high credit quality, short duration, and low historical losses.
The commercial and institutional (C&I) portfolio utilizes Northern Trust’s internal borrower rating assessments to determine initial credit quality. A sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the impact of upgrades or downgrades by shifting the rating up or down by one rating class, assuming no changes to other factors, such as macroeconomic projections or qualitative adjustments. The analysis excludes defaulted loans and does not assume a default event; hence, borrowers at the lowest non-default rating were not downgraded. Similarly, those at the highest rating could not be upgraded. Assuming the final forecast probability weighting, the collective component of the allowance assigned to the C&I portfolio would increase by approximately $78.1 million if all C&I borrowers were downgraded by one performing rating class. The C&I collective allowance would decrease by approximately $21.3 million if borrower ratings were upgraded by one rating class (if possible).
The results of the credit reserve estimation methodology are reviewed quarterly by Northern Trust’s Credit Loss Reserve Committee, which receives input from Credit Risk Management, Treasury, Corporate Finance, the Economic Research group, and each of Northern Trust’s business units. The Credit Loss Reserve Committee determines the probability weights applied to each forecast approved by MSDC, and also reviews and approves qualitative adjustments to the collective allowance in line with Northern Trust’s qualitative adjustment framework.
Evaluated on an Individual Basis. The allowance is determined through an individual evaluation of financial assets that have defaulted that is based on expected future cash flows, the value of collateral, and other factors that may impact the borrower’s ability to pay. For defaulted loans for which the amount of allowance, if any, is determined based on the value of the underlying real estate collateral, third-party appraisals are typically obtained and utilized by management. These appraisals are generally less than twelve months old and are subject to adjustments to reflect management’s judgment as to the realizable value of the collateral.
Analysis and Controls. The quarterly analysis of the individual and collective allowance components and the control process maintained by Credit Risk Management and the lending staff are the principal methods relied upon by management for the timely identification and estimation of individual expected credit losses. In addition to Northern Trust’s own experience, management also considers regulatory guidance. Control processes and analyses employed to determine an appropriate level of allowance for credit losses are reviewed at least annually and modified as considered appropriate.
Management believes that the allowance for credit losses adequately considers these uncertainties and has been established at an appropriate level. Actual losses may vary from current estimates and the amount of the provision for credit losses may be greater or less than actual net charge-offs in any particular period.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 65
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Pension Plan Accounting
Northern Trust maintains a noncontributory defined benefit pension plan covering substantially all U.S. employees (U.S. Qualified Plan) and a U.S. noncontributory supplemental pension plan (U.S. Non-Qualified Plan). Certain European-based employees also retain benefits in local defined benefit pension plans, of which the majority are closed to new employees and to future benefit accruals. Measuring cost and reporting liabilities resulting from defined benefit pension plans requires the use of several assumptions regarding future interest rates, asset returns, compensation increases, mortality rates, and other actuarial-based projections relating to the plans. Due to the long-term nature of this obligation and the estimates that are required to be made, the assumptions used in determining the periodic pension expense and the projected benefit obligation are closely monitored and reviewed annually for adjustments that may be required. Pension accounting guidance requires that differences between estimates and actual experience be recognized as other comprehensive income in the period in which they occur. The differences are amortized into net periodic pension expense from accumulated other comprehensive income over the average remaining service period of eligible participants. As a result, differences between the estimates made in the calculation of periodic pension expense and the projected benefit obligation and actual experience affect stockholders’ equity in the period in which they occur but continue to be recognized as expense systematically and gradually over subsequent periods.
Northern Trust recognizes the significant impact that these pension-related assumptions have on the determination of the pension obligations and related expense and has established procedures for monitoring and setting these assumptions each year. These procedures include an annual review of actual demographic and investment experience with the pension plans’ actuaries. In addition to actual experience, adjustments to these assumptions consider observable yields on fixed income securities, known compensation trends and policies, as well as economic conditions and investment strategies that may impact the estimated long-term rate of return on plan assets.
In determining the pension expense for the U.S. Qualified Plan in 2021, Northern Trust utilized a discount rate of 2.75% as of December 31, 2020, 3.05% as of June 30, 2021, and 3.06% as of September 30, 2021, and 3.03% as of December 31, 2021. The application of settlement accounting in 2021 required interim re-measurements of the U.S. Qualified Plan throughout 2021. The discount rate utilized for the U.S. Non-Qualified Plan as of December 31, 2020 was 2.45% . For both plans, the rate of increase in the compensation level is based on a graded schedule from 9.00% to 2.50% that averaged 4.97%. The expected long-term rate of return on U.S. Qualified Plan assets was 5.25% as of both December 31, 2020 and June 30, 2021, and 5.00% as of September 30, 2021.
In evaluating possible revisions to pension-related assumptions for the U.S. pension plans as of Northern Trust’s December 31, 2021 measurement date, the following were considered:
•Discount Rate: Northern Trust estimates the discount rate for its U.S. pension plans by applying the plan specific projected cash flows for future benefit payments for each plan to the Aon AA Above Median yield curve as of the measurement date. This yield curve is composed of individual zero-coupon interest rates for 198 different time periods over a 99-year time horizon. Zero-coupon rates utilized by the yield curve are mathematically derived from observable market yields for AA-rated corporate bonds. This yield curve model referenced by Northern Trust in establishing the discount rate resulted in a rate of 3.03% and 2.80% at December 31, 2021 for the U.S. Qualified and U.S. Non-Qualified Plans, respectively.
•Compensation Level: Based on a review of actual and anticipated salary experience, the compensation scale assumption is based on a graded schedule from 9.00% to 2.50% that averages 4.97%.
•Rate of Return on Plan Assets: The expected return on plan assets is based on an estimate of the long-term (30 years) rate of return on plan assets, which is determined using a building block approach that considers the current asset mix and estimates of return by asset class based on historical experience, giving proper consideration to diversification and rebalancing. Current market factors such as inflation and interest rates are also evaluated before long-term capital market assumptions are determined. Peer data and historical returns are reviewed to check for reasonability and appropriateness. As a result of these analyses, Northern Trust’s rate of return assumption for the U.S. Qualified Plan is 5.25% for 2022.
•Mortality Table: As of December 31, 2021, Northern Trust has adopted the aggregate Pri-2012 mortality table with a 2012 base year, which was released by the Society of Actuaries in October 2019. Northern Trust’s pension obligations reflect proposed future improvement under scale MP-2021, which was released by the Society of Actuaries in October 2021. This assumption was updated at December 31, 2021 from improvement scale MP-2020. The updated improvement scale applies to annuity payments only and results in slightly higher projected mortality improvement rates than estimated by the MP-2020 improvement scale. Mortality assumptions on lump sum payments remain static and continue to be in line with the IRS prescribed table for minimum lump sums in 2022.
Excluding pension settlement charges, net pension expense in 2022 is expected to decrease by approximately $10.1 million, primarily driven by lower loss amortization due to strong asset returns in previous years and the 2021 settlement recognition.
66 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In order to illustrate the sensitivity of these assumptions on the expected U.S pension plans’ periodic pension expense in 2022 and the projected benefit obligation as of December 31, 2021, the following table is presented to show the effect of increasing or decreasing each of these assumptions by 25 basis points.
TABLE 44: SENSITIVITY OF U.S. PENSION PLANS ASSUMPTIONS
Pension Contributions. The deduction limits specified by the Internal Revenue Code for contributions made by sponsors of defined benefit pension plans are based on a “Target Liability” under the provisions of the Pension Protection Act of 2006. There were no contributions to the U.S. Qualified Plan for the 2021 plan year. The minimum required contribution to the U.S. Qualified Plan is expected to be zero in 2022. The maximum deductible contribution is estimated at $413.0 million for 2022.
FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires certain assets and liabilities to be reported at fair value. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 21% of Northern Trust’s total assets and less than 1% of total liabilities were carried on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value. As of December 31, 2020, approximately 25% of Northern Trust’s total assets and approximately 1% of its total liabilities were carried on the consolidated balance sheets at fair value. As discussed more fully in Note 3, “Fair Value Measurements,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” GAAP requires entities to categorize financial assets and liabilities carried at fair value according to a three-level valuation hierarchy. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to quoted, active market prices for identical assets and liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to valuation techniques that require significant management judgment because one or more of the significant inputs are unobservable in the market place (Level 3). Approximately 6% and 7% of Northern Trust’s assets carried at fair value are classified as Level 1 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Northern Trust typically does not hold equity securities or other instruments that are actively traded on an exchange.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately 94% of Northern Trust’s assets and 96% of its liabilities carried at fair value are categorized as Level 2, as they are valued using models in which all significant inputs are observable in active markets. Investment debt securities classified as AFS make up 98% of Level 2 assets with the remaining 2% primarily consisting of derivative financial instruments. Level 2 liabilities are comprised solely of derivative financial instruments.
As of December 31, 2020, approximately 93% of Northern Trust’s assets and 98% of its liabilities carried at fair value are categorized as Level 2, as they are valued using models in which all significant inputs are observable in active markets. Investment debt securities classified as AFS make up 97% of Level 2 assets with the remaining 3% primarily consisting of derivative financial instruments. Level 2 liabilities are comprised solely of derivative financial instruments.
Northern Trust’s Level 2 assets include AFS and trading account securities, the fair values of which are determined predominantly by external pricing vendors. Northern Trust has a well-established process to validate prices received from pricing vendors as discussed more fully in Note 3, “Fair Value Measurements,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, all derivative assets and liabilities, excluding the swap related to the sale of certain Visa Class B common shares described below, were classified as Level 2 and approximately 96% and 95%, respectively, were measured on a notional value basis, related to client-related and trading activities, predominantly consisting of foreign exchange contracts. Derivative instruments are valued internally using widely accepted income-based models that incorporate inputs readily observable in actively quoted markets and reflect contractual terms of contracts. Northern Trust evaluated the impact of counterparty credit risk and its own credit risk on the valuation of derivative instruments. Factors considered included the likelihood of default by Northern Trust and its counterparties, the remaining maturities of the instruments, net exposures after giving effect to master netting agreements, available collateral, and other credit enhancements in determining the appropriate fair value of derivative instruments. The resulting valuation adjustments are not considered material.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 67
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, Northern Trust’s Level 3 liabilities consisted of swaps that Northern Trust entered into with the purchaser of 1.1 million and 1.0 million shares of Visa Inc. Class B common stock (Visa Class B common shares) previously held by Northern Trust and sold in June 2016 and 2015, respectively. Pursuant to the swaps, Northern Trust retains the risks associated with the ultimate conversion of the Visa Class B common shares into shares of Visa Inc. Class A common stock (Visa Class A common shares), such that the counterparty will be compensated for any dilutive adjustments to the conversion ratio and Northern Trust will be compensated for any anti-dilutive adjustments to the ratio. The swaps also require periodic payments from Northern Trust to the counterparty calculated by reference to the market price of Visa Class A common shares and a fixed rate of interest. The fair value of the swaps are determined using a discounted cash flow methodology. The significant unobservable inputs used in the fair value measurement are Northern Trust’s own assumptions about estimated changes in the conversion rate of the Visa Class B common shares into Visa Class A common shares, the date on which such conversion is expected to occur and the estimated growth rate of the Visa Class A common share price. See “Visa Class B Common Shares” under Note 26, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” for further information.
While Northern Trust believes its valuation methods for its assets and liabilities carried at fair value are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, the use of different methodologies or assumptions, particularly as applied to Level 3 assets, could have a material effect on the computation of their estimated fair values.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS AND DEVELOPMENTS
In November 2021, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU No. 2021-10, “Government Assistance (Topic 832): Disclosures by Business Entities about Government Assistance” (ASU 2021-10). The amendments in ASU 2021-10 require annual disclosures about transactions with a government that are accounted for by applying a grant or contribution accounting model by analogy to other accounting guidance within Topic 958, Not-for-Profit Entities, or International Accounting Standards 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance. ASU 2021-10 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021, although early adoption is permitted. ASU 2020-10 is not expected to have a significant impact on Northern Trust’s consolidated financial condition or results of operations.
RISK MANAGEMENT
Risk Management Overview
Northern Trust employs an integrated risk management framework to support its business decisions and the execution of its corporate strategies. The framework provides a methodology to identify, manage, report and govern both internal and external risks to Northern Trust, and promotes a culture of risk awareness and good conduct across the organization. Northern Trust’s risk culture encompasses the general awareness, attitude and conduct of employees with respect to risk and the management of risk across all lines of defense within the organization. Northern Trust cultivates a culture of effective risk management by defining and embedding risk management accountabilities in all employee performance expectations and provides training, development and performance rewards to reinforce this culture.
Northern Trust’s risk management framework contains three inter-related elements, designed to support consistent enterprise risk identification, management and reporting: a comprehensive risk inventory, a static taxonomy of risk categories and a dynamic taxonomy of risk themes. The risk inventory is a detailed register of the risks inherently faced by Northern Trust. The risk categories and risk themes are classification systems used for classifying and managing the risk inventory and enabling different risk profile views. All identified risks inherent in Northern Trust’s business activities are cataloged into the following risk categories: credit, operational, fiduciary, compliance, market, liquidity, and strategic risk. All material risks are also dynamically cataloged into various risk themes which are defined groupings that share common characteristics, focus on business outcomes and span across risk categories.
Northern Trust implements its risk management framework through a “three lines of defense” operating model, embedding a robust risk management capability within its businesses. The model, used to communicate risk management expectations across the organization, contains three roles, each with a complementary level of risk management accountability. Within this operating model, Northern Trust’s businesses are the first line of defense for protecting it against the risks inherent in its businesses and are supported by dedicated business risk management teams. The Risk Management function, the second line of defense, sets the direction for Northern Trust’s risk management activities and provides aggregate risk oversight and reporting in support of risk governance. Audit Services, the third line of defense, provides independent assurance as to the effectiveness of the integrated risk framework.
68 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Risk Governance and Oversight Overview
Risk governance is an integral aspect of corporate governance at Northern Trust, and includes clearly defined accountabilities, expectations, internal controls and processes for risk-based decision-making and escalation of issues. The following diagram provides a high-level overview of Northern Trust’s risk governance structure, highlighting oversight by the Board of Directors and key risk-related committees.
TABLE 45: RISK GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE
Northern Trust Corporation Board of Directors
Audit Committee Business Risk Committee Capital Governance Committee Compensation and Benefits Committee
-Cybersecurity Risk Oversight Subcommittee
Global Enterprise Risk Committee (GERC)
Credit Risk Committee Market & Liquidity Risk Committee Operational Risk Committee Fiduciary Risk Committee Compliance & Ethics Oversight Committee Information Technology Risk Committee Model Risk Oversight Committee
The Board of Directors provides oversight of risk management directly and through certain of its committees: the Audit Committee, the Business Risk Committee, the Capital Governance Committee and the Compensation and Benefits Committee. The Board of Directors annually approves Northern Trust’s Risk Management Framework and Corporate Risk Appetite Statement.
The Audit Committee provides oversight with respect to financial reporting and legal risk.
The Business Risk Committee assumes primary responsibility and oversight with respect to the credit risk, operational risk, fiduciary risk, compliance risk, market risk, liquidity risk, strategic risk, and associated risk themes. The Cybersecurity Risk Oversight Subcommittee is a subcommittee of the Business Risk Committee and assists the Business Risk Committee in discharging its duties with respect to risks related to cybersecurity inherent in Northern Trust’s businesses.
The Compensation and Benefits Committee oversees the development and operation of Northern Trust’s incentive compensation program. The Committee annually reviews management’s assessment of the effectiveness of the design and performance of Northern Trust’s incentive compensation arrangements and practices in providing incentives that are consistent with Northern Trust’s safety, soundness, and culture. This assessment includes an evaluation of whether Northern Trust’s incentive compensation arrangements and practices discourage inappropriate risk-taking behavior by participants.
The Capital Governance Committee assists the Board of Directors in discharging its oversight duties with respect to capital management and resolution planning activities. Among other responsibilities, the Capital Governance Committee oversees Northern Trust’s capital management assessments, forecasting, and stress testing processes and activities, including the annual CCAR exercise, and challenges management, as appropriate, on various elements of such processes and activities. Accordingly, the Capital Governance Committee provides oversight with respect to Northern Trust’s linkage of material risks to the capital adequacy assessment process.
The Chief Risk Officer (CRO) oversees Northern Trust’s management of risk and compliance, promotes risk awareness and fosters a proactive risk management environment wherein risks inherent in the business strategy are identified, understood, appropriately monitored and mitigated. The CRO reports directly to the Business Risk Committee and the Corporation’s Chief Executive Officer. The CRO regularly advises the Business Risk Committee and reports to the Committee at least quarterly on risk exposures, risk management deficiencies and emerging risks. In accordance with the risk management framework, the CRO and the Risk Management executive leadership team of Northern Trust, together with the Chief Financial Officer, Head of Capital and Resolution Planning, General Counsel and Chief Human Resources Officer, meet as the Global Enterprise Risk Committee (GERC) to provide executive management oversight and guidance with respect to the management of the categories of risk and risk themes within Northern Trust. The Chief Audit Executive, or his or her designee, also attends GERC meetings as a non-voting member. Among other risk management responsibilities, GERC receives reports, escalations, or recommendations from senior risk committees that are responsible for the management of risk, and from time to time may delegate responsibility to such committees for risk issues. Senior risk committees include:
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 69
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Credit Risk Committee (CRC) establishes and monitors credit-related policies and practices throughout Northern Trust and promotes their uniform application.
The Market & Liquidity Risk Committee (MLRC) oversees activities relating to the management of market and liquidity risks by facilitating a focused review of market and liquidity risk exposures and providing rigorous challenge of related policies, key assumptions, and practices.
The Operational Risk Committee (ORC) provides independent oversight and is responsible for setting the operational risk-related policies and developing and implementing the operational risk management framework and programs that support coordination of operational risk activities.
The Fiduciary Risk Committee (FRC) is responsible for establishing and reviewing the fiduciary risk policies and establishing the fiduciary risk framework, governance and programs that support the coordination of fiduciary risk activities.
The Compliance & Ethics Oversight Committee (CEOC) provides oversight and direction with respect to compliance policies, implementation of the compliance and ethics program, and the coordination of regulatory compliance initiatives across the Corporation.
The Information Technology Risk Committee (ITRC) provides oversight and direction with respect to information security, technology and cyber risk. The committee is responsible for recommending the policies related to, and overseeing development and implementation of the risk management framework, standards and processes supporting coordination and governance of, information security, technology and cyber risk management activities.
The Model Risk Oversight Committee (MROC) is responsible for providing management attention, direction, and oversight of the model risk management framework and model risk within Northern Trust.
In addition to the aforementioned committees, Northern Trust establishes business and regional risk committees that also report into GERC.
Risk Assessment, Appetite and Reporting Processes
As part of the integrated risk framework, Northern Trust has established key risk identification and risk management processes, embedded within its businesses to enable a risk-informed profile that supports its business decisions and the execution of its corporate strategies. Northern Trust’s risk assessment process consists of a series of programs across the first and second lines of defense that identify, measure, manage and report risks in line with risk appetite and guidelines.
Northern Trust defines its risk appetite as the aggregate level and types of risk the Board of Directors and senior management are willing to assume to achieve the Corporation’s strategic objectives and business plan, consistent with prudent management of risk and applicable capital, liquidity, and other regulatory requirements. It includes consideration of the likelihood and impact of risks, using both monetary loss and non-financial measures across risk themes to monitor against tolerance thresholds and guideline levels that trigger escalation to risk committees, senior management, and the Board of Directors or committees thereof, as appropriate.
Risk Control
Risk Control is an internal, independent review function within the Risk Management function. Risk Control is managed by the Head of Risk Control and is comprised of Model Risk Management, Credit Review, and Global Compliance Testing groups, each with its own risk focus and oversight. Model Risk Management is responsible for the implementation and management of the enterprise-wide model risk framework and independently validating new models and reviewing and re-validating existing models. Credit Review provides an independent, ongoing assessment of credit exposure and related credit risk management processes across Northern Trust. Lastly, Global Compliance Testing evaluates the effectiveness of procedures and controls designed to comply with relevant laws and regulations, as well as corresponding Northern Trust policies governing regulatory compliance activities. The Business Risk Committee has oversight responsibility with respect to Risk Control generally as well as each of these groups.
70 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Audit Services
Audit Services is an independent control function that assesses and validates controls within Northern Trust’s risk management framework. Audit Services is managed by the Chief Audit Executive with oversight from the Audit Committee. Audit Services tests the overall adequacy and effectiveness of the system of internal controls associated with the framework on an ongoing basis and reports the results of these audits directly to the Audit Committee. Audit Services includes professionals with a broad range of audit and industry experience, including risk management expertise. The Chief Audit Executive reports directly to the Audit Committee and administratively reports to the Corporation’s Chief Executive Officer and is a non-voting member of GERC.
Credit Risk
Credit risk is the risk to interest income or principal from the failure of a borrower, issuer, or counterparty to perform on an obligation.
Credit Risk Overview
Credit risk is inherent in many of Northern Trust’s activities. A significant component of credit risk relates to loans, leases, securities, and counterparty-related exposures. Northern Trust’s loan portfolio differs significantly from those of other large U.S. financial institutions in that Northern Trust is generally:
•not an originator of loan products to be sold into a secondary market or to be bundled into asset securitizations;
•not an agent bank or syndicator of loans, where risk management is achieved post-close through the sale of participations; and
•not a participant in leveraged financial transactions, such as project finance, private-equity-originated acquisition financing or hedge fund leveraging.
Credit Risk Framework and Governance
The Credit Risk Management function is the focal point of the credit risk framework and, while independent of the businesses, it works closely with them to achieve the goal of assuring proactive management of credit risk. To monitor and control credit risk, the Credit Risk Management function maintains a framework that consists of policies, standards, and programs designed to promote a prudent relationship-based credit culture. This function also monitors adherence to corporate policies, standards, programs, and external regulations.
The Credit Risk Management function provides a system of checks and balances for Northern Trust’s diverse credit-related activities by monitoring these activities and practices and promoting their uniform application throughout Northern Trust.
The credit risk framework provides authorities for approval of the extension of credit. Individual credit authority for commercial and personal loans is limited to specified amounts and maturities. Credit requests exceeding individual authority because of amount, rating, term or other conditions, are referred to the relevant Group Credit Approval Committee. Credit decisions involving exposure in excess of these limits require the approval of the Senior Credit Committee. The Capital Markets Credit Committee has sole credit authority for the approval, modification, or renewal of credit exposure to all wholesale market counterparties.
The Credit Risk Committee establishes and monitors credit-related policies and programs throughout Northern Trust and promotes their uniform application. The Chief Credit Officer reports directly to the CRO and chairs the CRC. Independent oversight and review of the credit risk framework also is provided by Risk Control.
Credit Risk Measurement
An integral component of credit risk measurement is Northern Trust’s internal risk rating system. Northern Trust’s internal risk rating system enables identification, measurement, approval and monitoring of credit risk. Calculations include entity-specific information about the obligor’s or counterparty’s probability of default and exposure-specific information about loss given default, exposure at default and maturity.
The Credit Risk Management function is responsible for the ongoing oversight of each model that supports the internal risk-rating system. Independent model governance and oversight is further supported by the activities of Risk Control.
Loans and Other Extensions of Credit
A significant component of credit risk relates to the loan portfolio, including contractual obligations such as legally binding commitments to extend credit, commercial letters of credit, and standby letters of credit. These contractual obligations and arrangements are discussed in Note 26, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Undrawn commitments to extend credit generally have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses. Since a significant portion of the commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amount
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 71
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
does not necessarily represent future loans or liquidity requirements. The following table provides information about the industry sector and expiration dates of undrawn commitments to extend credit as of December 31, 2021.
TABLE 46: UNDRAWN COMMITMENTS TO EXTEND CREDIT BY INDUSTRY SECTOR
(1) Commercial and Institutional industry sector information is presented on the basis of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS).
As part of Northern Trust’s credit processes, the Credit Risk Management function oversees a range of portfolio reviews that focus on significant and/or weaker-rated credits. This approach allows management to take remedial action in an effort to deal with potential problems. An integral part of the Credit Risk Management function is a formal review of past due and potential problem loans to determine which credits, if any, need to be placed on nonaccrual status or charged off. Northern Trust maintains a loan portfolio watch list for adversely classified credit exposures that includes all nonaccrual credits as well as other loans with elevated risk of default. Independent from the Credit Risk Management function, Credit Review undertakes both on-site and off-site file reviews that evaluate effectiveness of management’s implementation of the Credit Risk Management’s requirements.
Counterparty Credit Risk
Counterparty credit risk for Northern Trust primarily arises from a variety of funding, treasury, trading and custody-related activities, including over-the-counter (OTC) currency and interest rate derivatives, and from indemnified securities lending transactions. Credit exposure to counterparties is managed by use of a framework for setting limits by product type and exposure tenor.
To calculate exposure, Northern Trust treats repurchase agreements, reverse repurchase agreements and indemnified securities lending transactions as repo-style transactions. Foreign exchange exposures and interest rate derivatives are treated as OTC derivatives. The exposure at default measurement methodology for each eligible type of counterparty credit exposure, including the use of netting and collateral as risk mitigants, is determined based on operational requirements, the characteristics of the contract type and the portfolio size and complexity.
72 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Credit Risk Mitigation
Northern Trust considers cash flow to be the primary source of repayment for client-related credit exposures. However, Northern Trust employs several different types of credit risk mitigants to manage its overall credit risk in the event cash flow is not sufficient to repay a credit exposure. Northern Trust broadly groups its risk mitigation techniques into the following three primary categories.
Physical and Financial Collateral: Northern Trust’s primary risk mitigation approaches include the requirement of collateral. Residential and commercial real estate exposures are typically secured by properly margined mortgages on the property. In cases where loans to commercial or certain Wealth Management clients are secured by marketable securities, the daily values of the securities are monitored closely to ensure adherence to collateral coverage policies.
Netting: On-balance sheet netting is employed where applicable for counterparties with master netting agreements. Netting is primarily related to foreign exchange transactions with major banks and institutional clients subject to eligible master netting agreements. Northern Trust has elected to take the credit risk mitigation capital benefit of netting within its regulatory capital calculation at this time.
Guarantees: Personal and corporate guarantees are often taken to facilitate potential collection efforts and to protect Northern Trust’s claims relative to other creditors. Northern Trust has elected not to take the credit risk mitigation capital benefit of guarantors within its regulatory capital calculation at this time.
Another important risk management practice is the avoidance of undue concentrations of exposure, such as in any single (or small number of related) obligor/counterparty, loan type, industry, geography, country or risk mitigant. Processes are in place to establish limits on certain concentrations and the monitoring of adherence to the limits.
Operational Risk
Operational risk is the risk of loss from inadequate or failed internal processes, human factors and systems, or from external events.
Operational Risk Overview
Operational risk is inherent in each of Northern Trust’s businesses and corporate functions and reflects the potential for inadequate information systems, operating problems, challenges related to reliance on third parties, product design and delivery difficulties, potential legal actions or other catastrophes to result in losses. This includes the potential that continuity of service and resiliency may be impacted.
Operational risk includes information technology and cybersecurity, compliance, fiduciary and legal risks, which under the Corporation’s risk structure are governed and managed explicitly.
Operational Risk Framework and Governance
To monitor and control operational risk, Northern Trust maintains a framework consisting of risk management policies, programs and practices designed to promote a sound operational environment and maintain the Corporation’s operational risk profile and losses within approved risk appetites and guidelines. The framework is deployed consistently and globally across all businesses and its objective is to identify and measure the factors that influence risk and drive action to reduce future loss events. The Operational Risk Management function is responsible for defining the operational risk management framework and providing independent oversight of the framework implementation and application across Northern Trust. It is the responsibility of each business to implement the enterprise-wide operational risk framework and business-specific risk management programs to identify, monitor, measure, manage and report on operational risk and mitigate Northern Trust’s exposure to loss. Several key programs support the operational risk framework, including:
•Loss Event Data Program - a program that collects internal and external loss data for use in monitoring operational risk exposure, various business analyses and a Basel Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) capital quantification.
•Risk and Control Self-Assessment - a comprehensive, structured risk management process used by Northern Trust’s businesses to identify, measure, monitor and mitigate operational risk exposures throughout the enterprise.
•Operational Risk Scenario Analysis - a systematic process of obtaining expert opinions from business managers and risk management experts to derive reasoned assessments of the likelihood of occurrence and the potential loss impact of plausible operational losses.
•Product and Process Risk Management Program - a program used for evaluating and managing risks associated with the introduction of new and modified noncredit products and services, significant changes to operating processes, and related significant loss events.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 73
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
•Outsourcing Risk Management Program - a program that provides processes for appropriate risk assessment, measurement, monitoring and management of outsourced technology and business process outsourcing.
•Global Fraud Risk - a program designed to prevent, detect and respond to attempted or actual fraud impacting the bank and its clients globally.
•Global Privacy Program - a program that sets forth a consistent, global approach to compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations relating to privacy and establishes overarching principles for the responsible use and protection of confidential information. The Program is designed to guide Northern Trust to more effectively identify, assess, manage and mitigate privacy risks and privacy incidents.
•Information Security and Technology Risk Management - a framework that sets forth a consistent, global approach to communicate risk management processes and controls addressing information security, including cyber threats, technology and compliance risks to the organization.
•Operational Resiliency and Recovery Management Program - a program designed to protect life safety, minimize and manage the business impact and support the resumption of mission-critical and economic functions for clients following an incident.
•Physical Security - a program that provides for the life safety of Northern Trust partners, clients, and visitors worldwide.
•Insurance Management Program - a program designed to reduce the monetary impact of certain operational loss events through the securing of appropriate insurance policy protection.
As discussed in Risk Control, Model Risk Management also is part of the operational risk framework.
The ORC is responsible for overseeing the activities of Northern Trust related to the management of operational risk including establishing and maintaining the Corporate Operational Risk Policy and approving the operational risk framework and programs. This committee has the expanded role of coordinating operational risk issues related to information technology, cybersecurity, compliance and fiduciary risks. The purpose of this committee is to provide executive management’s insight and guidance to the management of existing and emerging operational risks. This includes identification and assessment of evolving risk trends across the operational risk framework and how these can be best managed.
Operational Risk Measurement
Northern Trust utilizes the AMA capital quantification process to estimate required capital for the Corporation and applicable U.S. banking subsidiaries. Northern Trust’s AMA capital quantification process incorporates outputs from the Loss Event Data, Risk and Control Self-Assessment and Operational Risk Scenario Analysis programs to derive required capital. Business environment factor information is used to estimate loss frequency. The AMA capital quantification process uses a Loss Distribution Approach methodology to combine frequency and severity distributions to arrive at an estimate of the potential aggregate loss at the 99.9th percentile of the aggregate loss distribution over a one-year time horizon.
Information Security and Technology Risk Management
Effective management of risks related to the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information is crucial in an environment of increasing cyber threat and requires a structured approach to establish and communicate expectations and required practices. Northern Trust’s information security, technology, and cyber risk management framework provides the overall structure for managing the respective risks in a sustainable manner. The framework is supported by the Information Security, Technology, and Cyber Risk Management Policy, which is the highest-level governing document and is approved by the Business Risk Committee. In addition, the framework is supported by an organizational structure that reflects support from executive management and includes risk committees comprised of members from across the business, including the Information Technology Risk Committee (ITRC). The ITRC is chaired by the Chief Information Risk Officer, who regularly reports to the Board of Directors and its subcommittees, as appropriate, on the status of the information security, technology, and cyber risk profile.
The governance process, internal controls and risk management practices are designed to keep risk at levels appropriate to Northern Trust’s overall risk appetite and the inherent risk in the markets in which Northern Trust operates. Northern Trust employees are responsible for promoting information security as well as adhering to applicable policies and standards and other means provided to them to safeguard electronic information and business systems within their care. In cases where Northern Trust relies on vendors to perform services, controls are routinely reviewed for alignment with industry standards and their ability to protect information. Any findings identified are remediated following a risk-based approach.
In addition to the many information security controls managed and monitored within the organization, Northern Trust uses external third-party security teams on a regular basis to assess effectiveness. These teams perform program maturity
74 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
assessments, penetration tests, security assessments and reviews of Northern Trust’s vulnerability to cyber-attacks. Northern Trust operates a global security operations center for threat identification and response. This center aggregates security threat information from systems and platforms across the business, and alerts the organization in accordance with its documented Cyber Incident Response Plan.
The Cyber Incident Response Plan is used to respond to cybersecurity incidents. A cybersecurity incident is defined as an incident caused by damaging activity, which requires actions to prevent and respond to disruptions, denials, compromises or exfiltration that impact the confidentiality, integrity and availability of the assets of Northern Trust or its clients. The plan provides a streamlined approach that can be invoked rapidly to address matters that raise enterprise concern and to communicate impact, actions and status to senior management, including the Chief Information Security Officer and Chief Information Risk Officer, and appropriate stakeholders. The plan is designed to work with enterprise-level response plans, and is reviewed, tested, and updated regularly.
Northern Trust’s disclosure procedures and controls also address cybersecurity incidents and include elements to ensure that there is an analysis of potential disclosure obligations arising from any such incidents. Northern Trust maintains compliance programs to address the applicability of restrictions on securities trading while in possession of material, nonpublic information, including in instances in which such information may relate to cybersecurity incidents.
Northern Trust also maintains a comprehensive Information and Cyber Security Training and Awareness practice providing baseline and targeted education and awareness for employees and contractors. This program includes at least one required annual online training class for all employees, supplemental refresher training throughout the year, targeted training based on roles and risk levels, multiple simulated phishing and vishing attacks with associated training, the distribution of regular information security awareness materials, and the designation of individuals as Information Security and Privacy champions within the businesses.
Operational Resiliency and Recovery Management
Northern Trust’s operational resiliency approach encompasses operational resiliency and recovery processes enterprise-wide (including staff, technology and facilities) to anticipate and limit disruptions and to ensure that following a disaster or business interruption Northern Trust is able to resume mission-critical business and economic functions and fulfills all regulatory and legal requirements.
Northern Trust’s operational resiliency mitigation and preventative measures include sophisticated physical security, resilient designs and peer capacity for its corporate data centers, a highly redundant global network, robust network security, resiliency centers that offer alternative workstations and transfer of work and work-from-home programs that provide further capability.
All of Northern Trust’s businesses are required to risk-assess their critical functions regularly and develop business continuity plans covering resource requirements (people, systems, vendor relationships and other assets), arrangements for obtaining these resources and prioritizing the resumption of each function in compliance with corporate standards. The business continuity programs of all critical third-party vendors to Northern Trust are reviewed on a regular basis. All of Northern Trust’s businesses test their plans at least annually. The ORC annually reviews and presents the corporate business continuity plan to the Business Risk Committee. In 2020 and 2021, Northern Trust utilized these business continuity plans to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Fiduciary Risk
Fiduciary risks are risks arising from the failure in administering or managing financial and other assets in clients’ fiduciary accounts: i) to adhere to a fiduciary standard of care if required under the terms of governing documents or applicable laws; or ii) to properly discharge fiduciary duties. Fiduciary status may hinge on the nature of a particular function being performed and fiduciary standards may vary by jurisdiction, type of relationship and governing document.
Fiduciary Risk Overview
The fiduciary risk management framework identifies, assesses, measures, monitors and reports on fiduciary risk matters deemed significant. Fiduciary risk is mitigated through internal controls and risk management practices that are designed to identify, understand and keep such risk at levels consistent with the organization’s overall risk appetite while also managing the inherent risk in each relationship for which Northern Trust serves in a fiduciary capacity. Each business is responsible for complying with all corporate policies and external regulations and for establishing specific procedures, standards and guidelines to manage fiduciary risk within the desired risk appetite.
Fiduciary Risk Framework and Governance
The FRC is responsible for overseeing activities related to the exercise of fiduciary powers throughout the organization and for establishing and reviewing the fiduciary risk policies and the fiduciary risk framework that supports the coordination of activities to identify, monitor, manage and report on fiduciary risk. In addition, the FRC serves as an escalation point for significant issues raised by its subcommittees or elsewhere in the organization.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 75
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Compliance Risk
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to reputation resulting from failure to comply with laws, regulations, rules, other regulatory requirements, or codes of conduct and other standards of self-regulatory organizations applicable to Northern Trust. Compliance risk includes the following two subcategories:
•Regulatory Risk - risk arising from failure to comply with prudential and conduct of business or other regulatory requirements.
•Financial Crime Risk - risk arising from financial crime (e.g., money laundering, sanctions violations, fraud, insider dealing, theft, etc.) in relation to the products, services, or accounts of the institution, its clients, or others associated with the same.
Compliance Risk Framework and Governance
The compliance risk management framework identifies, assesses, controls, measures, monitors and reports on compliance risk. The framework is designed to minimize compliance risk and maintain an environment in which criminal or regulatory violations do not occur. The framework includes a comprehensive governance structure and a Compliance and Ethics Program approved by the Business Risk Committee.
Each business is responsible for the implementation and effectiveness of the Compliance and Ethics Program and specific compliance policies within their respective businesses. Each business is responsible for its respective employees’ compliance with corporate policies and external regulations and for establishing specific procedures, standards and guidelines to manage compliance risk in accordance with Northern Trust’s Compliance and Ethics Program.
The CEOC establishes and monitors adherence to Northern Trust’s Compliance and Ethics Program. The Chief Compliance and Ethics Officer reports to the Business Risk Committee, as appropriate, and chairs the CEOC.
Liquidity Risk Management
Liquidity Risk Overview
Liquidity risk is the risk of not being able to raise sufficient funds or maintain collateral to meet balance sheet and contingent liability cash flow obligations when due, because of firm-specific or market-wide stress events.
Northern Trust maintains a strong liquidity position and liquidity risk profile. Northern Trust’s balance sheet is primarily liability-driven. That is, the main driver of balance sheet changes comes from changing levels of client deposits, which are generally related to the level of custody assets serviced and commercial and personal deposits and can also be influenced by market conditions. This liability-driven business model differs from a typical asset-driven business model, where increased levels of deposits and wholesale borrowings are required to support, for example, increased levels of lending. Northern Trust’s balance sheet is generally comprised of high-quality assets that are managed to meet anticipated obligations under stress, resulting in low liquidity risk. In recent years, market conditions have driven elevated levels of client deposits, which have been actively managed and monitored.
Liquidity Risk Framework and Governance
Northern Trust maintains a liquidity risk framework consisting of risk management policies and practices to keep its risk profile within the Board-approved Corporate Risk Appetite Statement. All liquidity risk activities are overseen by the Risk Management function, which is independent of the businesses undertaking the activities.
The Liquidity Management Policy and exposure limits for liquidity risk are set by the Board of Directors, and committee structures have been established to implement and monitor adherence to corporate policies, external regulations and established procedures. Limits are monitored based on measures such as the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR), the net stable funding ratio (NSFR), and the liquidity stress-testing buffer across a range of time horizons. Treasury, in the first line of defense, proposes liquidity risk management strategies and is responsible for performing liquidity management activities. The Asset and Liability Management Committee (ALCO) provides first line management oversight and is responsible for approving strategies and activities within the risk appetite, monitoring risk metrics, overseeing balance sheet resources, and reviewing reporting such as cash flows, LCR, NSFR, and stress test results.
The Market and Liquidity Risk Management Committee (MLRC), in the second line of defense, provides challenge to the first line activities, evaluates compliance with regulatory requirements and process effectiveness, and escalates material items for corrective action. The MLRC provides second line oversight and is responsible for reviewing market and liquidity risk exposures, approving and monitoring risk metrics, and approving key methodologies and assumptions that drive liquidity risk measurement.
76 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Liquidity Risk Analysis, Monitoring, and Reporting
Liquidity risk is analyzed and monitored in order to ensure compliance with the approved risk appetite. Various liquidity analysis and monitoring activities are employed by Northern Trust to understand better the nature and sources of its liquidity risks, including: liquidity stress testing, liquidity metric monitoring, collateral management, intraday management, cash flow projections, operational deposit modeling, liquid asset buffer measurement, funds transfer pricing, and contingency funding planning.
The liquidity risk management process is supported through management and regulatory reporting. Both Northern Trust’s Treasury and Market and Liquidity Risk Management functions produce management reports that enable oversight bodies to make informed decisions and support management of liquidity risk within the approved risk appetite. Holistic liquidity metrics such as LCR, NSFR and internal liquidity stress testing are actively monitored, along with a suite of other metrics that provide early warning indicators of changes in the risk profile.
Regulatory Environment
Northern Trust actively follows regulatory developments and regularly evaluates its liquidity risk management framework against proposed rule-making and industry best practices in order to comply with applicable regulations and further enhance its liquidity policies. Please refer to “Supervision and Regulation-Liquidity Standards” in Item 1, “Business,” for a discussion of applicable liquidity standards.
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR)
The LCR Final Rule requires covered banking organizations, which include the Corporation, to maintain an amount of high-quality liquid assets (HQLAs) equal to or greater than 100% of the banking organization’s total net cash outflows over a 30 calendar-day standardized supervisory liquid stress scenario. The requirements of the LCR Final Rule are intended to promote the short-term resilience of the liquidity risk profile of covered banking organizations, improve the banking industry’s ability to absorb shocks arising from financial and economic stress, and improve the measurement and management of liquidity risk. The Corporation and the Bank each satisfied the U.S. liquidity coverage ratio requirements during 2021.
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR)
The NSFR Final Rule requires covered banking organizations, which include the Corporation, to maintain an amount of available stable funding (ASF) equal to or greater than the banking organization’s projected minimum funding needs, or required stable funding (RSF), over a one-year time horizon. The NSFR is designed to reduce the likelihood that disruptions to a banking organization’s regular sources of funding will compromise its liquidity position, promote effective liquidity risk management, and support the ability of banking organizations to provide financial intermediation to businesses and households across a range of market conditions. The NSFR supports financial stability by requiring banking organizations to fund their activities with stable sources of funding on an ongoing basis, reducing the possibility that funding shocks would substantially increase distress at individual banking organizations. Since the regulatory compliance date of July 1, 2021, both the Corporation and Bank each satisfied the U.S. net stable funding ratio requirements.
Funding
Northern Trust maintains a very liquid balance sheet, with cash and due from banks, deposits with the Federal Reserve and other central banks, short-term money market assets and investment securities in aggregate representing 71% and 73% of total assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The market value of unencumbered securities at the Bank, which include those placed at the Federal Reserve discount window, totaled $59.0 billion and $56.8 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As the Corporation’s principal subsidiary encompassing all of Northern Trust’s banking activities, the Bank centrally manages liquidity for all U.S. and international banking operations. Liquidity is provided by a variety of sources, including client deposits (institutional and personal) from the C&IS and Wealth Management businesses, wholesale funding from the capital markets, maturities of short-term investments, interest earned on investment securities and money market assets, Federal Home Loan Bank advances, and unencumbered liquid assets that can be sold or pledged to secure additional funds. While management does not view central bank discount windows as primary sources of liquidity, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Bank had over $55.0 billion and $51.3 billion, respectively of securities and loans readily available as collateral to support discount window borrowings. The Bank also is active in the U.S. interbank funding market, providing an important source of additional liquidity and low-cost funds.
The liquidity of the Corporation is managed separately from that of the Bank. The primary sources of cash for the Corporation are issuances of debt or equity and dividend payments from the Bank. For further information on issuances or redemptions of debt or equity, please refer to Note 13, “Senior Notes and Long-Term Debt” and Note 14, “Floating Rate Capital Debt” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” The Corporation received $751.1
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 77
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
million and $900.0 million of dividends from the Bank in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Dividends from the Bank are subject to certain restrictions, as discussed in further detail in Note 31, “Restrictions on Subsidiary Dividends and Loans or Advances,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
The Corporation’s liquidity, defined as the amount of cash and highly marketable assets, was $1.7 billion and $2.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During, and at year-end, 2021 and 2020, these assets were comprised almost entirely of cash in a demand deposit account at the Bank or overnight money market placements, both of which were fully available to the Corporation to support its own cash flow requirements or those of its subsidiaries, as needed. Average liquidity during 2021 and 2020 was $1.8 billion and $2.7 billion, respectively. The cash flows of the Corporation are shown in Note 34, “Northern Trust Corporation (Corporation only),” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Uses of Liquidity
Liquidity supports a variety of activities, including client withdrawals, purchases of securities, net loan growth, and draws on commitments to extend credit.
The Corporation’s uses of cash consist mainly of dividend payments to the Corporation’s stockholders; the payment of principal and interest to note holders; repurchases of its common stock; and investments in, or loans to, its subsidiaries. The most significant uses of cash by the Corporation during 2021 were $583.3 million of common stock dividends, repayments of senior notes and floating rate capital debt of $500.0 million and $278.8 million, respectively and $267.6 million of common stock repurchases.
Credit Ratings
A significant source of liquidity for both the Corporation and the Bank is the ability to draw funding from capital markets globally. The credit ratings of the Corporation and the Bank as of December 31, 2021, provided in the following table, allow Northern Trust to access capital markets on favorable terms.
TABLE 47: NORTHERN TRUST CREDIT RATINGS AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2021
A significant downgrade in one or more of these ratings could limit Northern Trust’s access to capital markets and/or increase the rates paid for short-term borrowings, including deposits, and future long-term debt issuances. The size of these rate increases would depend on multiple factors, including the extent of the downgrade, Northern Trust’s relative debt rating compared to other financial institutions, current market conditions, and other factors. In addition, as discussed in Note 28, “Offsetting of Assets and Liabilities,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” Northern Trust enters into certain master netting arrangements with derivative counterparties that contain credit-risk-related contingent features in which the counterparty has the option to declare Northern Trust in default and accelerate cash settlement of net derivative liabilities with the counterparty in the event Northern Trust’s credit rating falls below specified levels. At December 31, 2021, the net maximum amount of these termination payments that Northern Trust could have been required to pay was $27.3 million. Other than these credit-risk-related contingent derivative counterparty payments, Northern Trust had no long-term debt covenants or other credit-risk-related payments at December 31, 2021, that would be triggered by a significant downgrade in its debt ratings.
78 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Please refer to Note 26, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities,” provided in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for information on off-balance sheet arrangements and the Credit Risk discussion in the “Risk Management” section for further detail on undrawn commitments.
Market Risk Management
There are two types of market risk, interest rate risk associated with the banking book and trading risk. Interest rate risk associated with the banking book is the potential for movements in interest rates to cause changes in net interest income and the market value of equity. Trading risk is the potential for movements in market variables such as foreign exchange and interest rates to cause changes in the value of trading positions.
Market Risk Framework and Governance
Northern Trust maintains a market risk framework consisting of risk management policies and practices to keep its risk profile within the Board-approved Corporate Risk Appetite Statement. All market risk activities are overseen by the Risk Management function, which is independent of the businesses undertaking the activities.
The Asset and Liability Management Policy, Policy on Dealer Trading Activities, and exposure limits for market risk are set by Board-level committees, and committee structures have been established to implement and monitor adherence to corporate policies, external regulations and established procedures. Limits are monitored based on measures such as sensitivity of net interest income (NII), sensitivity of market value of equity (MVE), and Value-at-Risk (VaR) across a range of time horizons.
Treasury, in the first line of defense, proposes market risk management strategies and is responsible for performing market risk management activities. The ALCO provides first line management oversight and is responsible for approving strategies and activities within the risk appetite, monitoring risk metrics, overseeing balance sheet resources, overseeing the execution of strategies, and reviewing reporting such as stress test results.
Market and Liquidity Risk Management, in the second line of defense, provides challenge to the first line activities, evaluates compliance with regulatory requirements and process effectiveness, and escalates material items for corrective action. The MLRC provides second line oversight and is responsible for reviewing market risk exposures, establishing and monitoring risk metrics, and approving key methodologies and assumptions that drive market risk measurement.
Interest Rate Risk Overview
Interest rate risk in the banking book is the potential for deterioration in Northern Trust's financial position (e.g. interest income, market value of equity, or capital) due to changes in interest rates. NII and MVE sensitivity are the primary metrics used for measurement and management of interest rate risk. Changes in interest rates can have a positive or negative impact on NII depending on the positioning of assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet instruments. Changes in interest rates also can impact the values of assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet positions, which directly impact the MVE. To mitigate interest rate risk, the balance sheet is managed so that movements of interest rates on assets and liabilities (adjusted for hedges) are sufficiently correlated, which allows Northern Trust to manage its interest rate risk within its risk appetite.
There are four commonly recognized types of structural interest rate risk in the banking book:
•repricing risk, which arises from differences in the maturity and repricing terms of assets and liabilities;
•yield curve risk, which arises from changes in the shape of the yield curve;
•basis risk, which arises from imperfect correlation in the adjustment of the rates earned and paid on different financial instruments with otherwise similar repricing characteristics; and
•embedded optionality risk, which arises from client or counterparty behavior in response to interest rate changes.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 79
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Interest Rate Risk Analysis, Monitoring, and Reporting
Northern Trust uses two primary measurement techniques to manage interest rate risk: NII and MVE sensitivity. NII sensitivity provides management with a short-term view of the impact of interest rate changes on NII. MVE sensitivity provides management with a long-term view of interest rate changes on MVE based on the period-end balance sheet.
Northern Trust limits aggregate interest rate risk (as measured by the NII sensitivity and MVE sensitivity simulation techniques) to an acceptable level within the context of risk appetite. A variety of actions may be used to implement risk management strategies to modify interest rate risk including:
•purchase of investment securities;
•sale of investment securities that are classified as available for sale;
•issuance of senior notes and subordinated notes;
•collateralized borrowings from the Federal Home Loan Bank; and
•hedging with various types of derivative financial instruments.
NII Sensitivity
The modeling of NII sensitivity incorporates on-balance sheet positions, as well as derivative financial instruments (principally interest rate swaps) that are used to manage interest rate risk. Northern Trust uses market implied forward interest rates as the base case and measures the sensitivity (i.e., change) of a static balance sheet to changes in interest rates. Stress testing of interest rates is performed to include such scenarios as immediate parallel shocks to rates, nonparallel (i.e., twist) changes to yield curves that result in their becoming steeper or flatter, and changes to the relationship among the yield curves (i.e., basis risk).
The NII sensitivity analysis incorporates certain critical assumptions such as interest rates and client behaviors under changing rate environments. These assumptions are based on a combination of historical analysis and future expected pricing behavior. The simulation cannot precisely estimate NII sensitivity given uncertainty in the assumptions. The following key assumptions are incorporated into the NII simulation:
•the balance sheet size and mix remains constant over the simulation horizon with maturing assets and liabilities replaced with instruments with similar terms as those that are maturing, with the exception of certain nonmaturity deposits that are considered short-term in nature and therefore receive a more conservative interest-bearing treatment;
•prepayments on mortgage loans and securities collateralized by mortgages are projected under each rate scenario using a third-party mortgage analytics system that incorporates market prepayment assumptions;
•cash flows for structured securities are estimated using a third-party vendor in conjunction with the prepayments provided by the third-party mortgage analytics vendor;
•nonmaturity deposit pricing is projected based on Northern Trust’s actual historical patterns and management judgment, depending upon the availability of historical data and current pricing strategies/or judgment; and
•new business rates are based on current spreads to market indices.
The following table shows the estimated NII impact over the next twelve months of 100 and 200 basis point ramps upward and 100 basis point ramp downward movements in interest rates relative to forward rates. Each rate movement is assumed to occur gradually over a one-year period.
TABLE 48: NET INTEREST INCOME SENSITIVITY AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2021
The NII sensitivity analysis does not incorporate certain management actions that may be used to mitigate adverse effects of actual interest rate movement. For that reason and others, the estimated impacts do not reflect the likely actual results but serve as estimates of interest rate risk. NII sensitivity is not comparable to actual results disclosed elsewhere or directly predictive of future values of other measures provided.
80 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
MVE Sensitivity
MVE is defined as the present value of assets minus the present value of liabilities, net of the value of financial derivatives that are used to manage the interest rate risk of balance sheet items. The potential effect of interest rate changes on MVE is derived from the impact of such changes on projected future cash flows and the present value of these cash flows and is then compared to the established limit. Northern Trust uses current market rates (and the future rates implied by these market rates) as the base case and measures MVE sensitivity under various rate scenarios. Stress testing of interest rates is performed to include such scenarios as immediate parallel shocks to rates, nonparallel (i.e., twist) changes to yield curves that result in their becoming steeper or flatter, and changes to the relationship among the yield curves (i.e., basis risk).
The MVE sensitivity analysis incorporates certain critical assumptions such as interest rates and client behaviors under changing rate environments. These assumptions are based on a combination of historical analysis and future expected pricing behavior. The simulation cannot precisely estimate MVE sensitivity given uncertainty in the assumptions. Many of the assumptions that apply to NII sensitivity also apply to MVE sensitivity simulations, with the following separate key assumptions incorporated into the MVE simulation:
•the present value of nonmaturity deposits are estimated using dynamic decay methodologies or estimated remaining lives, which are based on a combination of Northern Trust’s actual historical runoff patterns and management judgment-some balances are assumed to be core and have longer lives while other balances are assumed to be temporary and have comparatively shorter lives;
•the present values of most noninterest-related balances (such as receivables, equipment, and payables) are the same as their book values; and
•Monte Carlo simulation is used to generate forward interest rate paths.
The following table shows the estimated impact on MVE of 100 and 200 basis point shocks up and a 100 basis point shock down from current market implied forward rates.
TABLE 49: MARKET VALUE OF EQUITY SENSITIVITY AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2021
The MVE simulations do not incorporate certain management actions that may be used to mitigate adverse effects of actual interest rate movements. For that reason and others, the estimated impacts do not reflect the likely actual results but serve as estimates of interest rate risk. MVE sensitivity is not comparable to actual results disclosed elsewhere or directly predictive of future values of other measures provided.
Foreign Currency Risk Overview
Northern Trust’s balance sheet is exposed to nontrading foreign currency risk as a result of its holdings of non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities, investment in non-U.S. subsidiaries, and future non-U.S. dollar denominated revenue and expense. To manage currency exposures on the balance sheet, Northern Trust attempts to match its assets and liabilities by currency. If those currency offsets do not exist on the balance sheet, Northern Trust will use foreign exchange derivative contracts to mitigate its currency exposure. Foreign exchange contracts are also used to reduce Northern Trust’s currency exposure to future non-U.S. dollar denominated revenue and expense.
In addition, Northern Trust provides global foreign exchange (GFX) services to clients. Most of these services are provided in connection with Northern Trust’s global custody business. In the normal course of business, Northern Trust also engages in trading of non-U.S. currencies for its own account. Both activities are considered trading activities.
Foreign currency trading positions exist when aggregate obligations to purchase and sell a currency other than the U.S. dollar do not offset each other in amount, or offset each other over different time periods. The GFX trading portfolio at Northern Trust is composed of spot, forward, and non-deliverable foreign currency transactions. For GFX, spot risk is driven primarily by foreign exchange rate (FX) risk, and forward risk is driven primarily by interest rate (IR) risk.
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 81
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Foreign Currency Risk Measurement
Northern Trust measures daily the risk of loss associated with all non-U.S. currency positions using a VaR model and applying the historical simulation methodology. This statistical model provides estimates, based on high confidence levels, of the potential loss in value that might be incurred if an adverse shift in non-U.S. currency exchange rates and interest rates were to occur over a small number of days. The model incorporates foreign currency and interest rate volatilities and correlations in price movements among the currencies. VaR is computed for each trading desk and for the global portfolio.
VaR measures are computed in a vendor software application which reads foreign exchange positions from Northern Trust’s trading systems each day. Data vendors provide foreign exchange rates and interest rates for all currencies. The Risk Management function monitors on a daily basis VaR model inputs and outputs for reasonableness.
Foreign Currency Risk Monitoring, Reporting and Analysis
Northern Trust monitors several variations of the GFX VaR measures to meet specific regulatory and internal management needs. Variations include different methodologies (historical simulation, Monte Carlo simulation and Taylor approximation), horizons of one day and ten days, confidence levels of 95% and 99%, subcomponent VaRs using only FX drivers and only IR drivers, and look-back periods of one year, two years, and four years. Those alternative measures provide management an array of corroborating metrics and alternative perspectives on Northern Trust’s market risks.
Automated daily reports are produced and distributed to business managers and risk managers. The Risk Management function also reviews and reports several variations of the VaR measures in historical time series format to provide management with a historical perspective on risk.
The following table presents the levels of total regulatory VaR and its subcomponents for GFX in the years indicated below, based on the historical simulation methodology, a 99% confidence level, a one-day horizon and equally-weighted volatility. The total VaR for GFX is typically less than the sum of its two subcomponents due to diversification benefits derived from the two subcomponents.
TABLE 50: GLOBAL FOREIGN CURRENCY VALUE-AT-RISK
During 2021 and 2020, Northern Trust did not incur an actual GFX trading loss in excess of the daily GFX VaR estimate.
Other Nonmaterial Trading Activities
Market risk associated with other trading activities is negligible. Northern Trust’s broker-dealer subsidiary, Northern Trust Securities, Inc., maintains a small portfolio of trading securities held for customer accommodation purposes, which averaged $0.6 million and $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Northern Trust is also party to interest rate derivative contracts consisting mostly of interest rate swaps and swaptions entered into to meet clients’ interest rate risk management needs, but also including a small number of caps and floors. All interest rate derivative transactions are executed by Northern Trust's Treasury department. When Northern Trust enters into client transactions, its practice is to mitigate the resulting market risk with offsetting interbank derivative transactions with matching terms and maturities.
Strategic Risk
Strategic risk is the vulnerability of the organization to internal or external developments that render corporate strategy ineffective or unachievable. The consequences of strategic risk can be diminished long-term earnings and capital, as well as reputational damage to the firm. Strategic risk encompasses two main areas:
•Macroeconomic and geopolitical risk centers on external events or developments that would have a detrimental impact on financial markets and/or financial services firms.
•Business risk arises from internal, secular, competitive, or regulatory trends that impact Northern Trust’s stated strategy or its achievability.
82 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Strategic Risk Framework and Governance
The Corporate Strategic Risk Framework has been developed in conjunction with the Corporation’s risk appetite and risk management policies, and defines the mission and expectations of the Strategic Risk Management function to identify and analyze the sources and consequences of strategic risk.
This is achieved through participation in the establishment and review of business line strategy, coordination of risk input to the evaluation of key strategic opportunities, and developing and maintaining a risk inventory and set of metrics which attempt to gauge the level of strategic risk within the organization.
In addition, the Strategic Risk Management function maintains the Global Event Response Program, which aims to anticipate and prepare for stress scenarios, and provide an outline for responding to them when they occur.
Both GERC and the Business Risk Committee are responsible for reviewing the general methods, guidelines and frameworks by which Northern Trust monitors and evaluates strategic risk.
Climate Risk
Climate risk has become a growing strategic risk for the Corporation. Various regulatory agencies, investors, and other stakeholders have increased expectations and scrutiny in this area. Accordingly, the Risk Management function has been taking increasing account of the impact that climate change has, or may in the future have, on operations, credit conditions, and regulatory compliance across the globe. The Corporation has also established a cross-disciplinary group to monitor and react to developments related to climate risk, with the goal of ensuring that the organization takes it into proper account.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This report may include statements which constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are identified typically by words or phrases such as “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “likely,” “plan,” “goal,” “target,” “strategy,” and similar expressions or future or conditional verbs such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “would,” and “could.” Forward-looking statements include statements, other than those related to historical facts, that relate to Northern Trust’s financial results and outlook; capital adequacy; dividend policy and share repurchase program; accounting estimates and assumptions; credit quality including allowance levels; future pension plan contributions; effective tax rate; anticipated expense levels; contingent liabilities; acquisitions; strategies; market and industry trends; and expectations regarding the impact of accounting pronouncements and legislation. These statements are based on Northern Trust’s current beliefs and expectations of future events or future results, and involve risks and uncertainties that are difficult to predict and subject to change. These statements are also based on assumptions about many important factors, including:
•the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic-and governmental and societal responses thereto-on Northern Trust’s business, financial condition, and results of operations;
•financial market disruptions or economic recession in the United States or other countries across the globe resulting from any of a number of factors;
•volatility or changes in financial markets, including debt and equity markets, that impact the value, liquidity, or credit ratings of financial assets in general, or financial assets held in particular investment funds or client portfolios, including those funds, portfolios, and other financial assets with respect to which Northern Trust has taken, or may in the future take, actions to provide asset value stability or additional liquidity;
•the impact of equity markets on fee revenue;
•the downgrade of U.S. government-issued and other securities;
•changes in foreign exchange trading client volumes and volatility in foreign currency exchange rates, changes in the valuation of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies in which Northern Trust records revenue or accrues expenses, and Northern Trust’s success in assessing and mitigating the risks arising from all such changes and volatility;
•a decline in the value of securities held in Northern Trust’s investment portfolio, particularly asset-backed securities, the liquidity and pricing of which may be negatively impacted by periods of economic turmoil and financial market disruptions;
•Northern Trust’s ability to address operating risks, including those related to cybersecurity, data security, human errors or omissions, pricing or valuation of securities, fraud, operational resiliency (including systems performance), failure to maintain sustainable business practices, and breakdowns in processes or internal controls;
•Northern Trust's success in responding to and investing in changes and advancements in technology;
•a significant downgrade of any of Northern Trust’s debt ratings;
•the health and soundness of the financial institutions and other counterparties with which Northern Trust conducts business;
•uncertainties inherent in the complex and subjective judgments required to assess credit risk and establish appropriate allowances therefor;
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 83
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
•the effectiveness of Northern Trust’s management of its human capital, including its success in recruiting and retaining necessary and diverse personnel to support business growth and expansion and maintain sufficient expertise to support increasingly complex products and services;
•Northern Trust’s success in controlling the costs and expenses of its business operations and the impacts of any broader inflationary environment thereon;
•the transition away from LIBOR or changes in the calculation of alternative interest rate benchmarks;
•the pace and extent of continued globalization of investment activity and growth in worldwide financial assets;
•changes in interest rates or in the monetary or other policies of various regulatory authorities or central banks;
•changes in the legal, regulatory and enforcement framework and oversight applicable to financial institutions, including Northern Trust;
•increased costs of compliance and other risks associated with changes in regulation, the current regulatory environment, and areas of increased regulatory emphasis and oversight in the United States and other countries, such as anti-money laundering, anti-bribery, and data privacy;
•failure to satisfy regulatory standards or to obtain regulatory approvals when required, including for the use and distribution of capital;
•changes in tax laws, accounting requirements or interpretations and other legislation in the United States or other countries that could affect Northern Trust or its clients;
•geopolitical risks, risks related to global climate change and the risks of extraordinary events such as pandemics, natural disasters, terrorist events and war (including current events involving Ukraine and Russia), and the responses of the United States and other countries to those events;
•the departure of the United Kingdom from the European Union, commonly referred to as “Brexit;”
•changes in the nature and activities of Northern Trust’s competition;
•Northern Trust’s success in maintaining existing business and continuing to generate new business in existing and targeted markets and its ability to deploy deposits in a profitable manner consistent with its liquidity requirements;
•Northern Trust’s ability to address the complex needs of a global client base and manage compliance with legal, tax, regulatory and other requirements;
•Northern Trust’s ability to maintain a product mix that achieves acceptable margins;
•Northern Trust’s ability to continue to generate investment results that satisfy clients and to develop an array of investment products;
•uncertainties inherent in Northern Trust’s assumptions concerning its pension plan, including discount rates and expected contributions, returns and payouts;
•Northern Trust’s success in continuing to enhance its risk management practices and controls and managing risks inherent in its businesses, including credit risk, operational risk, market and liquidity risk, fiduciary risk, compliance risk and strategic risk;
•risks and uncertainties inherent in the litigation and regulatory process, including the possibility that losses may be in excess of Northern Trust’s recorded liability and estimated range of possible loss for litigation exposures;
•risks associated with being a holding company, including Northern Trust’s dependence on dividends from its principal subsidiary;
•the risk of damage to Northern Trust’s reputation which may undermine the confidence of clients, counterparties, rating agencies, and stockholders; and
•other factors identified elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those factors described in Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” and other filings with the SEC, all of which are available on Northern Trust’s website.
Actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by forward-looking statements. The information contained herein is current only as of the date of that information. All forward-looking statements included in this document are based upon information presently available, and Northern Trust assumes no obligation to update its forward-looking statements.
84 2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Reconciliation to Fully Taxable Equivalent
The following table presents a reconciliation of interest income, net interest income, net interest margin, and total revenue prepared in accordance with GAAP to such measures on an FTE basis, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Net interest margin is calculated by dividing annualized net interest income by average interest-earning assets. Management believes this presentation provides a clearer indication of these financial measures for comparative purposes. When adjusted to an FTE basis, yields on taxable, nontaxable and partially taxable assets are comparable; however, the adjustment to an FTE basis has no impact on net income.
TABLE 51: RECONCILIATION TO FULLY TAXABLE EQUIVALENT
2021 Annual Report | Northern Trust Corporation 85