ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In this section, “we,” “our,” “ours” and “us” refer to Clinigence Holdings Inc.(“Clinigence”) and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliated entities, as appropriate, including its consolidated variable interest entities (“VIEs”).
Overview
The Company, together with our recent acquisitions of AHP Health Management Services, Inc. (“AHP”), Accountable Healthcare America, Inc. (“AHA”) and Procare Health Inc. (‘Procare”) is a technology-enabled, risk-bearing population health management company that manages provider networks.
Headquartered in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, our subsidiaries include management services organizations (“MSOs”), affiliated independent practice associations (“IPAs”), and a healthcare information technology company providing a cloud-based platform that enables healthcare organizations to provide value-based care and population health management (PHM).
Highlights
Merger with AHP Health Management Services Inc.
On February 25, 2021, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger (the “AHP Merger Agreement”) with AHP Health Management Services, Inc., a California corporation (“AHP”), AHP Acquisition Corp., a Delaware corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Clinigence Holdings, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), and Robert Chan (the “Shareholders’ Representative”). The transactions contemplated by the AHP Merger Agreement were consummated on February 26, 2021 (the “AHP Closing”).
Table of Contents 34
The AHP Merger Agreement provided for the merger of Merger Sub with and into AHP, hereafter referred to as the “AHP Acquisition.” As a result of the Acquisition, Merger Sub ceased to exist, and AHP became the surviving corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Clinigence, and the former stockholders of AHP (the “AHP Stockholders”) have a direct equity ownership in Clinigence. Merger Sub was renamed AHP Health Management Services, Inc. Merger Sub was originally incorporated in Delaware, on January 26, 2021, and had no operating activity prior to the reported transaction.
AHP is a privately held company with controlling interest in its’ affiliate Associated Hispanic Physicians of Southern California IPA, a California Medical corporation, (“AHISP). A key term of the AHP Merger Agreement is that at Closing, AHP Management Inc entered into a Management Services Agreement with AHISP (the “Management Services Agreement”) making AHISP a Variable Interest Entity (VIE) of AHP.
California is a corporate practice of medicine state, and we operate by maintaining a long-term MSA with ASHISP. Under the MSA, our wholly owned AHP subsidiary is contracted to provide non-medical management and administrative services such as financial and risk management as well as information systems, marketing and administrative support to the AHISP. The MSA has an initial term of 20 years and is generally not terminable by AHISP except in the case of bankruptcy, gross negligence, fraud, or other illegal acts by AHP.
Through the MSA, we have exclusive authority over all non-medical decisions related to the ongoing business operations of AHISP. Consequently, the Company consolidates the revenue and expenses of AHISP as their primary beneficiary from the date of execution of the MSA.
The AHP Merger Agreement and Management Services Agreement was disclosed on the Company’s current report on Form 8-K filed on March 2, 2021.
Merger with Accountable Healthcare America, Inc.
On February 25, 2021, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger with Accountable Healthcare America, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“AHA”), and AHA Acquisition Corp., a Delaware corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Parent (“Merger Sub entered into an agreement and plan of merger (the “AHA Merger Agreement”). The transactions contemplated by the AHA Merger Agreement were consummated on February 26, 2021 (the “AHA Closing”).
The AHA Merger Agreement provided for the merger of Merger Sub with and into AHA, hereafter referred to as the “AHA Acquisition.” As a result of the Acquisition, Merger Sub ceased to exist, and AHA became the surviving corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Clinigence, and the former stockholders of AHA (the “AHA Stockholders”) have a direct equity ownership in Clinigence. Merger Sub was renamed Accountable Healthcare America, Inc. Merger Sub was originally incorporated in Delaware, on January 2, 2020, and had no operating activity prior to the reported transaction.
The AHA Merger Agreement was disclosed on the Company’s current report on Form 8-K filed on March 2, 2021.
At the AHP Closing and the AHA Closing, hereafter collectively referred to as the “Closing”, all of the outstanding shares of AHP common stock (the “AHP Shares”) were converted solely into the right to receive a number of shares of Clinigence common stock (the “Company Shares”) such that the holders of outstanding equity of AHP immediately prior to the Closing own 45%, on a fully-diluted basis, of the outstanding equity of Clinigence immediately following the Closing, and all of the outstanding shares of AHA common stock (the “AHA Shares”) were converted solely into the right to receive a number of the Company Shares such that the holders of outstanding equity of AHA immediately prior to the Closing own 35%, on a fully-diluted basis, of the outstanding equity of Clinigence immediately following the Closing, and holders of outstanding equity of Clinigence immediately prior to the Closing own 20%, on a fully-diluted basis, of the outstanding equity of Clinigence. Additionally, the Company’s AHA Series E Preferred Stock investment was surrendered as part of the Acquisition of 100% of AHA.
Table of Contents 35
The preliminary accounting for our merger with AHP and AHA was disclosed on the Company’s current report on Form 8-K/A filed on May 21, 2021.
Acquisition of Procare Health Inc.
On October 15, 2021, we entered into an agreement and plan of merger (the “Procare Merger Agreement”) with Clinigence Procare Health Inc, a Delaware corporation (“Merger Sub”), Procare Health, Inc., a California corporation (“Procare”), Anh Nguyen (“Majority Stockholder”), and Tram Nguyen (“Minority Stockholder” and together with Majority Stockholder, the “Stockholders”).
The Procare Merger Agreement provided for the merger of Merger Sub with and into Procare, hereafter referred to as the “Acquisition.” As a result of the Acquisition, Merger Sub ceased to exist, and Procare became the surviving corporation and a direct wholly owned subsidiary of Clinigence, and the former stockholders of Procare, the Stockholders, have a direct equity ownership in Clinigence.
Under the terms of the stock purchase agreement, the shares of Procare’s common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time (other than Cancelled Shares) will be converted into the right to receive by the Stockholders an aggregate of 759,036 (the “Exchange Ratio”) shares of Parent’s common stock (“Stock Consideration”). Twenty Five percent of the Stock Consideration shall be held back and shall be released to Parent or Stockholders, as the case may be, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 3.2 the Merger Agreement. In the event that EBITDA is equal to or exceeds $316,265 (the “Minimum EBITDA Amount”) for the Fiscal Year ended December 31, 2021, Stockholders shall be entitled to receive fifty percent (50%) of the Holdback Shares. If the EBITDA for such period is less than $316,265, that portion of the Holdback Shares shall be released to the Parent. In addition, if the EBITDA for the Procare for the period ended December 31, 2022, equals or exceeds the Minimum EBITDA Amount, the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the Holdback Shares shall be released to the Stockholders. In the event that the Minimum EBITDA Amount is not achieved for such period, that portion of the Holdback Shares shall be returned to the Parent.
The Procare Merger Agreement was disclosed on the Company’s current report on Form 8-K filed on October 22, 2021, and the preliminary accounting for our merger with Procare was disclosed on the Company’s current report on Form 8-K/A filed on December 15, 2021.
Recent Developments
Reverse Merger with Nutex
On November 23, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Nutex Merger Agreement”) among the Company, Nutex Acquisition LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Subsidiary”), Nutex Health Holdco LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Nutex”), Micro Hospital Holding LLC, a Texas limited liability company (“MHH”) (solely for the purposes of certain Sections), Nutex Health LLC (solely for the purposes of certain Sections) and Thomas Vo, M.D., not individually but in his capacity as the representative of the equityholders of Nutex (the “Nutex Representative”).
Under the terms of the Nutex Merger Agreement, Merger Subsidiary will merge with and into Nutex, with Nutex becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Nutex Merger”).
In connection with the Nutex Merger Agreement, Nutex has entered into certain Contribution Agreements with holders of equity interests (“Nutex Owners”) of subsidiaries and affiliates of Nutex and MHH (the “Nutex Subsidiaries”) pursuant to which such Nutex Owners have agreed to contribute certain equity interests in the Nutex Subsidiaries to Nutex in exchange for specified equity interests in Nutex (collectively, the “Contribution Transaction”).
Table of Contents 36
Pursuant to the Nutex Merger Agreement, each unit representing an equity interest in Nutex issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger but after the Contribution Transaction (collectively, the “Nutex Membership Interests”) shall be converted into the right to receive 3.571428575 (the “Exchange Ratio”) shares of common stock (“Company Common Stock”) of the Company, par value $0.001 per share. The Exchange Ratio may be adjusted proportionally upward based on potential pre-Closing redemptions of Nutex Membership Interests taking into account any new debt incurred by Nutex to finance such redemptions.
The aggregate number of Nutex Membership Interests outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time of the Merger will be equal to the aggregate EBITDA of Nutex and the contributing percentages of the Nutex Subsidiaries for the trailing 12-month period ended September 30, 2021 (“TTM EBITDA”). The aggregate number of shares of Company Common Stock to be issued in the Merger will be equal to (a) ten times TTM EBITDA (minus the aggregate debt of the Nutex Subsidiaries and Nutex facilities outstanding as of Closing, including any new debt incurred to finance the redemptions of Nutex Membership Interests divided by (b) $2.80 (the “Merger Consideration”).
The aggregate number of Nutex Membership Interests outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time of the Merger will be equal to (a) with respect to ramping and mature hospitals the aggregate EBITDA of Nutex based on the contributed percentages of such hospitals for the trailing 12-month period ended September 30, 2021 (“TTM EBITDA”) and (b) with respect to under construction hospitals, the aggregate capital contribution amounts received from the contributing owners of the under construction hospitals	The aggregate number of shares of Company Common Stock to be issued in the Merger will be equal to (x) with respect to the ramping and mature hospitals, (i) ten times TTM EBITDA (minus (A) the aggregate debt of the Nutex Subsidiaries and Nutex facilities outstanding as of Closing, ‎excluding guarantees of mortgage debt of the noncontrolled real estate entities and finance lease obligations ‎reported as indebtedness under GAAP but including any new debt incurred to finance any redemptions of Nutex Membership Interests, plus (B) up to $10,000,000 of cash held by the Nutex Subsidiaries at Closing ) divided by (ii) $2.80 plus (y) with respect to the Under Construction Hospitals, (a) the aggregate capital contribution amounts received from the contributing owners of the Under Construction Hospitals divided by (b) $2.80 (collectively the “Merger Consideration”). The Merger Consideration shall be increased by such number of shares of Company Common Stock as is equal to the number of shares of Company Common Stock as may be issued by Clinigence to a certain consultant as required under the Merger Agreement. In addition, under the terms of the Contribution Agreements owners of the under construction hospitals and ramping hospitals may be entitled to additional shares of Company Common Stock in the future.
The transaction was approved by the Board of Directors of the Company. Consummation of the Merger is subject to various closing conditions, including, among other things, listing of the Company Common Stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market.
Key Financial Measures and Indicators
Operating Revenues
Our revenue primarily consists of capitation revenue and SaaS subscription services. The form of billing and related risk of collection for such services may vary by type of revenue and the customer.
Operating Expenses
Our largest expense is the patient care cost paid to contracted physicians, and the cost of providing management and administrative support services to our affiliated physician groups. These services include providing utilization and case management, physician practice billing, revenue cycle services, physician practice management, administrative oversight, coding services, and other consulting services.
Results of operation
Our consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 were as follows:
Table of Contents 37
Revenue
The increase was primarily attributable to the AHP acquisition.
Our total revenue in 2021 was $18.8 million, as compared to $1.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the following:
(i) an increase of $16.6 million in capitation revenue due to the acquisition of AHP Health Management Services, Inc. which was acquired as of February 21, 2021.
(ii) a decrease of $67,854 in SaaS revenue due to a decrease in the number customers subscribing to the technology platform.
(iii) an increase of $519,489 in management services fees due to the acquisitions of AHP health Management Services, Inc. which was acquired as of February 21, 2021 and Procare Health Inc which was acquired as of October 1, 2021.
Cost of Services
Expenses related to cost of services for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $14.6 million, as compared to $909,780 for the same year ended December 31, 2020. The overall increase was primarily due to the AHP acquisition.
Research and Development
Research and Development expense for year ended December 31, 2021, was $285,880 compared to $557,257 for year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to the reduction of research and development personnel for our Clinigence Health subsidiary.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and Marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $24,449, compared to $166,759 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to the reduction of sales and marketing personnel for our Clinigence Health subsidiary.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for year ended December 31, 2021, were $12.1 million, as compared to $3.25 million for year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to the AHP, AHA, Procare acquisitions and pending Nutex merger transactional costs as well as to stock-based compensation expenses.
Gain on Sale of Assets
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on the sale of intellectual property of $8,395,702 pursuant to the AHP IP purchase agreement in 2020 with our subsidiary Clinigence Health Inc.
Gain on Lease Termination
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on the termination of the operating lease of $25,174 for the termination of the Atlanta, Georgia office lease for our Clinigence Health subsidiary.
Loss on Sale of Fixed Assets
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a loss on the sale of fixed assets of $54,819 resulting from the termination of the Atlanta, Georgia office lease for our Clinigence Health subsidiary.
Table of Contents 38
Amortization
Amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $677,168 as compared to $222,032 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This amount includes the amortization of intangible assets acquired from AHP and AHA.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported, a non-recurring loss on extinguishment of debt for related party convertible debt conversions of $167,797, which represents the write off of debt discount of the debt assumed by AHA in the IP purchase agreement.
Income from forgiveness of debt
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had income from forgiveness of debt for the forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Plan (PPP) Loans of $461,125 and $175,682 for our subsidiaries CHI and AHA, respectively.
Impairment of Series E investment
Pursuant to the AHA IP purchase agreement in 2020 with our subsidiary CHI, we recorded a Series E Preferred Stock investment in AHA at $6,402,278 based on 1,252,892 shares outstanding at a fair value of $5.11 per share based on an appraised valuation of the AHA Series E Preferred Stock. As of December 31, 2020, we determined that the fair value of the AHA Series E Preferred Stock fell below its’ carrying value based on an independent valuation report and wrote off the investment in AHA. The Preferred Stock was surrendered pursuant to the AHA Merger Agreement.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $917 as compared to $1,030 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest income reflects interest earned on cash held in deposit accounts.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $6.8 million as compared to $335,450 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense was primarily for accretion of debt of $6,011,071 combined with $784,012 interest incurred on convertible debt related to the acquisition of AHA.
Income Tax Benefit
For the year ended December 31, 2021, income tax benefit was recorded for the valuation allowance against the deferred tax liability of $984,810 recorded on the intangible assets acquired from AHA and Procare.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests was $891 for the year ended December 31, 2021, from our noncontrolling interest in the AHP VIE.
Table of Contents 39
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
We had cash of $15,314,328 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $26,931 as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $15,287,397.
We generate cash primarily from capitations, risk pool settlements and incentives, fees for medical management services provided to our physician groups, as well as FFS reimbursements and recurring SaaS Subscriptions.
Historically, the Company’s has experienced significant losses and the major sources of cash have been comprised of proceeds from various public and private offerings of its common stock, debt financings, and option and warrant exercises. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company raised approximately $14.4 million in gross proceeds from various public and private offerings of its common stock. Although the Company expects to have sufficient capital to fund its obligations, as they become due, in the ordinary course of business until at least December 31, 2022, the actual amount of cash that it will need to operate is subject to many factors. During the year ended December 31, 2022, the Company expects to collect the receivable of $1.3 million from the sale of its ACMG investment. The Company also decreased its debt in 2021. With the funds raised and the other mitigating factors the Company believes that it has enough cash to fund its operations for one year from the date of filing. Therefore, such conditions of substantial doubt as of December 31, 2021, have subsequently been alleviated.
Cash Flow Activity
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $6,703,530 as compared to cash used in operating activities of $1,475,075 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by our operating revenues not being sufficient to cover our on-going obligations. Additional contributing factors include an increase in accounts receivable of $74,880, an increase in account payable and accrued expenses of $1,365,554, a decrease in customer deposits of $36,691, an increase in prepaid expenses of $161,155, income from forgiveness of debt of $633,125, deferred tax benefit of $984,810, amortization and depreciation expense of $713,779, interest expense associated with debt discount of $6,011,071, increase in accrued interest of $197,033, an AHP purchase price adjustment of $300,000, a settlement payment of $522,000 from ACMG , non-cash interest expense of $24,372, a decrease in deposits and other assets of $410, a decrease in lease liability of $27,472, an increase in deferred revenue of $97,232 and stock-based compensation expense of $4,026,884.
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $7,951,570, primarily due to $4,554,676 from the proceeds of the sale of ACMG. $522,000 in a separation payment from the investment in ACMG and $3,884,583 of cash acquired in the acquisitions of AHP and Procare, and preacquisition loan from subsidiary of $85,000, offset by $1,094,689 in AHP litigation settlement, compared to cash used in investing activities of $60,900 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $14,039,357, primarily due to $14,323,439 in proceeds from sale of common stock, $153,424 in proceeds from exercise of warrants, $178,842 in proceeds from exercise of options and $413,917 from issuance of notes and convertible notes payable, offset by $16,765 in payments on notes payable and $1,013,500 in payments of financing costs for capital raise.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of financial statements may require us to make estimates and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the related disclosures at the date of the financial statements. We do not currently have any estimates or assumptions where the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change or the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material, except as described below.
Table of Contents 40
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Clinigence Health, Inc., Accountable Healthcare America Inc., AHP Management Inc., and Procare Health, Inc. All intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated.
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. The Company’s significant estimates used in these financial statements include, but are not limited to, accounts receivable reserves, the valuation allowance related to the Company’s deferred tax assets, the recoverability and useful lives of long-lived assets, debt conversion features, stock-based compensation, certain assumptions related to the valuation of the reserved shares and the assets acquired and liabilities assumed related to the Company’s acquisitions. Certain of the Company’s estimates could be affected by external conditions, including those unique to the Company and general economic conditions. It is reasonably possible that these external factors could have an effect on the Company’s estimates and could cause actual results to differ from those estimates.
Fair Value Measurements
We adopted the provisions of ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, which defines fair value as used in numerous accounting pronouncements, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and expands disclosure of fair value measurements.
The estimated fair value of certain financial instruments, including cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued expenses are carried at historical cost basis, which approximates their fair values because of the short-term nature of these instruments. The carrying amounts of our short- and long-term credit obligations approximate fair value because the effective yields on these obligations, which include contractual interest rates taken together with other features such as concurrent issuances of warrants and/or embedded conversion options, are comparable to rates of returns for instruments of similar credit risk. The Company’s investment in AHA was valued at level 3 input.
ASC 820 defines fair value as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. ASC 820 also establishes a fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. ASC 820 describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities
Level 2 - quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets or inputs that are observable
Level 3 - inputs that are unobservable (for example cash flow modeling inputs based on assumptions)
Convertible Instruments
The Company evaluates and accounts for conversion options embedded in convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging Activities.
Applicable GAAP requires companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under other GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument.
Table of Contents 41
The Company accounts for convertible instruments (when it has been determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) as follows: The Company records, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their stated date of redemption.
The Company accounts for the conversion of convertible debt when a conversion option has been bifurcated using the general extinguishment standards. The debt and equity linked derivatives are removed at their carrying amounts and the shares issued are measured at their then-current fair value, with any difference recorded as a gain or loss on extinguishment of the two separate accounting liabilities.
Variable interest model
We perform a primary beneficiary analysis on all our identified variable interest entities, which comprises a qualitative analysis based on power and economics. We consolidate a VIE if both power and benefits belong to us - that is, we (i) have the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly influence the VIE’s economic performance (power), and (ii) have the obligation to absorb losses of, or the right to receive benefits from, the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE (benefits). We consolidate VIEs whenever it is determined that we are the primary beneficiary.
Noncontrolling Interests
We consolidate variable interest entities (VIEs) in which the Company is the primary beneficiary. Noncontrolling interests represent the amount of net income attributable to the VIEs and is disclosed in the consolidated statements of income.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is generated by software licenses, training, and consulting. Software licenses are provided as SaaS-based subscriptions that grants access to proprietary online databases and data management solutions. Training and consulting are project based and billable to customers on a monthly-basis or task-basis.
Revenue from training and consulting are generally recognized upon delivery of training or completion of the consulting project. The duration of training and consulting projects are typically a few weeks or months and last no longer than 12 months.
SaaS-based subscriptions are generally marketed under multi-year agreements with annual, semi-annual, quarterly, or month-to-month renewals and revenue is recognized ratably over the renewal period with the unearned amounts received recorded as deferred revenue. For multiple-element arrangements accounted for in accordance with specific software accounting guidance, multiple deliverables are segregated into units of accounting which are delivered items that have value to a customer on a standalone basis.
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new revenue recognition standard Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606)”, using the modified retrospective method. The modified retrospective adoption used by the Company did not result in a material cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of accumulated deficit. Revenue from substantially all the Company’s contracts with customers continues to be recognized over time as performance obligations are satisfied.
Table of Contents 42
The Company provides its customers with software licensing, training, and consulting through SaaS-based subscriptions. This subscription revenue represents revenue earned under contracts in which the Company bills and collects the charges for licensing and related services. The Company determines the measurement of revenue and the timing of revenue recognition utilizing the following core principles:
1. Identifying the contract with a customer;
2. Identifying the performance obligations in the contract;
3. Determining the transaction price;
4. Allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
5. Recognizing revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies its performance obligations.
Revenues from subscriptions are deferred and recorded as deferred revenue when cash payments are received in advance of the satisfaction of the Company’s performance obligations and recognized over the period in which the performance obligations are satisfied. The Company completes its contractual performance obligations through providing its customers access to specified data through subscriptions for a service period, and training on consulting associated with the subscriptions. The Company primarily invoices its customers on a monthly basis and does not provide any refunds, rights of return, or warranties to its customers.
AHA’s performance obligation is to manage ACO participants who provide healthcare services to CMS’s members for the purpose of generating shared savings. If achieved, the Company receives shared savings payments from CMS, which represents variable consideration. The shared savings payments are recognized using the most likely methodology. However, as the Company does not have sufficient insight from CMS into the financial performance of the shared risk pool because of unknown factors related to shifting patient count, risk adjustment factors and benchmark adjustments, among other factors, an estimate cannot be developed. Therefore, these amounts are considered to be fully constrained and only recorded in the months when such payments are known and/or received. The Company generally receives payment within ten months after the fiscal year-end.
AHP negotiates fixed per-member, per-month (PMPM) rates (Capitation) with third-party insurers for a fixed period of time. The Independent Physicians Association (“IPA”) recognizes capitation payments received in advance from third-party insurers as revenue on a monthly basis without regard to the frequency, extent, or nature of the medical services actually furnished.
Procare’s revenue is generated primarily through management fees that are received based on Gross Capitation Revenues of the IPA/Physician Groups. Revenue is paid monthly and is a flat fixed rate determined by the agreement. In addition to Management Fees, there is revenue generated through consultant services that are charged as a flat fixed rate and represent a small portion of the total revenue.
Cost of Sales
Our costs of sales primarily consist of cloud computing and storage costs, datasets, contracted and internal labor costs and contracted medical provider services.
Advertising Costs
We expense advertising costs as incurred. Advertising costs of $24,449 and $41,418 were charged to operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of cash and highly liquid investments with original maturities of 90 days or less at the date of purchase. We do not have any cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, and 2020. We are exposed to credit risk in the event of default by the financial institutions or the issuers of these investments to the extent the amounts on deposit or invested are in excess of amounts that are insured.
Table of Contents 43
Accounts Receivable
The Company analyzes the collectability of accounts receivable from continuing operations each accounting period and adjusts its allowance for doubtful accounts accordingly. A considerable amount of judgment is required in assessing the realization of accounts receivables, including the creditworthiness of each customer, current and historical collection history and the related aging of past due balances. The Company evaluates specific accounts when it becomes aware of information indicating that a customer may not be able to meet its financial obligations due to deterioration of its financial condition, lower credit ratings, bankruptcy or other factors affecting the ability to render payment. As of December 31, 2021, no customers represented more than 10% of total accounts receivable.
Inventory
Inventory consisting of finished products is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Property and equipment and depreciation
Property and equipment are stated at cost. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense when incurred. When property and equipment are retired or otherwise disposed of, the related cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the respective accounts and any gain or loss is credited or charged to income. Depreciation for both financial reporting and income tax purposes is computed using combinations of the straight line and accelerated methods over the estimated lives of the respective assets as follows:
Office equipment and fixtures 5 - 7 years
Computer hardware 5 years
Computer software 3 years
Development equipment 5 years
Business Combinations
We use the acquisition method of accounting for all business combinations, which requires assets and liabilities of the acquiree to be recorded at fair value, to measure the fair value of the consideration transferred, including contingent consideration, to be determined on the acquisition date, and to account for acquisition related costs separately from the business combination.
Amortization
Intangible assets are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated lives of the respective assets as follows:
Developed technology 13 years
Customer relationships 10 years
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the net identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed of Procare, AHA and AHP and the fair market value of the common shares issued by the Company for the acquisition of Procare, AHA and AHP. In accordance with ASC Topic No. 350 “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other”), the goodwill is not being amortized, but instead will be subject to an annual assessment of impairment by applying a fair-value based test and will be reviewed more frequently if current events and circumstances indicate a possible impairment. An impairment loss is charged to expense in the period identified. If indicators of impairment are present and future cash flows are not expected to be sufficient to recover the asset’s carrying amount, an impairment loss is charged to expense in the period identified. No impairment was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Table of Contents 44
Long-Lived Assets
We assess the valuation of components of our property and equipment and other long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances dictate that the carrying value might not be recoverable. We base our evaluation on indicators such as the nature of the assets, the future economic benefit of the assets, any historical or future profitability measurements and other external market conditions or factors that may be present. If such factors indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable, we determine whether an impairment has occurred by analyzing an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows exist. If the estimate of undiscounted cash flows during the estimated useful life of the asset is less than the carrying value of the asset, we recognize a loss for the difference between the carrying value of the asset and its estimated fair value, generally measured by the present value of the estimated cash flows.
Deferred Revenue
Deposits from customers are not recognized as revenues, but as liabilities, until the following conditions are met: revenues are realized when cash or claims to cash (receivable) are received in exchange for goods or services or when assets received in such exchange are readily convertible to cash or claim to cash or when such goods/services are transferred. When such income item is earned, the related revenue item is recognized, and the deferred revenue is reduced. To the extent revenues are generated from our support and maintenance services, we recognize such revenues when services are completed and billed. We received deposits from our various customers that have been recorded as deferred revenue and presented as current liabilities in the amount of $173,919 and $76,687 as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for our stock-based awards granted under our employee compensation plan in accordance with ASC Topic No. 718-20, Awards Classified as Equity, which requires the measurement of compensation expense for all share-based compensation granted to employees and non-employee directors at fair value on the date of grant and recognition of compensation expense over the related service period for awards expected to vest. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of its stock options and warrants. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions including the expected stock price volatility of the Company’s common stock, the risk-free interest rate at the date of grant, the expected vesting term of the grant, expected dividends, and an assumption related to forfeitures of such grants. Changes in these subjective input assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate of the Company’s stock options and warrants.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method in accordance with ASC Topic No. 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that are expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse.
We apply the provisions of ASC Topic No. 740 for the financial statement recognition, measurement and disclosure of uncertain tax positions recognized in our financial statements. In accordance with this provision, tax positions must meet a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed other recent accounting pronouncements and concluded they are either not applicable to the business, or no material effect is expected on the condensed consolidated financial statements as a result of future adoption.
Table of Contents 45
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off balance-sheet arrangements.