Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
As noted earlier, this Annual Report, including the following discussion and analysis, may contain forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, assumptions and other factors which, if they do not materialize or prove correct, could cause our results to differ from historical results or those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Please review this Annual Report and the following discussion and analysis in light of the forward-looking statements provisions outlined at the outset of Part I.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to promote understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to those statements included in this Annual Report. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020 is presented under “Results of Operations” further below in this Item 7. For discussion regarding our financial condition and the results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
We are a global medical technology company focused on developing, manufacturing, selling and providing procedural solutions for spine surgery, with a guiding purpose to transform surgery, advance care and change lives. We offer a comprehensive portfolio of procedurally integrated spine surgery solutions, including surgical access instruments, spinal implants, fixation systems, biologics, and enabling technologies, as well as systems and services for intraoperative neuromonitoring. In addition, we develop and sell magnetically adjustable implant systems for spine and specialized orthopedic procedures. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated net sales of $1.1 billion, including sales in more than 50 countries.
Since our incorporation in 1997, we have grown from a small developer of specialty spinal implants into a leading medical technology company delivering procedurally integrated solutions for spine surgery. A key driver of our growth has been our focus on innovative products and technologies that drive reproducible outcomes for patients, surgeons and providers. In 2003, we introduced the eXtreme Lateral Interbody Fusion procedure, or XLIF, a lateral access spine surgery technique that is less invasive than traditional, open surgical procedures and clinically proven to enable better patient outcomes. Building off the success of XLIF, we have continued to develop innovative less-invasive techniques and technologies for spine surgery, and we have broadened our portfolio of solutions for traditional, open surgical procedures. Our comprehensive portfolio of solutions can be utilized in procedures for the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spine, supporting surgical approaches from the anterior, including lateral, and posterior. Our solutions are used to treat degenerative conditions and for complex spinal surgery, including adult and pediatric deformities, as well as trauma and tumors.
Underlying our procedurally integrated solutions for spine surgery are innovative technologies designed to enable better clinical, financial, and operational outcomes, including:
•
our differentiated surgical access instruments, including our integrated split-blade retractor system, designed to enable less-invasive surgical techniques by minimizing soft tissue disruption during spine surgery;
•
our Advanced Materials Science portfolio of specialized spinal implants, designed to advance spinal fusion by enhancing the osseointegration and biomechanical properties of implant materials, including porous titanium and porous polyetheretherketone, or PEEK;
•
our comprehensive fixation system, designed to facilitate the preservation and restoration of patient alignment, while addressing a vast array of spinal pathologies from an open or less-invasive approach across all spinal procedures;
•
our cervical total disc replacement, or cTDR, technology, which complements our portfolio of products and services for cervical spinal fusion surgery and is designed to offer surgeons best-in-class capabilities across key performance functions-anatomic, physiologic motion, and radiologic design;
•
our neuromonitoring systems, which use proprietary software-driven nerve detection and avoidance technology, and our intraoperative neuromonitoring, or IONM, services and support; and
•
our Pulse platform, a software ecosystem that integrates multiple hardware technologies into a single, condensed footprint in the operating room, including: radiation reduction, imaging enhancement, rod bending, navigation, IONM, and spinal alignment tools.
In addition, we also design and sell expandable growing rod implant systems for the treatment of early-onset scoliosis that can be non-invasively lengthened following implantation with precise, incremental adjustments via an external remote controller using magnetic technology called MAGnetic External Control, or MAGEC. This technology is also the basis for our Precice line of products, which are designed to support complex orthopedic reconstruction, such as trauma and limb length discrepancy. Precice is an intramedullary device that, once implanted, utilizes the MAGEC technology to non-invasively lengthen the femur and tibia.
We intend to continue development on a wide variety of innovation projects to advance our leadership position in less-invasive spine surgery, increase our product offerings and solutions for traditional spine surgery procedures, and further our enabling technologies portfolio. We expect to continue to invest in the Pulse platform to support our global commercialization plan for the technology and to develop and expand its application offerings, including investments related to surgical automation and robotics. In addition, we expect to continue to pursue business and technology acquisition targets and strategic relationships to identify opportunities to broaden participation along the spine care continuum. Top priorities include opportunities that complement our technology leadership position in spine, targeted geographic expansion, technology that makes procedures even safer, as well as opportunities for surgical automation.
The COVID-19 pandemic materially impacted our business and results of operations in fiscal years 2020 and 2021. Many government agencies in conjunction with hospitals and healthcare systems have, to varying degrees, deferred, reduced, or suspended elective surgical procedures due to COVID-19. While certain spine surgeries are deemed essential and certain surgeries, like in cases of trauma, cannot be delayed, we have seen and may continue to see a significant reduction in procedural volumes as hospital systems and/or patients elect to defer spine surgery procedures.
Despite the impact COVID-19 has had on our business, we continued to invest in research and development, invest in our people, improve operating processes, and take steps to position ourselves for long-term success. During 2020, we raised additional capital to solidify our financial foundation. During 2020 and 2021, we continued to train and educate surgeons on our products and less-invasive surgical techniques in both live and virtual settings. Further, we remained focused on developing innovative solutions and enabling technologies to drive increased adoption of less-invasive surgery, including the commercialization of the Simplify Cervical Disc for cTDR procedures and the Pulse platform in 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and its impact on our business will depend on several factors that are highly uncertain and unpredictable, including, the efficacy and adoption of vaccines, future resurgences of the virus and its variants, the speed at which government restrictions are lifted, patient capacity at hospitals and healthcare systems, the duration and severity of healthcare worker shortages, and the willingness and ability of patients to seek care and treatment due to safety concerns or financial hardship. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided under Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Net Sales and Operations
The majority of our net sales are derived from the sale of implants and fixation products, biologics, disposables and IONM services and we expect this trend to continue for the foreseeable future. Our implants and fixation products, biologics, and disposables are currently sold and shipped from our distribution and warehousing operations. We generally recognize net sales from implants and fixation products, biologics and disposables upon notice that our products have been used in a surgical procedure or upon shipment to a third-party customer who has assumed control of the products. Net sales from IONM services are recognized in the period the service is performed for the amount of payment we expect to receive. We make available surgical instrument sets and neuromonitoring systems to hospitals to facilitate surgeon access to the spine to perform restorative and fusion procedures using our implants and fixation products. We sell surgical instrument sets and our proprietary software-driven neuromonitoring systems, however this does not make up a material part of our business. While selling or leasing of capital equipment has not historically made up a material portion of our total net sales, selling and leasing of capital equipment will likely increase over time as a result of our commercialization of the Pulse platform.
A substantial portion of our operations are located in the U.S., and the majority of our net sales and cash generation have been made in the U.S. We sell our products in the U.S. through a sales force comprised primarily of directly employed and independent sales representatives. Our sales force provides a delivery and consultative service to surgeon and hospital customers and is compensated based on sales and product placements in their territories. Sales force commissions are reflected in the selling, general and administrative operating expense line item within our Consolidated Statements of Operations. We continue to invest in international expansion with a focus on European, Asia-Pacific and Latin American markets. Our international sales force is comprised of directly-employed sales personnel, independent sales representatives, as well as exclusive and non-exclusive independent third-party distributors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net sales and expenses.
Estimates and Assumptions
We make certain estimates and assumptions based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable when preparing these financial statements, as further discussed below. These estimates and assumptions involve judgments with respect to numerous factors that are difficult to predict. As a result, actual amounts could be materially different from these estimates.
The following accounting policies are critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue upon the transfer of goods or services to a customer at an amount that reflects the expected consideration to be received in exchange for those goods or services. Specifically, revenue from the sale of implants, fixation products and disposables is generally recognized at an amount that reflects the expected consideration upon notice that our products have been used in a surgical procedure or upon shipment to a third-party customer assuming control of the products. Revenue from IONM services is recognized in the period the service is performed for the amount of consideration expected to be received. Revenue from the sale of surgical instrument sets is generally recognized upon receipt of a purchase order and the subsequent shipment to a customer who assumes control. In certain cases, we offer the ability for customers to lease surgical instrumentation primarily on a non-sales type basis. Revenue from the sale or lease of capital equipment is recognized when we transfer control to the customer, which is generally at the point when acceptance occurs that indicates customer acknowledgment of delivery or installation, depending on the terms of the arrangement. Revenue associated with products holding rights of return or trade-in are recognized when we conclude there is not a risk of significant revenue reversal in future periods for the expected consideration in the transaction. Our costs incurred associated with sales contracts with customers are deferred over the performance obligation period and recognized in the same period as the related revenue, with the exception of contracts that complete within one year or less, in which case the associated costs are expensed as incurred.
Allowance for Credit Losses and Sales Return and Pricing Reserves
We maintain an allowance for credit losses resulting from the inability of our customers, including hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, and distributors, to make required payments. The allowance for credit losses is calculated quarterly and is estimated on a region-by-region basis considering a number of factors including age of account balances, collection history, historical account write-offs, third-party credit reports, identified trends, current economic conditions, and supportable forecasted economic expectations. The allowance is adjusted on a specific identification basis for certain accounts as well as pooling of accounts with similar characteristics. An increase in the provision for credit losses may be required when the financial condition of our customers or their collection experience deteriorates.
Our exposure to credit losses may increase if our customers are adversely affected by changes in healthcare laws, coverage and reimbursement, economic pressures or uncertainty associated with local or global economic recessions, disruption associated with the current COVID-19 pandemic, or other customer-specific factors. It is possible that there could be a material adverse impact from potential adjustments of the carrying amount of trade receivables as customers’ cash flows are impacted by their response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the deferral of elective surgical procedures.
In addition, we establish a liability for estimated sales returns and a reserve for price adjustments that are recorded as a reduction to net sales. The liability and reserve are maintained to account for future product returns and price adjustments of products sold in the current period. This reserve is reviewed quarterly and is estimated based on an analysis of our historical experience and expected future trends.
Inventory, net
Finished goods primarily consists of specialized implants, fixation products and disposables and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value determined by utilizing a standard cost method, which includes capitalized variances, which approximates the weighted average cost. Work in progress and raw materials represent the underlying material, and labor for work in progress, that ultimately yield finished goods upon completion and are subject to lower of cost or net realizable value. We review the components of inventory on a periodic basis for excess and obsolescence and adjust inventory to its net realizable value as necessary.
We record an inventory reserve for estimated excess and obsolete inventory based upon historical turnover and assumptions about future demand for our products and market conditions, such as product life cycles, revenue forecasts and timing of the introduction and development of new or enhanced products. Our allograft products have shelf lives ranging from two to five years and are subject to demand fluctuations based on the availability and demand for alternative products. Our inventory, which consists primarily of disposables, specialized implants and fixation products, is at risk of obsolescence following the introduction and development of new or enhanced products.
One of our strategic objectives is to continue to rapidly develop and commercialize new products and product enhancements which increases the risk that existing products will become obsolete prior to the end of their anticipated useful life. Our estimates and assumptions for excess and obsolete inventory are reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis. The estimates we use for demand are also used for near-term capacity planning and inventory purchasing and are consistent with our net sales forecasts.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The valuation of assets and liabilities subject to fair value measurements utilizes a three tiered approach and fair value measurement be classified and disclosed in one of the following three categories. Inputs to valuation techniques are observable or unobservable. Observable inputs reflect market data obtained from independent sources, while unobservable inputs reflect our market assumptions.
Level 1: Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable prices that are based on inputs not quoted on active markets, but corroborated by market data.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs are used when little or no market data is available and may be derived with internally developed methodologies.
The carrying value of financial instruments measured and classified within Level 1 are based on quoted prices.
The types of instruments that trade in markets that are not considered to be active, but are valued based on quoted market prices, broker or dealer quotations, or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency are generally classified within Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy.
Certain contingent consideration liabilities are classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy because their fair value is determined using unobservable inputs. We estimate the fair value of those liabilities using a discounted cash flow model or Monte Carlo simulation model. The significant unobservable inputs of such models include projected financial results, volatility rates, probability factors associated with the achievement of defined milestones, and discount rates.
The most significant portion of our contingent consideration liabilities as of December 31, 2021, resulted from the acquisition of Simplify Medical Pty Limited, or Simplify Medical, during the first quarter of 2021. In connection with the purchase price allocation for the acquisition, we recorded a fair value estimate of $103.4 million for contingent consideration liabilities related to the achievement of milestones associated with the regulatory approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for two-level cervical total disc replacement, and net sales from products incorporating the Simplify Medical cervical artificial disc technology.
We estimated the fair value of the contingent liability related to the FDA regulatory approval milestone using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model. This fair value measurement was based on significant inputs not observable in the market, with key assumptions including our estimation of the probability of FDA approval, the timing of approval, and the discount rate applied. Significant changes to these assumptions could have resulted in a higher or lower fair value prior to achievement of this milestone. In April 2021, the Simplify Cervical Disc received approval from the FDA for two-level cervical total disc replacement, resulting in the achievement of the regulatory milestone and payment by us of $45.8 million.
We estimate the fair value of the remaining contingent liabilities related to the net sales milestones using a Monte Carlo simulation model. This fair value measurement is based on significant inputs that are both observable and unobservable in the market, with key assumptions including the forecasted net sales from products incorporating the Simplify Medical cervical artificial disc technology, volatility factors associated with those forecasted net sales, and discount rates. Significant changes in these assumptions could result in a significantly higher or lower fair value estimate. Evaluating this contingent consideration liability as of December 31, 2021, holding other inputs constant, an increase or decrease in our forecasted net sales by 5% would have resulted in an increase or decrease in the fair value by $5.3 million. See further discussion in Note 5, Business Combinations, and Note 4, Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangible Assets with Indefinite Lives
Our goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of net assets acquired from our business combinations. The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from business combinations and asset acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired, including capitalized in-process research and development, or IPR&D. Intangible assets acquired in a business combination that are used for IPR&D activities are considered indefinite lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development efforts. Upon commercialization of the relevant research and development project, we will amortize the acquired in-process research and development over its estimated useful life or expense the acquired in-process research and development should the research and development project be unsuccessful with no future alternative use.
Goodwill and IPR&D are not amortized; however, they are assessed for impairment using fair value measurement techniques on an annual basis or more frequently if facts and circumstance warrant such a review. The goodwill or IPR&D are considered to be impaired if we determine that the carrying value of the reporting unit or IPR&D exceeds its respective fair value.
We perform our goodwill impairment analysis at the reporting unit level, which aligns with our reporting structure and availability of discrete financial information. We perform our annual impairment analysis by either comparing a reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying amount or doing a qualitative assessment of a reporting unit’s fair value from the last quantitative assessment to determine if there is potential impairment. We may do a qualitative assessment when the results of the previous quantitative test indicated the reporting unit’s estimated fair value was significantly in excess of the carrying value of its net assets and we do not believe there have been significant changes in the reporting unit’s operations that would significantly decrease its estimated fair value or significantly increase its net assets. If a quantitative assessment is performed the evaluation includes management estimates of cash flow projections based on internal future projections and/or use of a market approach by looking at market values of comparable companies. Key assumptions for these projections include net sales growth, future gross and operating margin growth, and its weighted cost of capital and terminal growth rates. The net sales and margin growth is based on increased sales of new and existing products as we maintain our investment in research and development. Additional assumed value creators may include increased efficiencies from capital spending. The resulting cash flows are discounted using a weighted average cost of capital. Operating mechanisms and requirements to ensure that growth and efficiency assumptions will ultimately be realized are also considered in the evaluation, including timing and probability of regulatory approvals for our products to be commercialized. Our market capitalization is also considered as a part of this analysis.
Our annual evaluation for impairment of goodwill consists of one reporting unit. In accordance with our policy, we completed our most recent annual evaluation for impairment as of October 1, 2021 using the qualitative method. This qualitative analysis considered macroeconomic conditions and other relevant factors specific to the reporting unit, including market considerations, cost factors, historical and forecasted financial performance, and relevant entity-specific considerations. As part of our qualitative assessment, we also reviewed certain quantitative factors to assess the likelihood of an impairment. During the year ended December 31, 2021, no indicators of impairments were noted and consequently, no impairment charge was recorded during the year.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets are comprised primarily of purchased technology, customer relationships, manufacturing know-how and trade secrets, and trade name and trademarks. We make significant judgments in relation to the valuation of intangible assets resulting from business combinations and asset acquisitions.
Intangible assets are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives of 2 to 17 years. We base the useful lives and related amortization expense on the period of time we estimate the assets will generate net sales or otherwise be used. We also periodically review the lives assigned to our intangible assets to ensure that our initial estimates do not exceed any revised estimated periods from which we expect to realize cash flows from the technologies. If a change were to occur in any of the above-mentioned factors or estimates, the likelihood of a material change in our reported results would increase.
We evaluate our intangible assets with finite lives for indications of impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Factors that could trigger an impairment review include significant under-performance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business or significant negative industry or economic trends. If this evaluation indicates that the value of the intangible asset may be impaired, we make an assessment of the recoverability of the net carrying value of the asset over its remaining useful life. If this assessment indicates that the intangible asset is not recoverable, based on the estimated undiscounted future cash flows of the technology over the remaining amortization period, we reduce the net carrying value of the related intangible asset to fair value and may adjust the remaining amortization period.
Significant judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in the discounted cash flow valuation models. It is possible that plans may change and estimates used may prove to be inaccurate. If our actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses, are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur additional impairment charges.
Valuation of Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense for equity-classified awards, principally related to restricted stock units, or RSUs, and performance restricted stock units, or PRSUs, is measured at the grant date based on the estimated fair value of the award. The fair value of equity instruments that are expected to vest is recognized and amortized over the requisite service period. We have granted awards with up to five year graded or cliff vesting terms (in each case, with service through the date of vesting being required). No exercise price or other monetary payment is required for receipt of the shares issued in settlement of the respective award; instead, consideration is furnished in the form of the participant’s service.
The fair value of RSUs including PRSUs with pre-defined performance criteria is based on the stock price on the date of grant whereas the expense for PRSUs with pre-defined performance criteria is adjusted with the probability of achievement of such performance criteria at each period end. The fair value of the PRSUs that are earned based on the achievement of pre-defined market conditions for total shareholder return, is estimated on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo valuation model. The key assumptions in applying this model are an expected volatility and a risk-free interest rate.
Stock-based compensation expense is adjusted from the grant date to exclude expense for awards that are expected to be forfeited. The forfeiture estimate is adjusted as necessary through the vesting date so that full compensation cost is recognized only for awards that vest. We assess the reasonableness of the estimated forfeiture rate at least annually, with any change to be made on a cumulative basis in the period the estimated forfeiture rates change. We considered our historical experience of pre-vesting forfeitures on awards by each homogenous group of employees as the basis to arrive at our estimated annual pre-vesting forfeiture rates.
We estimate the fair value of stock options issued under our equity incentive plans and shares issued to employees under our employee stock purchase plan, or ESPP, using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model on the date of grant. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model incorporates various assumptions including expected volatility, expected term and risk-free interest rates. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected term of our stock options and ESPP offering period which is derived from historical experience. The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant. We have never declared or paid dividends and have no plans to do so in the foreseeable future.
Accounting for Income Taxes
The asset and liability approach is used to recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. Tax law and rate changes are reflected in income in the period such changes are enacted. We include interest and penalties related to income taxes, including unrecognized tax benefits, within income tax expense.
Our income tax returns are based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. In addition, the calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. We recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on a two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement. While we believe we have appropriate support for the positions taken on our tax returns, we regularly assess the potential outcomes of examinations by tax authorities in determining the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. We continually assess the likelihood and amount of potential revisions and adjust the income tax provision, income taxes payable and deferred taxes in the period in which the facts that give rise to a revision become known.
Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and the valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined using the enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized. A valuation allowance is established when it is more likely than not the future realization of all or some of the deferred tax assets will not be achieved. The evaluation of the need for a valuation allowance is performed on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis, and includes a review of all available positive and negative evidence. Factors reviewed include projections of pre-tax book income for the foreseeable future, determination of cumulative pre-tax book income after permanent differences, earnings history, and reliability of forecasting.
Legal Proceedings
We are involved in a number of legal actions and investigations arising out of the normal course of our business. The outcomes of these legal actions and investigations are not within our complete control and may not be known for prolonged periods of time. In some actions, the claimants seek damages as well as other relief, including injunctions barring the sale of products that are the subject of the lawsuit, that could require significant expenditures or result in lost net sales. In accordance with authoritative guidance, we disclose information regarding each claim where the likelihood of a material loss contingency is probable or reasonably possible. An estimated loss contingency is accrued in our financial statements if it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. If a loss is reasonably possible and can be reasonably estimated, the estimated loss or range of loss is disclosed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. In most cases, significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of a loss to be recorded. Our significant legal proceedings and investigations are discussed in Note 12, Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
The above discussion is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies and estimates. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP. See our Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Annual Report, which contain accounting policies and other disclosures required by U.S. GAAP.
Results of Operations
Net Sales
Our spinal hardware product line offerings include our implants and fixation products. Our surgical support product line offerings include IONM services, disposables and biologics, and our capital equipment, all of which are used to aid spine surgery.
We expect continued adoption of our innovative less-invasive procedures and deeper penetration into existing accounts and international markets as our sales force executes on our strategy of selling the full mix of our products and services. However, the continued consolidation and increased purchasing power of our hospital customers and group purchasing organizations, continued changes in the public and private insurance markets regarding reimbursement, and ongoing policy and legislative changes in the U.S. have created less predictability. Although the market for procedurally-integrated spine surgery solutions is expected to continue to grow over the long term, economic, political and regulatory influences are subjecting our industry to significant changes that may slow the growth rate of the spine surgery market. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has had, and may continue to have, an adverse effect on our business. There were periods of mixed recovery and decline as it relates to procedural volume rates for elective surgeries in both the U.S. and international regions throughout 2021. Sustained shortages of U.S. healthcare workers and the introduction of new variants of the virus added additional uncertainty. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and it is not possible to accurately predict the length or severity of the COVID-19 pandemic or the timing for a broad and sustained resumption of elective surgical procedures.
Total net sales increased $88.4 million, or 8%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Net sales from our spinal hardware product line offerings increased $73.0 million, or 9%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Product volume within spinal hardware increased our net sales by approximately 10% in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to improved recovery rates of certain elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic impacts. Additionally, we experienced unfavorable pricing impacts of approximately 1% in 2021 compared to 2020. Foreign currency fluctuation from 2020 to 2021 did not have a material impact on surgical support net sales.
Net sales from our surgical support product line offerings increased $15.3 million, or 6%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Product and service volume within surgical support increased our net sales by approximately 7% in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to improved recovery rates of certain elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we experienced unfavorable pricing impacts of approximately 1% in 2021 compared to 2020. Foreign currency fluctuation from 2020 to 2021 did not have a material impact on surgical support net sales.
Cost of Sales, Excluding Below Amortization of Intangible Assets
Cost of sales consists primarily of purchased goods, raw materials, labor and overhead associated with product manufacturing, inventory-related costs and royalty expenses, as well as the cost of providing IONM services, which includes personnel and physician oversight costs. We primarily procure and manufacture our product and product components in the U.S., and accordingly, foreign currency fluctuations have not materially impacted our cost of sales.
Cost of sales increased $0.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020. Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales in 2021 decreased by 3% compared to 2020. The increase in cost of sales in 2021 is primarily associated with proportional higher net sales, compared to the same period in 2020. Offsetting this increase is a decrease in the amount of our provision for excess and obsolete inventory reserves of $23.3 million as compared to 2020. This decrease in our excess and obsolete inventory reserves is primarily attributable to a $37.5 million year-over-year reduction in our provision due to changes in our estimates and assumptions about future demand and product life cycles which have been affected by multiple factors, including the COVID-19 pandemic and general market conditions. Offsetting this decrease, during the third quarter of 2021 we made a determination to withdraw certain products manufactured by our NuVasive Specialized Orthopedics, or NSO, subsidiary from the market and discontinue sales of the products. As a result, we recorded a charge of $14.2 million.
Operating Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation costs, commissions and training costs for our employees engaged in sales, marketing and customer support functions. The expense also includes commissions to sales representatives, freight expenses, surgeon training costs, depreciation expense for property and equipment such as surgical instrument sets, and administrative expenses for both employees and third-party service providers.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $62.9 million, or 11%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in 2021 is primarily due to increased compensation costs, including stock-based compensation, commissions, as well as freight and travel expenses compared to 2020, as a result of an increase in net sales from improved recovery rates of certain elective surgeries from COVID-19 pandemic impacts. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic we implemented temporary actions to reduce expenses, including compensation reductions for our Board of Directors and executive officers, and reducing discretionary spend across the organization.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of product research and development, clinical trial and study costs, regulatory and clinical functions, and compensation and other employee related expenses. In the last several years, we have introduced numerous new products and product enhancements that have significantly expanded our technology platforms and our comprehensive product portfolio. We have also acquired complementary and strategic assets and technology, particularly in the area of spinal hardware products. We continue to invest in research and development programs related to our core product portfolio, as well as in our capital equipment.
Research and development expense increased by $12.8 million, or 16%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in spending is primarily due to higher headcount and headcount-related costs, as well as further development and enhancement of our current and future product offerings, including capital equipment and the Simplify Cervical Disc, acquired during the first quarter of 2021. Over the course of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we have stayed committed to our investment in research and development in order to further advance our leadership position in spine surgery and our enabling technologies portfolio.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets relates to the amortization of finite-lived intangible assets acquired. Amortization expense increased by $5.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily related to intangible assets established from the acquisition of Simplify Medical.
Business Transition Costs
We incur certain costs related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which include severance, relocation, consulting, leasehold exit costs, third-party merger and acquisition costs, contingent consideration fair value adjustments and other costs directly associated with such activities. Contingent consideration is accrued based on the fair value of the expected payment, and such accruals are subject to increase or decrease based on assessment of the likelihood and amount of contingent consideration achievement resulting in payment. If an accrual for contingent consideration decreases during a particular period, it results in a reduction of costs during such period.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $68.7 million of costs related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which included $53.4 million of fair value adjustments on contingent consideration liabilities associated with our 2021, 2018, 2017 and 2016 acquisitions. We incurred $4.0 million of costs associated with the acquisition of Simplify Medical during the year ended December 31, 2021. See further discussion in Note 4, Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements, and Note 5, Business Combinations, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $10.9 million of costs related to acquisition, integration and business transition activities, which included $2.3 million of fair value adjustments on contingent consideration liabilities associated with our 2018, 2017 and 2016 acquisitions.
Interest and Other Expense, Net
Total interest and other expense, net for the periods presented included gains and losses from strategic investments, gains and losses from changes in the fair value of derivatives, our pro rata allocation of net income or loss from our equity method investments, and net foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Total interest and other expense, net decreased by $39.5 million, or 46%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Interest expense decreased by $49.4 million primarily due to the discontinuation of accretion of the debt discount for our Senior Convertible Notes due 2021, 2023 and 2025 resulting from our adoption of ASU No. 2020-06, Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), or ASU 2020-06, on January 1, 2021, as well as a reduction in interest expense relating to the 2021 Senior Convertible Notes which were settled in March 2021. Other expense, net increased by $8.6 million due to an increase in net foreign currency exchange losses of $24.4 million during 2021 as compared to 2020. We established intercompany receivables and payables and contingent consideration liabilities in connection with the acquisition of Simplify Medical which is subject to foreign currency remeasurement. Offsetting this increase, is a net loss of $12.3 million recognized during 2020 for the change in fair value of derivative assets and liabilities corresponding to the Senior Convertible Notes due 2023, and an increase in the net gain from strategic investments of $3.5 million recorded 2021. See Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Polices, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion on the adoption of ASU 2020-06.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
The provision for income tax expense as a percentage of pre-tax loss was expense of (10%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with a tax benefit of 22% on pre-tax loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax expense during 2021 was primarily due to increased valuation allowances and a decrease in uncertain tax position releases, offset by reduced foreign income inclusions, increase in research and development credits, and an increase in tax benefits on share-based compensation.
We are subject to audits by federal, state, local, and foreign tax authorities. We believe that adequate provisions have been made for any adjustments that may result from tax examinations. However, the outcome of tax audits cannot be predicted with certainty. Should any issues addressed in our tax audits be resolved in a manner not consistent with our expectations, we could be required to adjust our provision for income taxes in the period such resolution occurs.
We continue to streamline our international operations, including procurement, logistics and customer service functions, in an effort to improve overall operational efficiencies. U.S. tax reform has lessened the tax benefit associated with foreign earnings due to a reduced federal corporate tax rate and the forced U.S. inclusion of certain foreign intangible related earnings. As international tax rules and regulations change, we may be subjected to higher taxes on foreign earnings.
Liquidity, Cash Flows and Capital Resources
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, cash generated from operations, proceeds from our convertible notes issuances, and access to our revolving line of credit. We expect that cash provided by operating activities may fluctuate in future periods as a result of a number of factors, including fluctuations in our operating results, which include impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, working capital requirements and capital deployment decisions. We have historically invested our cash primarily in U.S. treasuries and government agencies, corporate debt, and money market funds. Certain of these investments are subject to general credit, liquidity and other market risks. The general condition of the financial markets and the economy may increase those risks and may affect the value and liquidity of investments and restrict our ability to access the capital markets.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate in net sales, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of selling, general and administrative activities, the timing of introductions of new products and enhancements to existing products, successful insourcing of our manufacturing process, the continuing market acceptance of our products, the expenditures associated with possible future acquisitions or other business combination transactions, the outcome of current and future litigation, international expansions of our business, and impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect our cash flows from operations to continue to fund the ongoing core business. As borrowings become due, we may be required to access the capital markets or draw upon our line of credit for additional funding. As we assess inorganic growth strategies, we may need to supplement our internally generated cash flow with outside sources. As part of our liquidity strategy, we will continue to monitor our current level of earnings and cash flow generation as well as our ability to secure additional credit facilities, term loans, or other similar arrangements and access the capital markets in light of those earning levels and general financial market conditions.
A substantial portion of our operations are located in the U.S., and the majority of our net sales and cash generation have been made in the U.S. Accordingly, we do not have material net cash flow exposures to foreign currency rate fluctuations from operations. However, as our business in markets outside of the U.S. continues to increase, we will be exposed to foreign currency exchange risk related to our foreign operations. Fluctuations in the rate of exchange between the U.S. dollar and foreign currencies, primarily in the pound sterling, the euro, the Australian dollar, the Brazilian real, the Colombian peso, the Singapore dollar, and the yen, could adversely affect our financial results, including our net sales, growth rates in net sales, gross margins, gains and losses as well as assets and liabilities. In particular, as a result of our acquisition of Simplify Medical, we have additional exposure to fluctuations in the Australian dollar. We established intercompany receivables and payables in Australian dollars in connection with the acquisition of Simplify Medical, a proprietary limited company registered in Australia. Additionally, we have future contingent consideration liabilities denominated in U.S. dollars, in connection with the acquisition of Simplify Medical, which are the financial obligation of NuVasive (AUST/NZ) Pty Limited, an Australian dollar denominated company. Both the intercompany receivables and payables and contingent consideration liabilities are subject to foreign currency remeasurement. While we enter into forward currency contracts for certain currencies to partially offset the impact from fluctuations of the foreign currency rates on our third-party and short-term intercompany receivables and payables between our domestic and international operations, we have not entered into hedges with respect to the Australian dollar. In addition, we currently do not hedge future forecasted transactions but will continue to assess whether that strategy is appropriate. As of December 31, 2021, the cash balance held by our foreign subsidiaries with currencies other than the U.S. dollar was approximately $46.5 million and it is our intention to indefinitely reinvest all of our current foreign earnings to increase working capital within our international business and to expand our existing operations outside the U.S. As of December 31, 2021, our account receivable balance held by our foreign subsidiaries with currencies other than the U.S. dollar was approximately $52.6 million. We have operations in markets in which there is governmental financial instability which could impact funds that flow into the medical reimbursement system. In addition, loss of financial stability within these markets could lead to delays in reimbursement or inability to remit payment due to currency controls. Specifically, we have operations and/or sales in Puerto Rico, Brazil and Argentina. We do not have any material financial exposure to one customer or one country that would significantly hinder our liquidity.
We are currently, and in the future could be, involved in legal actions and investigations arising out of the normal course of our business. Due to the inherent uncertainties associated with pending legal actions and investigations, we cannot predict the outcome, and, with respect to certain pending litigation or claims where no liability has been accrued, to make a meaningful estimate of the reasonably possible loss or range of loss that could result from an unfavorable outcome, other than those matters disclosed in this Annual Report. We have no material accruals for pending litigation or claims that are not disclosed in our Consolidated Financial Statements. It is reasonably possible, however, that an unfavorable outcome that exceeds our accrual estimate for a particular legal proceeding or investigation could have a material adverse effect on our liquidity and access to capital resources. Additionally, it is possible that in connection with a legal proceeding or investigation we are required to pay fees and expenses of the other party or set aside funds in an escrow or purchase a performance bond, regardless of our assessment of the probability of a loss. These requirements to pay fees and expenses or escrow funding in connection with a legal proceeding or investigation could have an adverse impact on our liquidity or affect our access to additional capital resources. We have disclosed all material accruals for pending litigation or investigations in Note 12, Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
On September 12, 2016, we completed an acquisition of an imaging software and technology platform known as Lessray. In connection with the acquisition, we recorded a purchase accounting fair value estimate of $34.1 million for contingent consideration liabilities related to the achievement of certain regulatory and commercial milestones. In January 2018, we paid $9.0 million of the outstanding contingent consideration liabilities for the achievement of a commercial milestone. In July 2018, we paid $10.0 million of the outstanding contingent consideration liabilities for the achievement of a regulatory approval milestone. We anticipate the remaining sales-based milestones will become payable at varying times by 2024.
On September 7, 2017, we completed an acquisition of a medical device company that developed interbody implants for spinal fusion using patented porous PEEK technology. In connection with the acquisition, we recorded a purchase accounting fair value estimate of $31.4 million for contingent consideration liabilities related to the achievement of certain manufacturing and commercial milestones. In May 2020, we paid $7.5 million toward the successful achievement of a milestone. As of December 31, 2021, an additional milestone was achieved resulting in $7.5 million to be paid during the first quarter of 2022. We anticipate the remaining milestones will become payable at varying times between 2023 and 2027 but are subject to change based on the achievement of those manufacturing and commercial milestones.
On February 24, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Simplify Medical, a developer of cervical artificial disc technology for cTDR procedures. In connection with the acquisition, we recorded a purchase accounting fair value estimate of $103.4 million for contingent consideration liabilities related to the achievement of milestones related to regulatory approval and net sales from products incorporating the Simplify Medical cervical artificial disc technology. On April 1, 2021, the Simplify Cervical Artificial Disc received approval from the FDA for two-level cervical total disc replacement, resulting in the achievement of the regulatory milestone. We made a payment of $45.8 million on April 20, 2021 for the regulatory milestone using available cash. Additional milestone payments, which are contingent upon net sales from products incorporating the Simplify Medical cervical artificial disc technology, will become payable in calendar years 2023, 2024 and 2025.
Cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments were $246.1 million and $1.03 billion at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. While the efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have created significant disruptions to the healthcare system and the global economy, as of the filing date of this report, we believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, projected future cash flows from operations and access to external financing sources are sufficient to satisfy our current and reasonably anticipated requirements for funds to conduct our operations in the ordinary course of our business and pay our obligation as they become due for the next twelve months. Additionally, we have varying needs for cash in connection with our Senior Convertible Notes and also as a result of certain acquisition-related obligations and contingent consideration achievements. Future litigation or requirements to escrow funds could also materially impact our liquidity and our ability to invest in and operate our business on an ongoing basis. Although we have no cash borrowings under our existing revolving senior credit facility as of the date of this report, we expect to use our cash resources or cash borrowings under our senior credit facility to support our business within the context of prevailing market and economic conditions, which, given the continued unpredictability of the COVID-19 pandemic, could rapidly and materially deteriorate or otherwise change. During this time, we may seek other sources of liquidity through capital market or bank loan transactions to support our business needs. In addition, we may seek to further adjust or amend the terms of and/or expand the capacity of our existing senior credit facility, or enter into additional credit facilities, term loans, or other similar arrangements. However, with the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, our ability to engage in such transactions may be constrained by volatile financial market conditions, reduced investor and/or lender interest or capacity, as well as our liquidity, leverage, and general creditworthiness and we can provide no assurance as to successfully completing such transactions. Furthermore, our ability to borrow under our existing revolving senior credit facility is subject to remaining in compliance with underlying financial covenants which may be difficult to satisfy if our business experiences additional disruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided under Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.
The decrease in liquidity during the year ended December 31, 2021, of $783.9 million was mainly driven by cash outflows of $649.4 million related to the settlement of our Senior Convertible Notes due 2021, the acquisition of Simplify Medical for $149.5 million (net of cash acquired) and the payment of $45.8 million for the achievement of the Simplify Medical regulatory milestone. At December 31, 2021, we had cash totaling $1.5 million in restricted accounts which is not available to us to meet any ongoing capital requirements if and when needed.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $182.2 million in 2021, compared to $185.9 million in 2020. The $3.7 million decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to the timing of collections and payments associated with our accounts receivable, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, inventory, and compensation related accruals.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $136.1 million in 2021, compared to $281.9 million used in 2020. The $145.9 million decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily due to a net increase of $346.5 million relating to purchase, sale and maturity activity from our marketable security portfolio from 2021 and 2020. This was partially offset by payments of $195.3 million associated with the acquisition of Simplify Medical and the associated regulatory milestone being met during 2021.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $653.3 million in 2021, compared to $736.7 million cash provided from financing activities in the same period in 2020. The $1.4 billion increase in cash used in financing activities was primarily due to the $649.4 million payment to settle our Senior Convertible Notes due 2021. Additionally, in 2020, we issued $450.0 million of Senior Convertible Notes due 2025, and $450.0 million of Senior Convertible Notes due 2023, receiving proceeds of $437.0 million and $436.9 million, respectively. These proceeds were offset by $53.9 million of net cash used for the call spreads on the sales and purchases of our warrants and bond hedges issued in connection with these Senior Convertible Notes. Treasury stock purchases decreased by $71.9 million during 2021, compared to the same period in 2020. In 2020, we repurchased approximately 1,085,000 shares of our common stock for $75.0 million pursuant to our stock repurchase program, and in 2021, we did not make any such repurchases.
Treasury stock purchases related to equity award vesting totaled $8.8 million during 2021.We use net share settlement on stock issuances, which results in cash tax payments. Net share settlement is generally used in lieu of cash payments by employees for minimum tax withholding for equity awards. The net share settlement is accounted for as a treasury share repurchase transaction, with the cost of any deemed repurchased shares included in treasury stock and reported as a reduction in total equity at the time of settlement. Additionally, net share settlement for tax withholding requires us to fund a significant amount of cash for certain tax payment obligations from time-to-time with respect to the employee tax obligations for vested equity awards. We anticipate using cash generated from operating activities to fund such payments.
Senior Convertible Notes
1.00% Senior Convertible Notes due 2023
In June 2020, we issued $450.0 million principal amount of unsecured Senior Convertible Notes with a stated interest rate of 1.00% and a maturity date of June 1, 2023, which we refer to as the 2023 Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and costs directly related to the offering, were approximately $436.7 million. Interest on the 2023 Notes began accruing upon issuance and is payable semi-annually. We may settle conversions of the 2023 Notes in cash, stock, or a combination thereof, solely at our discretion. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions through combination settlement, which involves satisfying the principal amount outstanding with cash and any note conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock. On or after February 1, 2023, until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding June 1, 2023, holders may convert their 2023 Notes at any time, regardless of the conditions. We may not redeem the 2023 Notes prior to the maturity date. No principal payments are due on the 2023 Notes prior to maturity. Other than restrictions relating to certain fundamental changes and consolidations, mergers or asset sales and customary anti-dilution adjustments, the 2023 Notes do not contain any financial covenants and do not restrict us from conducting significant restructurings, paying dividends or issuing or repurchasing any of our other securities. As of December 31, 2021, we are unaware of any current events or market conditions that would allow holders to convert the 2023 Notes.
In connection with the sale of the 2023 Notes, we entered into transactions for convertible notes hedge, which we refer to as the 2023 Hedge, and warrants, which we refer to as the 2023 Warrants. The cost of the 2023 Hedge was $69.5 million. The 2023 Hedge will expire on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding June 1, 2023. The 2023 Hedge is expected to reduce the potential equity dilution upon conversion of the 2023 Notes if the daily volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the 2023 Hedge. Our assumed exercise of the 2023 Hedge is considered anti-dilutive since the effect of the inclusion would always be anti-dilutive with respect to the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
In addition, we sold the 2023 Warrants to the 2023 Counterparties to acquire up to 5,345,010 common shares of our stock. The 2023 Warrants will expire on various dates from September 2023 through November 2023 and may be settled in net shares or cash, subject to certain conditions. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions in shares of our common stock. We received $46.8 million in cash proceeds from the sale of the 2023 Warrants. The 2023 Warrants could have a dilutive effect on our earnings per share to the extent that the price of our common stock during a given measurement period exceeds the strike price of the 2023 Warrants, which is $104.84 per share.
0.375% Senior Convertible Notes due 2025
In March 2020, we issued $450.0 million principal amount of unsecured senior convertible notes with a stated interest rate of 0.375% and a maturity date of March 15, 2025, which we refer to as the 2025 Notes. The net proceeds from the offering, after deducting initial purchasers’ discounts and costs directly related to the offering, were approximately $437.0 million. Interest on the 2025 Notes began accruing upon issuance and is payable semi-annually. The 2025 Notes may be settled in cash, stock, or a combination thereof, solely at our discretion. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions through combination settlement, which involves satisfying the principal amount outstanding with cash and any note conversion value over the principal amount in shares of our common stock. On or after September 15, 2024, until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding March 15, 2025, holders may convert their 2025 Notes at any time, regardless of the conditions. We may not redeem the 2025 Notes prior to March 20, 2023. We may redeem the 2025 Notes, at our option, in whole or in part, on or after March 20, 2023 until the close of business on the business day immediately preceding September 15, 2024, if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we deliver written notice of a redemption. The redemption price will be equal to 100% of the principal amount of such 2025 Notes to be redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No principal payments are due on the 2025 Notes prior to maturity. Other than restrictions relating to certain fundamental changes and consolidations, mergers or asset sales and customary anti-dilution adjustments, the 2025 Notes do not contain any financial covenants and do not restrict us from conducting significant restructurings, paying dividends or issuing or repurchasing any of our other securities. As of December 31, 2021, we are unaware of any current events or market conditions that would allow holders to convert the 2025 Notes.
In connection with the sale of the 2025 Notes, we entered into transactions for convertible notes hedge, which we refer to as the 2025 Hedge, and warrants, which we refer to as the 2025 Warrants. The cost of the 2025 Hedge was $78.3 million. The 2025 Hedge will expire on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding March 15, 2025. The 2025 Hedge is expected to reduce the potential equity dilution upon conversion of the 2025 Notes if the daily volume-weighted average price per share of our common stock exceeds the strike price of the 2025 Hedge. Our assumed exercise of the 2025 Hedge is considered anti-dilutive since the effect of the inclusion would always be anti-dilutive with respect to the calculation of diluted earnings per share.
In addition, we sold the 2025 Warrants to the 2025 Counterparties to acquire up to 4,823,910 common shares of our stock. The 2025 Warrants will expire on various dates from June 2025 through October 2025 and may be settled in net shares or cash, subject to certain conditions. It is our current intent and policy to settle all conversions in shares of our common stock. We received $47.1 million in cash proceeds from the sale of the 2025 Warrants. The 2025 Warrants could have a dilutive effect on our earnings per share to the extent that the price of our common stock during a given measurement period exceeds the strike price of the 2025 Warrants, which is $127.84 per share.
Revolving Senior Credit Facility
In February 2020, we entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, or the 2020 Credit Agreement, for a revolving senior credit facility, referred to as the 2020 Facility, which replaced the previous Amended and Restated Credit Agreement we had entered into in April 2017. The 2020 Credit Agreement was further amended in May 2020 to, among other things, provide additional flexibility in determining the financial covenant leverage ratios for the second and third fiscal quarters of 2020 and to adjust certain margin and benchmark rates used to determine interest under the 2020 Facility. The 2020 Credit Agreement provides for secured revolving loans, multicurrency loan options and letters of credit in an aggregate amount of up to $550.0 million. We did not carry any outstanding revolving loans under the 2020 Facility as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Any borrowings under the 2020 Facility are intended to be used to provide financing for working capital and other general corporate purposes, including potential mergers and acquisitions and to refinance indebtedness. Borrowings under the 2020 Facility bear interest, at our option, at a rate equal to an applicable margin plus: (a) the applicable Eurocurrency Rate (as defined in the 2020 Credit Agreement), or (b) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (1) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.50%, (2) the Bank of America prime rate, and (3) the Eurocurrency Rate for an interest period of one month plus 1.00%. The margin for the 2020 Facility ranges, based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio, from 0.50% to 1.25% in the case of base rate loans and from 1.50% to 2.25% in the case of Eurocurrency Rate loans. The 2020 Facility includes an unused line fee ranging, based on our consolidated total net leverage ratio, from 0.35% to 0.50% per annum on the revolving commitment.
The 2020 Credit Agreement contains affirmative, negative, permitted acquisition and financial covenants, and events of default customary for financings of this type. The financial covenants require us to maintain a consolidated interest coverage ratio and certain consolidated leverage ratios, which are measured on a quarterly basis. The 2020 Facility grants the lenders preferred first priority liens and security interests in capital stock, intercompany debt and all of our present and future property and assets including each guarantor. As of December 31, 2021, we are in compliance with the 2020 Credit Agreement covenants.
See Note 6, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for more information about the terms of the 2023 Notes, the 2023 Hedge, the 2023 Warrants, the 2025 Notes, the 2025 Hedge, the 2025 Warrants and the 2020 Credit Agreement.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contractual obligations and commitments represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties, including our Senior Convertible Notes, operating leases and other contractual obligations.
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1)
Senior Convertible Notes includes the expected coupon interest payments on the outstanding debt. See Note 6, Indebtedness, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion of the terms of the Senior Convertible Notes.
Total contractual obligations and commitments listed in the table above excludes potential contingent consideration payments pursuant to certain merger, purchase, and product development agreements, other than achieved milestones. See Note 4, Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements, and Note 7, Commitments, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further discussion on the contingent consideration obligations and product development agreements, respectively.
The expected timing of payments of the obligations discussed above is estimated based on current information. Timing of payment and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet activities.