ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on April 19, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (a “Business Combination”). We consummated our initial public offering on December 22, 2021 and are currently in the process of locating suitable targets for our business combination. We intend to use the cash proceeds from our Public Offering and the Private Placement described below as well as additional issuances, if any, of our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt to complete the Business Combination.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial Business Combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from April 19, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and, subsequent to the IPO, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income and unrealized gains from the cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from April 19, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $300,433, which consisted of a gain of $597,567 for the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities and interest income of $6,461, offset by formation and operating costs of $45,047 and offering costs allocated to warrants of $258,548. We are required to revalue our liability-classified warrants at the end of each reporting period and reflect in the statement of operations a gain or loss from the change in fair value of the warrant liabilities in the period in which the change occurred.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $741,228 in cash and working capital of $998,574 (excluding the amount of franchise tax payable that could be paid from available trust interest income). Prior to the completion of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain of the offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of $204,841, which was fully paid upon the initial public offering. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering and private placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended business combination, the initial stockholders or an affiliate of the initial stockholders or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds to pay existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
We entered into an administrative services agreement pursuant to which we will pay an affiliate of one of our directors for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount of $5,000 per month.
We have engaged I-Bankers and Dawson James as advisors in connection with our acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, entering into contractual arrangements with, or engaging in any other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities. We will pay I-Bankers and Dawson James for such services a fee equal to 3.68% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our financial information. We describe our significant accounting policies in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this report. Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies require that management apply significant judgments in defining the appropriate assumptions integral to financial estimates. On an ongoing basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Judgments are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, industry trends and information available from outside sources, as appropriate. However, by their nature, judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty, and, therefore, actual results could differ from our estimates.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with the IPO in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40. Such guidance provides that because the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, each warrant must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, we classified each warrant as a liability at its fair value. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date. With each such re-measurement, the warrant liabilities will be adjusted to fair value, with the change in fair value recognized in our statement of operations.
Net Income Per Common Stock
We have two categories of shares, which are referred to as common stock subject to possible redemption and common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two categories of shares. The 17,404,250 potential shares of common stock for outstanding warrants to purchase our shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the period from April 19, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income per share of common stock is the same as basic net income per share of common stock for the period.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
Our common stock sold as part of the Units in the IPO (“public common stock”) contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation, or if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the initial Business Combination. In accordance with ASC 480-10-S99, we classify public common stock subject to redemption outside of permanent equity as the redemption provisions are not solely within our control. The public common stock sold as part of the Units in the IPO was issued with other freestanding instruments (i.e., Public Warrants) and as such, the initial carrying value of public common stock classified as temporary equity was the allocated proceeds determined in accordance with ASC 470-20. The public common stock is subject to ASC 480-10-S99 and is currently not redeemable as the redemption is contingent upon the occurrence of events mentioned above. According to ASC 480-10-S99-15, no subsequent adjustment is needed if it is not probable that the instrument will become redeemable.
Recent Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the independent registered public accounting firm’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.