ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in those forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those described under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” Dollar amounts presented are in thousands, except per share data or where the context otherwise requires.
Overview
We are a provider of professional and technical engineering and consulting solutions to public and private sector clients. We focus on the infrastructure, utility services, construction, real estate, and environmental markets. Our primary clients include U.S. Federal, state, municipal, and local government agencies, and military and defense clients. We also serve quasi-public and private sector clients from the education, healthcare, utility services, and public utilities, including schools, universities, hospitals, health care providers, insurance providers, large utility service providers, and large to small utility service producers.
Although we anticipate public and quasi-public sector clients will represent the majority of our revenues for the foreseeable future, we intend to continue expanding our service offerings to private sector clients. Historically, public and quasi-public sector clients have demonstrated greater resilience during periods of economic downturns, while private sector clients have offered higher gross profit margin opportunities during periods of economic expansion.
Fiscal Year
We operate on a "52/53 week" fiscal year ending on the Saturday closest to December 31st (whether or not in the following calendar year), with interim calendar quarters ending on the Saturday closest to the end of such calendar quarter (whether or not in the following calendar quarter). As a result, fiscal 2021 and 2019 included 52 weeks compared to fiscal 2020, which included 53 weeks.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our critical accounting estimates are those we believe require our most significant judgments about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. A discussion of our critical accounting estimates, the underlying judgments and uncertainties used to make them and the likelihood that materially different estimates would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions is as follows:
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), we recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer at an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To determine the proper revenue recognition method, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. The majority of our contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services that is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, is not distinct.
Our performance obligations are satisfied as work progresses or at a point in time. Gross revenues from services transferred to customers over time accounted for 90%, 92%, and 90% of our revenues during fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. For our cost-reimbursable contracts, revenue is recognized over time using direct costs incurred or direct costs incurred to date as compared to the estimated total direct costs for performance obligations because it depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on its contracts. Contract costs include labor, sub-consultant services, and other direct costs. Gross revenue from services transferred to customers at a point in time accounted for 10%, 8%, and 10% of our revenues during fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Revenue from these contracts is recognized when the customer obtains control of the asset, which is generally upon delivery and acceptance by the customer of the reports and/or analysis performed.
Contract modifications are common in the performance of our contracts. Contracts modified typically result from changes in scope, specifications, design, performance, sites, or period of completion. In most cases, contract modifications are for services that are not distinct, and, therefore, are accounted for as part of the existing contract.
Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events. These assumptions are dependent upon the accuracy of a variety of estimates, including engineering progress, achievement of milestones, labor productivity and cost estimates. Due to uncertainties inherent in the estimation process, it is possible that actual completion costs may vary from estimates. If estimated total costs on contracts indicate a loss or reduction to the percentage of total contract revenues recognized to date, these losses or reductions are recognized in the period in which the revisions are known. The effect of revisions to revenues, estimated costs to complete contracts, including penalties, incentive awards, change orders, claims, anticipated losses and others are recorded on the cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the revisions are identified and the loss can be reasonably estimated. Such revisions could occur in any reporting period and the effects on the results of operations for that reporting period may be material depending on the size of the project or the adjustment. During fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019 the cumulative catch-up adjustment for contract modifications was not material.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We record billed and unbilled receivables net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. The allowance is estimated based on management’s evaluation of the contracts involved and the financial condition of clients. Factors considered include:
•Client type (governmental or private client)
•Historical performance
•Historical collection trends
•General economic conditions
The allowance is increased by our provision for doubtful accounts, which is charged against income. All recoveries on receivables previously charged off are credited to the accounts receivable recovery account and are included in income, while direct charge-offs of receivables are deducted from the allowance. Although we believe the allowance for doubtful accounts is sufficient, a decline in economic conditions could lead to the deterioration in the financial condition of our customers, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, and additional allowances may be required that could materially impact our consolidated results of operations. Trade receivable balances carried by us are comprised of accounts from a diverse client base across a broad range of industries.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is the excess of consideration paid for an acquired entity over the amounts assigned to assets acquired, including other identifiable intangible assets and liabilities assumed in a business combination. To determine the amount of goodwill resulting from a business combination, we perform an assessment to determine the acquisition date fair value of the acquired company’s tangible and identifiable intangible assets and liabilities.
We evaluate goodwill annually for impairment on August 1, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the asset may be impaired, using the quantitative method. An entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. These qualitative factors include: macroeconomic and industry conditions, cost factors, overall financial performance and other relevant entity-specific events. If the entity determines that this threshold is met, then we may apply a one-step quantitative impairment test. The one-step impairment test requires a comparison of the carrying value of the assets and liabilities associated with a reporting unit, including goodwill, with the fair value of the reporting unit. We determine fair value through multiple valuation techniques, and weight the results accordingly. We make certain subjective and complex judgments in assessing whether an event of impairment of goodwill has occurred, including assumptions and estimates used to determine the fair value of our reporting units. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we would record the amount of goodwill impairment as the excess of a reporting unit's carrying amount over its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
On August 1, 2021, we conducted our annual impairment tests using the quantitative method of evaluating goodwill. Based on the quantitative analyses, we determined the fair value of each of the reporting units exceeded its carrying value and therefore, there was no goodwill impairment. There were no indicators, events or changes in circumstances that would indicate goodwill impairment for the period from August 2, 2021 through January 1, 2022.
Identifiable intangible assets primarily include customer backlog, customer relationships, trade names, non-compete agreements, and developed technology. Amortizable intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives and reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the assets may be impaired. If an indicator of impairment exists we compare the estimated future cash flows of the asset, on an undiscounted basis, to the carrying value of the asset. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, then impairment, if any, is measured as the difference between fair value and carrying value, with fair value typically based on a discounted cash flow model. There were no indicators, events or changes in circumstances that would indicate intangible assets were impaired during fiscal 2021.
In connection with an acquisition of a business, we record identifiable intangible assets acquired at their respective fair values as of the date of acquisition. The corresponding fair value estimates for these assets acquired include projected future cash flows, associated discount rates used to calculate present value, asset life cycles, and customer retention rates. We use an independent valuation specialist to assist in determining the estimated fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The fair value calculated for intangible assets may change during the finalization of the purchase price allocation due to the estimates and assumptions used in determining their fair value. As a result, we may adjust the provisional amounts recorded for certain items as part of the purchase price allocation subsequent to the acquisition, not to exceed one year after the acquisition date, until the purchase accounting allocation is finalized. During 2020, we finalized the QSI purchase price allocation reported at December 28, 2019 to account for updates to assumptions and estimates related to the fair value of the trade name, customer relationships, and customer backlog. As a result, we determined the QSI trade name is a finite-lived asset that will be amortized over a two-year period and the fair value was decreased by $54,313. Additionally, the fair value of QSI's customer relationships and customer backlog increased $6,605 and $811, respectively.
Recent Acquisitions
The aggregate value of all consideration for our acquisitions consummated during 2021, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $100,729, $1,949, and $369,879, respectively. The net assets acquired during 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $54,695, $1,425, and $166,637, respectively, while the gross revenues associated with these acquisitions (from their respective dates of acquisition) were $29,965, $851 and $42,127, respectively.
2021 Acquisitions
We completed eight acquisitions during 2021. The aggregate purchase price of all eight acquisitions is $100,729, including $69,475 of cash, $19,334 of promissory notes, $6,787 of our common stock, and potential earn-outs of up to $25,700 payable in cash and stock, which was recorded at an estimated fair value of $5,133. An option-based model was used to determine the fair value of the earn-outs, which is a generally accepted valuation technique that embodies all significant assumption types. In order to determine the fair values of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we engaged an independent third-party valuation specialist to assist in the determination of fair values. The final determination of the fair value of assets and liabilities will be completed within the one-year measurement period as required by ASC 805. The 2021 acquisitions will necessitate the use of this measurement period to adequately analyze and assess the factors used in establishing the asset and liability fair values as of the acquisition date, including intangible assets, accounts receivable, and certain fixed assets.
2020 Acquisitions
We completed one acquisition during 2020 which was not material. The aggregate purchase price was $1,949, including $882 of cash, $500 in promissory note, $312 of our common stock, and $255 in additional contingent payments. In order to determine the fair values of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed we performed a fair value assessment.
2019 Acquisitions
On December 20, 2019 (the "Closing Date"), we acquired all of the outstanding equity interests in Geospatial Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries, including Quantum Spatial, Inc. (collectively "QSI"), a full-service geospatial solutions provider serving the North American market. QSI provides data solutions to public and private sector clients that need geospatial intelligence to mitigate risk, plan for growth, better manage resources, and advance scientific understanding. We acquired QSI in an all-cash transaction for $318,428, which includes excess working capital of $9,034 and closing date cash of approximately $6,894. The purchase price and other related costs associated with the transaction were financed through our amended and restated credit agreement (the "A&R Credit Agreement") with Bank of America, N.A. and the other lenders party thereto. See Note 11, Notes Payable and Other Obligations, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this
Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail on the A&R Credit Agreement. In order to determine the fair values of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed for QSI, we engaged a third-party independent valuation specialist to assist in the determination of fair values.
We completed eight other acquisitions during 2019. The aggregate purchase price of the eight acquisitions was $51,451, including $39,547 of cash, $9,300 of promissory notes, $1,600 of our common stock, and potential earn-outs of up to $2,700 payable in cash and stock, which was recorded at an estimated fair value of $1,004. An income-based model was used to determine the fair value of the earn-outs, which utilizes a probability weighted approach. In order to determine the fair values of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we engaged an independent third-party valuation specialist to assist in the determination of fair values.
Secondary Offering
On March 10, 2021, we priced an underwritten public offering of 1,612,903 shares of our common stock (the "Firm Shares") at a price of $93.00 per share. The shares were sold pursuant to an effective registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-237167). In addition, we also granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase 241,935 additional shares (the "Option Shares") of our common stock at the public offering price. On March 15, 2021, we closed on the Firm Shares, for which we received net proceeds of approximately $140,693 after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated offering expenses payable by us. On April 13, 2021, the underwriters exercised the Option Shares and we received net proceeds of $21,150 after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
Segments
Effective the beginning of fiscal year 2020, we re-evaluated the structure of our internal organization structure as a result of the 2019 acquisition of QSI. To reflect management's revised perspective, we are now organized into three operating and reportable segments:
•Infrastructure ("INF") - includes our engineering, civil program management, utility services, and construction quality assurance, testing and inspection practices;
•Building, Technology & Sciences ("BTS") - includes our environmental health sciences, buildings and program management, and MEP & technology engineering practices; and
•Geospatial Solutions ("GEO") - includes our geospatial solution practices.
The GEO segment has been created to provide greater visibility regarding the operational and financial performance of QSI. The GEO segment structure is consistent with how we plan and allocate resources, manage our business, and assess our performance. The change in our segment reporting was not material to fiscal 2019 segment financial results. As such, fiscal 2019 segment financial results were not retrospectively revised.
For additional information regarding our reportable segments, see Note 18, Reportable Segments, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted global stock markets and economies. We are closely monitoring the impact of the outbreak of COVID-19 on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact our customers and employees. Some of our services have been affected, primarily our Geospatial segment, real estate transactional services and hospitality-related services. In particular, due to COVID-19 restrictions, some of our casino and hotel projects have been delayed. As U.S. and international economies reopen and with increased vaccine availability, our real estate transactional services have recovered, however we are unable to predict the ultimate impact that it may have on our business, future results of operations, financial position, or cash flows. The extent to which our operations may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic will depend largely on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the outbreak and actions by government authorities to contain the outbreak or treat its impact. We intend to continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on our business closely.
Components of Income and Expense
Revenues
We enter into contracts with our clients that contain two principal types of pricing provisions, representing a percentage of total revenue as shown below:
Cost-reimbursable contracts. Cost-reimbursable contracts consist of the following:
•Time and materials contracts are common for smaller scale professional and technical consulting and certification services projects. Under these types of contracts, there is no predetermined fee. Instead, we negotiate hourly billing rates and charge our clients based upon actual hours expended on a project. In addition, any direct project expenditures are passed through to the client and are typically reimbursed. These contracts may have an initial not-to-exceed or guaranteed maximum price provision.
•Cost-plus contracts are the predominant contracting method used by U.S. Federal, state, and local governments. Under these type contracts, we charge clients for its costs, including both direct and indirect costs, plus a negotiated fee. The total estimated cost plus the negotiated fee represents the total contract value.
•Lump-sum contracts typically require the performance of all of the work under the contract for a specified lump-sum fee, subject to price adjustments if the scope of the project changes or unforeseen conditions arise. Many of our lump-sum contracts are negotiated and arise in the design of projects with a specified scope and project deliverables. In most cases, we can bill additional fees if the construction schedule is modified and lengthened.
Fixed-unit price contracts. Fixed-unit price contracts consist of the following:
•Fixed-unit price contracts typically require the performance of an estimated number of units of work at an agreed price per unit, with the total payment under the contract determined by the actual number of units performed.
Revenues from engineering services are recognized in accordance with the accrual basis of accounting. Revenues under cost-reimbursable contracts are recognized when services are performed or on the percentage-of-completion method. Revenues recognized on the percentage-of-completion method are generally measured by the direct costs incurred to date as compared to estimated costs incurred and represents approximately 44%, 45%, and 31% of revenues recognized during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Revenues from fixed-unit price contracts are recognized at a point in time.
Direct Costs of Revenues
Direct costs of revenues consist of the following in connection with fee generating projects:
•Technical and non-technical salaries and wages
•Production expenses, including depreciation
•Sub-consultant services
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are expensed as incurred and include the following:
•Marketing expenses
•Management and administrative personnel costs
•Payroll taxes, bonuses and employee benefits
•Portion of salaries and wages not allocated to direct costs of revenues
•Facility costs
•Depreciation and amortization
•Professional services, legal and accounting fees, and administrative operating costs
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table represents our condensed results of operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, compared to fiscal year ended January 2, 2021
Gross Revenues
Our consolidated gross revenues increased by $47,410, or 7% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in gross revenues was primarily due to incremental gross revenues of $31,073 from acquisitions completed since the beginning of 2020 and increases in power delivery and utility services of $27,542 and real estate transactional services of $17,092. These increases were partially offset by decreases in our geospatial solution services of $18,586 and infrastructure of $5,353. We believe the decreases were primarily a result of contract delays in our geospatial services and fiscal 2021 having one less week compared to fiscal 2020.
Gross Profit
As a percentage of gross revenues, our gross profit margin was 50.8% and 50.7% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in gross profit margin was primarily due to a change in the mix of work performed. As a percentage of gross revenues, direct salaries and wages decreased 2.1%. This decrease was partially offset by increases in sub-consultant services and other direct costs as a percentage of gross revenues of 1.4% and 0.6%, respectively.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses increased $581 in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in general and administrative expense of $3,772 as a result of increased acquisition-related expenses and other professional fees. These increases were partially offset by decreases in depreciation and amortization expense of $2,126 as a result of decreased intangible asset amortization and a decrease in facilities and facilities related expense of $1,087 as a result of decreased rent expense.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense decreased $8,942 in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in interest expense primarily resulted from the pay down of our Senior Credit Facility indebtedness and a lower interest rate.
Income taxes
Our consolidated effective income tax rate was 24.1% and 27.4% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The lower effective income tax rate is primarily due to an increase in excess tax benefits from stock-based payments in 2021 as compared to 2020. See Note 17, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further detail of income tax expense.
Net income
Our net income increased $26,129, or 124%, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of an increase in gross profit of $24,776 and a decrease in interest expense of $8,942, partially offset by an increase in income tax expense of $7,008.
For comparison of 2020 to 2019, see "Results of Operations - Consolidated Results of Operations" under Item 7 of Part II in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 2, 2021 filed with the SEC on March 3, 2021, which discussion is expressly incorporated herein by reference thereto.
Segment Results of Operations
The following tables set forth summarize financial information concerning our reportable segments (dollars in thousands):
For additional information regarding our reportable segments, see Note 18, Reportable Segments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, compared to fiscal year ended January 2, 2021
INF Segment.
Our gross revenues from INF increased $30,760, or 9%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in gross revenues was primarily due to increases in our power delivery and utility services of $27,542 and incremental gross revenues of $5,852 from acquisitions completed since the beginning of fiscal 2020. These increases were partially offset by decreases in gross revenues from infrastructure of $5,353. We believe the decrease in infrastructure gross revenue was primarily a result of fiscal 2021 having one less week compared to fiscal 2020.
Segment Income before Taxes from INF increased $9,264, or 15%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased gross revenues.
BTS Segment.
Our gross revenues from BTS increased $28,563, or 18%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in gross revenues was primarily due to incremental gross revenues of $18,147 from acquisitions completed since the beginning of fiscal 2020 and increases in our real estate transactional services of $17,092.
Segment Income before Taxes from BTS increased $14,130, or 67%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased gross revenues.
GEO Segment.
Our gross revenues from GEO decreased $11,913, or 8%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily a result of federal contract delays associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Segment Income before Taxes from GEO increased $3,014, or 10%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased gross margins and decreased operating expenses. The decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to reduced labor costs driven by a decrease in work force and benefit from scale compared to the prior year period.
For comparison of 2020 to 2019, see "Results of Operations - Segment Results of Operations" under Item 7 of Part II in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 2, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 3, 2021, which discussion is expressly incorporated herein by reference thereto.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents balances, cash flow from operations, borrowing capacity under our Senior Credit Facility, and access to financial markets. Our principal uses of cash are operating expenses, working capital requirements, capital expenditures, repayment of debt, and acquisition expenditures. We believe our sources of liquidity, including cash flow from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents and borrowing capacity under our Senior Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our projected cash requirements for at least the next twelve months. We will monitor our capital requirements thereafter to ensure our needs are in line with available capital resources and believe that there are no significant cash requirements currently known to us and affecting our business that cannot be met from our reasonably expected future operating cash flows, including upon the maturity of the Senior Credit Facility in 2026. .
Operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $101,442 in 2021 compared to $96,009 in 2020. The increase was a result of the growth in our net income primarily driven by higher gross revenues partially offset by changes in our working capital. The changes in our working capital that contributed to decreased cash flows were primarily a result of decreases in advanced billings of $17,654 primarily related to timing of liquefied natural gas project billing cycles, an increase in unbilled receivables of $14,569, and an increase of $9,472 in prepaid expenses and other assets primarily as a result of increased prepaid income taxes of $5,243. These decreases in cash flows from working capital were offset by decreased billed receivables of $16,269 driven by increased collections.
Investing activities
During 2021 and 2020, net cash used in investing activities totaled $80,259 and $9,067, respectively. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily a result of an increase in cash paid for acquisitions of $67,113 and increases in property and equipment purchases of $4,048.
Financing activities
Cash flows used in financing activities in 2021 was $38,112 compared to $53,858 in 2020. During 2021 the previously drawn term commitments of $150,000 and revolving commitments totaling $215,000 were converted into revolving commitments totaling $400,000 in the aggregate. An aggregate amount of $138,750 was drawn under the revolving commitment and we used the proceeds along with the $172,500 we received from our common stock public offering to make
principal payments on our Senior Credit Facility of $323,832. We also made common stock public offering cost payments of $10,657 during 2021.
For comparison of 2020 to 2019 cash flows, see "Liquidity and Capital Resources - Cash Flows” under Item 7 of Part II in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 2, 2021 filed with the SEC on March 3, 2021, which discussions are expressly incorporated herein by reference thereto.
Financing
Senior Credit Facility
On August 13, 2021 (the "Closing Date"), we amended and restated our Credit Agreement (the "Second A&R Credit Agreement"), originally dated December 7, 2016 and as amended to the Closing Date, with Bank of America, N.A. ("Bank of America"), as administrative agent, swingline lender and letter of credit issuer, the other lenders party thereto, and certain of our subsidiaries as guarantors. Pursuant to the Second A&R Credit Agreement, the previously drawn term commitments of $150,000 and revolving commitments totaling $215,000 in the aggregate were converted into revolving commitments totaling $400,000 in the aggregate. These revolving commitments are available through August 13, 2026 (the "Maturity Date") and an aggregate amount of approximately $138,750 was drawn under the Second A&R Credit Amendment on the Closing Date to repay previously existing borrowings under the term and revolving facilities prior to such amendment and restatement. Borrowings under the Second A&R Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of our assets. The Second A&R Credit Agreement also includes an accordion feature permitting us to request an increase in the revolving facility under the Second A&R Credit Agreement by an additional amount of up to $200,000 in the aggregate.
Borrowings under the Second A&R Credit Agreement bear interest at variable rates which are, at our option, tied to a Eurocurrency rate equal to LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) plus an applicable margin or a base rate denominated in U.S. dollars. Interest rates remain subject to change based on our consolidated leverage ratio. As of January 1, 2022 our interest rate was 1.4%.
The Second A&R Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that require us to maintain a consolidated net leverage ratio (the ratio of our pro forma consolidated net funded indebtedness to our pro forma consolidated EBITDA for the most recently completed measurement period) of no greater than 4.00 to 1.00.
These financial covenants also require us to maintain a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of no less than 1.10 to 1.00 as of the end of any measurement period. As of January 1, 2022, we were in compliance with the financial covenants.
The Second A&R Credit Agreement contains covenants that may have the effect of limiting our ability to, among other things, merge with or acquire other entities, enter into a transaction resulting in a Change in Control, create certain new liens, incur certain additional indebtedness, engage in certain transactions with affiliates, or engage in new lines of business or sell a substantial part of their assets. The Second A&R Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, including (but not limited to) a default in the payment of principal or, following an applicable grace period, interest, breaches of our covenants or warranties under the Second A&R Credit Agreement, payment default or acceleration of certain indebtedness, certain events of bankruptcy, insolvency or liquidation, certain judgments or uninsured losses, changes in control and certain liabilities related to ERISA based plans.
The Second A&R Credit Agreement limits the payment of cash dividends (together with certain other payments that would constitute a "Restricted Payment" within the meaning of the Second A&R Credit Agreement and generally including dividends, stock repurchases and certain other payments in respect to warrants, options, and other rights to acquire equity securities), unless the Consolidated Leverage Ratio would be less than 3.25 to 1.00 and available liquidity (defined as unrestricted, domestically held cash plus revolver availability) would be at least $30,000, in each case after giving effect to such payment.
Total debt issuance costs incurred and capitalized in connection with the issuance of the Second A&R Credit Agreement were $3,702. Total amortization of debt issuance costs was $1,210, $896, and $131 during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Other Obligations
We have aggregate obligations related to acquisitions of $19,509, $9,549, $3,888, $640, and $640 due in fiscal 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, and 2026, respectively. As of January 1, 2022, our average interest rate on other outstanding obligations was 2.5%.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 3, Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.