Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements as a result of many important factors, including those set forth in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Risk Factors”. Please see also the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in Part I above. We do not undertake any obligation to update forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Introduction
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which management has prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate such estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that management believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Business Overview
We are a research and clinical-stage biomaterials and biotechnology company with a focus on treatment of spinal cord injuries, or SCIs. Our approach to treating acute SCIs is based on our investigational Neuro-Spinal Scaffold™ implant, a bioresorbable polymer scaffold that is designed for implantation at the site of injury within a spinal cord and is intended to treat acute SCI. The Neuro-Spinal Scaffold implant incorporates intellectual property licensed under an exclusive, worldwide license from BCH and MIT. We also plan to evaluate other technologies and therapeutics that may be complementary to our development of the Neuro-Spinal Scaffold implant or offer the potential to bring us closer to our goal of redefining the life of the SCI patient.
Overall, we expect our research and development expenses to be substantial and to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development and clinical investigation of our current and future products. However, expenditures on research and development programs are subject to many uncertainties, including whether we develop our products with a partner or independently, or whether we acquire products from third parties. At this time, due to the uncertainties and inherent risks involved in our business, we cannot estimate in a meaningful way the duration of, or the costs to complete, our research and development programs or whether, when or to what extent we will generate revenues or cash inflows from the commercialization and sale of any of our products. While we are currently focused on advancing our Neuro-Spinal Scaffold implant, our future research and development expenses will depend on the determinations we make as to the scientific and clinical prospects of each product candidate, as well as our ongoing assessment of regulatory requirements and each product’s commercial potential. In addition, we may make acquisitions of businesses, technologies or intellectual property rights that we believe would be necessary, useful or complementary to our current business. Any investment made in a potential acquisition could affect our results of operations and reduce our limited capital resources, and any issuance of equity securities in connection with a potential acquisition could be substantially dilutive to our stockholders.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to successfully develop or acquire any product, or that we will be able to recover our development or acquisition costs, whether upon commercialization of a developed product or otherwise. We cannot provide assurance that any of our programs under development or any acquired technologies or products will result in products that can be marketed or marketed profitably. If our development-stage programs or any acquired products or technologies do not result in commercially viable products, our results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
We were incorporated on April 2, 2003, under the name Design Source, Inc. On October 26, 2010, we acquired the business of InVivo Therapeutics Corporation, which was founded in 2005, and continued the existing business operations of InVivo Therapeutics Corporation as our wholly-owned subsidiary.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements, which appear in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require that our management make certain assumptions and estimates and, in connection therewith, adopt certain accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are set forth in Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies”, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Of those policies, we believe that the policies discussed below may involve the highest degree of judgment and may be the most critical to an accurate reflection of our financial condition and results of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock options are granted with an exercise price set at the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Our stock options generally expire 10 years from the date of grant and vest upon terms determined by our Board of Directors.
We recognize compensation costs resulting from the issuance of stock-based awards to employees, non-employees and directors as an expense in our statements of operations over the service period based on a measure of fair value for each stock-based award. The fair value of each option grant is estimated as of the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and the fair value of each restricted stock award or restricted stock unit, which we refer to collectively as restricted securities, is determined based on the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant. The fair value is amortized as a compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the vesting period. The expected term of any options granted under our stock plans is based on the average of the contractual term (generally, 10 years) and the vesting period (generally, 48 months). The risk-free rate is based on the yield of a U.S. Treasury security with a term consistent with the expected term of the option. The restricted securities generally vest over a three-year period, contingent on the recipient’s continued employment. See Note 9, “Shared-Based Compensation, Stock Options and Restricted Securities,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about the assumptions underlying these estimates.
Research and Development Expense
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates, which include:
● employee related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and stock based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organization (“CROs”), and clinical sites that conduct our clinical studies;
● facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other supplies;
● costs associated with our research platform and preclinical activities;
● costs associated with our regulatory, quality assurance, and quality control operations; and
● amortization of intangible assets.
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual
costs. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrued expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In May 2021 the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options, a consensus of the Emerging Issues Task Force, which amends the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) to provide explicit guidance, and, thus, reduce diversity in practice, on accounting by issuers for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options that remain equity classified after the modification or exchange. This amendment provides that for an entity that presents earnings per share (EPS) in accordance with Topic 260, the effects of a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that is recognized as a dividend should be an adjustment to net income (or net loss) in the basic EPS calculation. The amended guidance becomes mandatorily effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years, and should be applied prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date. ASU No. 2021- 04 is effective for us beginning in fiscal 2022. We will adopt ASU 2021-04 effective January 1, 2022, and we do not expect that the adoption will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-01, Investments-Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815). The amendments in this ASU clarify the interaction between the accounting for investments in equity securities, investment in equity method and certain derivatives instruments. The ASU is expected to reduce diversity in practice and increase comparability of the accounting for these interactions. The pronouncement is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021. ASU No. 2020-01 is effective for us beginning in fiscal 2022. We will adopt ASU 2020-01 effective January 1, 2022, and we do not expect that the adoption will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $0.5 million to $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to higher incentive compensation costs in 2021 of $0.3 million, an increase in scaffold manufacturing costs of $0.2 million primarily as a result of higher clinical demand, an increase in legal costs of $0.1 million primarily due to increased fees associated with the submission of our second module to the FDA in 2021 and an increase of $0.1 million in other net immaterial accounts. These increases were offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in consulting costs mainly due to lower costs associated with clinical trial oversight activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.3 million to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.2 million for year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to higher compensation costs in 2021 of $0.4 million and higher consulting costs in 2021 of $0.1 million attributable to one time business development initiatives. These increases were offset by decreases in legal costs of $0.1 million and other net immaterial accounts of $0.1 million mainly due to cost containment initiatives.
Interest Income / (Expense), Net
Interest income decreased by $16 thousand to $3 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $19 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower yields in our cash and cash equivalents in 2021.
Other Income
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2 thousand and $4 thousand, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to meet potential cash requirements, including planned capital expenditures. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $16.5 million in working capital. Since inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to business planning, research and development, recruiting management and technical staff, acquiring operating assets, and raising capital. At December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $238.1 million.
At December 31, 2021, we had total assets of $21.8 million, total liabilities of $3.7 million, and total stockholders’ equity of $18.1 million. We recorded a net loss of $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We have not achieved profitability and may not be able to realize sufficient revenue to achieve or sustain profitability in the future. We do not expect to be profitable in the next several years, but rather expect to incur additional operating losses.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 will provide necessary funding to fund operations through the second quarter of 2023. We will need additional funding after that date in order to continue our operations. This estimate is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong; expenses could prove to be significantly higher, leading to a more rapid consumption of our existing resources. We have limited liquidity and capital resources and must obtain significant additional capital resources in order to fund our operations and sustain our product development efforts, for acquisition of technologies and intellectual property rights, for preclinical and clinical testing of our anticipated products, pursuit of regulatory approvals, acquisition of capital equipment, laboratory and office facilities, establishment of production capabilities, for selling, general and administrative expenses and for other working capital requirements. We will need to raise additional capital through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic could have a continued adverse impact on economic and market conditions and extend the period of global economic slowdown, which would impair our ability to raise needed funds. In addition, our liquidity is impacted by the limited number of shares authorized under our certificate of incorporation, and the resulting constraints on financing options and alternatives.
We may pursue various other dilutive and non-dilutive funding alternatives depending upon our clinical path forward and the extent to which we require additional capital to proceed with development of some or all of our product candidates on expected timelines. The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions and the status of our clinical development programs, both of which may be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Funding may not be available when needed, at all, or on terms acceptable to us. Lack of necessary funds may require us to, among other things, delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our research and product development programs, planned clinical trials, and capital expenditures or to license our potential products or technologies to third parties. We may alternatively engage in cost-cutting measures in an attempt to extend our cash resources as long as possible. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be forced to cease operations entirely.
Financing Transactions
In October 2020, we completed a registered public offering (the “October 2020 Offering”) in which we sold an aggregate of (i) 11,785,000 shares of our common stock, (the “October 2020 Shares”) and Series A Warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 11,785,000 shares of our common stock (the “October 2020 Series A Warrants”) at a combined public offering price of $0.80 per share and associated warrant and (ii) pre-funded Series B warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 6,965,000 shares of common stock (the “October 2020 Series B Pre-funded Warrants”) and Series A Warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 6,965,000 shares of our common stock (also the “October 2020 Series A
Warrants”) at a combined public offering price of $0.80 per pre-funded warrant and associated warrant. Each October 2020 Series A Warrant has an exercise price of $0.80 per share, is exercisable immediately and expires in October 2025. Each October 2020 Series B Pre-funded Warrant has an exercise price of $0.00001 per share, is exercisable immediately, and expires when exercised in full, subject to certain conditions. In connection with the October 2020 Offering, we issued, to designees of H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC (“Wainwright”), the placement agent for the October 2020 Offering, warrants (the “October 2020 Placement Agent Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 1,218,750 shares of our common stock, which represents a number of shares of common stock equal to 6.5% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock and October 2020 Series B Pre-funded Warrants sold in the October 2020 Offering. The October 2020 Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $1.00 per share, are immediately exercisable and expire in October 2025. The net proceeds to us, after deducting Wainwright's placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $13.5 million. There are no outstanding October 2020 Series B Pre-funded Warrants as of December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued an aggregate of 10,620,682 and 12,188 shares of common stock upon the exercise of certain of the October 2020 Series A Warrants and October 2020 Placement Agent Warrants, respectively, for aggregate proceeds of $8.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued an aggregate of 6,965,000 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of all of the October 2020 Series B Pre-funded Warrants for an immaterial amount, as they were substantially pre-funded. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we did not issue any shares as a result of October 2020 Series A Warrants or October 2020 Placement Agent Warrants exercise activity.
In April 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the "April 2020 Purchase Agreement") with certain institutional investors (the "April 2020 Purchasers"), pursuant to which we agreed to sell and issue, in a registered direct offering, an aggregate of 1,715,240 shares of our common stock, at a purchase price per share of $1.75 (the "April 2020 Shares"). The April 2020 Shares were offered by us pursuant to a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was declared effective by SEC on November 14, 2019 (File No. 333-234353) and a prospectus supplement thereunder. Pursuant to the April 2020 Purchase Agreement, in a concurrent private placement, we also issued to the April 2020 Purchasers warrants (the "April 2020 Series C Warrants") to purchase up to 1,715,240 shares of our common stock (the "Private Placement" and together with the April 2020 Registered Offering, the "April 2020 Offerings"). The April 2020 Series C Warrants are exercisable immediately at an exercise price of $1.62 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances, and expire on October 17, 2025. In connection with the April 2020 Offerings, we also issued to Wainwright warrants to purchase an aggregate of 111,491 shares of our common stock (the “April 2020 Placement Agent Warrants”) which represents a number of shares of common stock equal to 6.5% of the aggregate number of April 2020 Shares sold in the April 2020 Registered Offering, at an exercise price of $2.1875 per share with a term expiring on April 15, 2025. The net proceeds to us, after deducting Wainwright's placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $2.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not issue any shares as a result of April 2020 Series C Warrants exercise activity. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued an aggregate of 35,000 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of certain of the April 2020 Series C Warrants for aggregate proceeds of $57 thousand.
In March 2020, we completed a registered public offering (the “March 2020 Offering”) in which we sold an aggregate of (i) 955,613 shares of our common stock, (the “March 2020 Shares”) and Series A Warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 955,613 shares of our common stock (the “March 2020 Series A Warrants”) at a combined public offering price of $2.75 per share and associated warrant and (ii) pre-funded Series B warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 1,589,842 shares of our common stock (the “March 2020 Series B Warrants”) and Series A Warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 1,589,842 shares of our common stock (also the “March 2020 Series A Warrants”) at a combined public offering price of $2.75 per pre-funded warrant and associated warrant. Each March 2020 Series A Warrant has an exercise price of $2.75 per share, is exercisable immediately and expires in March 2025. Each March 2020 Series B Warrant has an exercise price of $0.00001 per share, is exercisable immediately, and expires when exercised in full, subject to certain conditions. In connection with the March 2020 Offering, we issued, to Wainwright, the placement agent for the March 2020 Offering, warrants (the “March 2020 Placement Agent Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 165,455 shares of our common stock, which represents a number of shares of common stock equal to 6.5% of the aggregate number of shares of common stock and March 2020 Series B Warrants sold in the March 2020 Offering. The March 2020 Placement Agent Warrants have an exercise price of $3.4375 per share, are immediately exercisable and expire in March 2025. The net proceeds to us, after deducting Wainwright's placement agent fees and other offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $6.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not issue any shares as a result of either the March 2020 Series A Warrant, March 2020 Series B Warrants or March 2020 Placement Agent Warrants exercise activity. During the year ended December 31, 2020,, we issued an aggregate of
1,577,114 shares of our common stock upon the exercise of certain of the pre-funded March 2020 Series B warrants for an immaterial amount, as they were substantially pre-funded.
Cashflows
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted of net loss of $9.9 million, non-cash items of $0.7 million and cash provided by working capital of $0.4 million. Adjustments for non-cash items consisted primarily of $0.3 million each in amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets and stock-based compensation expense, respectively. The change in cash from working capital included a $0.5 million increase in accrued expenses, and a $0.1 million increase in accounts payable. These increases were offset by a $0.3 million decrease in the operating lease liability and a $0.1 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted of net loss of $9.1 million, non-cash items of $0.5 million and cash used in working capital of $1.0 million. Adjustments for non-cash items consisted primarily of $0.3 million in amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets and $0.2 million in stock-based compensation expense. The change in cash from working capital included a decrease of $0.5 million in accounts payable, a decrease of $0.3 million in accrued expenses and a decrease of $0.3 million in the operating lease liability.
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $77 thousand and $41 thousand, respectively, attributable to purchases of capital equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.5 million related to proceeds from the exercise of warrants. This compares to net cash provided by financing activities of $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisting of $22.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock associated with the offerings in 2020 and $0.3 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants.
Inflation and Changing Prices
We do not believe that inflation has had, or will have, a material impact on our operating costs and earnings.
Material Cash Requirements from Contractual Obligations
Leases
As of December 31, 2021, we reported current and long-term operating lease liabilities of $0.3 million and $1.0 million, respectively. These balances represent our contractual obligation to make future payments on our Cambridge Lease, discounted to reflect our cost of borrowing. In the event that we were to vacate the Cambridge facility, we may be obliged to continue making payments under the Cambridge Lease.
Clinical Trial Commitments
We have engaged and executed contracts with clinical research organizations to assist with the administration of our ongoing INSPIRE 1.0 and INSPIRE 2.0 clinical trials. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $4.3 million remains to be paid on these contracts. The timelines and related costs necessary to complete these trials may vary depending on a number of factors, including the rate of patient enrollment into our INSPIRE 2.0 trial. In the event we were to close the INSPIRE 2.0 trial, certain financial penalties would become payable to the clinical research organizations for costs to wind down the closed trial.
See Note 12, “Commitments and Contingencies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our commitments.