ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Historic results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Business overview
We offer high-quality, comprehensive, affordable genetic testing across multiple clinical areas, including hereditary cancer, cardiology, neurology, pediatrics, personalized oncology, metabolic conditions and rare diseases. To augment our offering and realize our mission, we have acquired multiple assets and businesses, which expanded our suite of genome management offerings and established a broader entry into key genomics markets. We are building a platform to harness genetics on a global scale to diagnose more patients correctly, earlier and bring therapies to market faster. Our genome management offerings will provide information services to the patient that are intended to enhance the customer experience through personalized insights, technology-enabled services and network connections that inform genetic healthcare throughout life.
In 2021, we completed the acquisitions of Reference Genomics, Inc. d/b/a One Codex, or One Codex, Genosity, Inc., or Genosity, Medneon LLC, or Medneon, Ciitizen Corporation, or Ciitizen, and Stratify Genomics Inc., or Stratify. One Codex is a data platform for applied microbial genomics. Its acquisition adds capabilities across microbiome and infectious disease testing capabilities and allows us to deliver a high-quality, low-cost, end-to-end metagenomics product (sequencing and results) and enables the development of future offerings in infectious disease, preterm birth and wellness.
Genosity is a genomics and laboratory services company offering software and laboratory solutions that enable the deployment of complex sequencing-based cancer testing. The acquisition brings Genosity's specialized capabilities onto the Invitae platform to accelerate the time to market and decentralization of Invitae's personalized oncology offerings, including somatic and germline offerings used in screening, therapy selection and personalized cancer monitoring.
The Medneon digital platform combines artificial intelligence and human insights with actionable information regarding an individual's cancer risk to inform precision prevention and management over time at the point-of-care or through telemedicine.
Ciitizen is a patient-centric consumer health tech company working to build a global platform to help patients collect, organize, store and share their medical records digitally.
Stratify is a cancer risk stratification company for the general population offering a prostate risk score product and is dedicated to advancing the knowledge of genetic predisposition to cancer and other diseases so that practitioners can screen more effectively and efficiently.
In October 2020, we completed the acquisition of ArcherDX, Inc., or ArcherDX, a genomics company democratizing precision oncology by offering a suite of products and services that are accurate, personal, actionable and easy to use in local settings, thereby empowering clinicians to control the sample, data, patient care and economics. As part of the acquisition, we agreed to pay contingent consideration based on the achievement of five post-closing development, regulatory and revenue milestones. The first milestone was achieved in November 2020, and in June 2021, three additional milestones were achieved or deemed to be achieved. The remaining milestone is based upon receiving FDA clearance or approval of a therapy selection IVD, which per the terms of the acquisition agreement, must be completed by March 31, 2022, subject to certain extensions. Based on the current development timeline, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we determined that this milestone will not be met by the required achievement date per the acquisition agreement, although we expect to receive FDA clearance or approval at a later date.
We have experienced rapid growth. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our revenue was $460.4 million, $279.6 million and $216.8 million, respectively, and we incurred net losses of $379.0 million, $602.2 million and $242.0 million, respectively. At December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $1.7 billion. To meet the demands of scaling our business, we increased our number of employees to approximately 3,000 at December 31, 2021 from approximately 2,100 at December 31, 2020. Our sales force grew to approximately 330 at December 31, 2021 from approximately 300 at December 31, 2020. We expect headcount will continue to increase as we add staff to support anticipated growth.
Sales of our tests have grown significantly. In 2021, 2020 and 2019, we generated 1,169,000, 659,000 and 469,000 billable units, respectively. We calculate volume using billable units, which are billable events that include individual test reports released and individual reactions shipped. We refer to the set of reagents needed to perform an
NGS test as a "reaction." Through December 31, 2021, approximately 57% of the billable volume generated were billable to patients, biopharmaceutical partners and other business-to-business customers (e.g., hospitals, clinics, medical centers), and the remainder were billable to government and private insurance payers. Many of the gene tests on our assays are reimbursable by health insurance companies. However, when we do not have reimbursement policies or contracts with private insurers, our claims for reimbursement may be denied upon submission, and we must appeal the claims. The appeals process is time consuming and expensive, and may not result in payment. Even if we are successful in achieving reimbursement, we may be paid at lower rates than if we were under contract with the third-party payer. When there is not a contracted rate for reimbursement, there is typically a greater payment requirement from the patient that may result in further delay in payment for these tests.
We expect to incur operating losses for the near term as we continue to invest in our business to achieve our revenue growth objectives, including expansion of our platform to capture the broad potential of genetics across healthcare and expansion into new laboratory and production facilities, and expect we will need to raise additional capital in order to fund our operations. If we are unable to achieve these objectives and successfully manage our costs, we may not be able to achieve profitability in the near term or at all.
We believe that the keys to our future growth will be to increase billable volume, achieve broad reimbursement coverage for our tests from third-party payers and increase the amount we receive from other types of payers, advance digital health solutions and data services, drive down the price for genetic analysis and interpretation, reduce the costs associated with performing our genetic tests, steadily increase the amount of genetic content we offer, consistently improve the client experience, drive physician and patient utilization of our website for ordering and delivery of results and increase the number of strategic partners working with us to add value for our clients. We also believe that providing a unique genetic testing platform that is agnostic to stage of life or disease category will deliver unique benefits to customers, payers and other institutions that are seeking to make genetic information a standard element of healthcare decisions in the future.
Impact of COVID-19
Our daily test volumes have recovered from the low in March 2020, although the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact our business operations and practices. While we expect it may continue to impact our business, we experienced limited disruption during 2021. We have reviewed and adjusted, when necessary, for the impact of COVID-19 on our estimates related to revenue recognition and expected credit losses.
In response to the pandemic, we have implemented measures to protect the health of all of our employees during this time with additional measures in place to better protect our on-site lab production and support teams. Our production facilities currently remain fully operational. While we have not experienced significant disruption in our supply chain, we have experienced supply delays as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and have also had to obtain supplies from new suppliers. Although we do not yet know the ongoing impact COVID-19 will have on our supply chain, we have increased our inventory on hand to respond to potential future disruptions that may occur.
Many announced healthcare guidelines call for a shift of regular physician visits and healthcare delivery activities to remote/telehealth formats. This is particularly important for patients who, despite the fall-out from COVID-19, continue to be diagnosed with critical diseases, like cancer, and for women who are pregnant or are trying to conceive. We believe our investments in new access platforms and technologies has and will continue to position us well to provide a range of testing to clinicians and patients using a “clinical care from afar” model. An example is our rollout in April 2020 of our Gia telehealth platform, which expands access to remote interaction between patients and clinicians as well as direct ordering of genetic tests.
Given the unknown duration and extent of COVID-19’s impact on our business, and the healthcare system in general, we continue to monitor evolving market conditions and have pivoted our focus and investments on the commercial execution of workflows that support remote ordering, online support and telehealth. Approximately 8% of our workforce as of March 2020 was impacted by a reduction in force in April 2020 in an initiative to manage costs and cash burn, which resulted in one-time costs in the second quarter of 2020 of $3.8 million. In addition, effective May 2020, we reduced the salaries of our named executive officers by approximately 20%, which ceased as of January 2021.
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was signed into law as a stimulus bill intended to bolster the economy, among other things, and provide assistance to qualifying businesses and individuals. The CARES Act included an infusion of funds into the healthcare system. In April 2020, we received $3.8 million as a part of this initiative, and in January 2021, we received an additional $2.3 million. These payments were recognized as other income, net in our consolidated statements of operations in the periods received. At this time, we are not certain of the availability, extent or impact of any future relief provided under the CARES Act.
Factors affecting our performance
Number of billable units
Our centralized test revenue is tied to the number of tests which we bill third-party payers, biopharmaceutical partners, other business-to-business customers (e.g., hospitals, clinics, medical centers), or patients. Our decentralized product revenue is based upon the number of individual reactions we ship biopharmaceutical partners and other business-to-business customers. We refer to the set of reagents needed to perform an NGS test as a "reaction," and we refer to billable events that include individual test reports released and individual reactions shipped as billable units. We typically bill for our services following delivery of the billable report derived from testing samples and interpreting the results. For units manufactured for use by customers in distributed facilities, we typically bill customers upon shipment of those units. Test orders are placed under signed requisitions or contractual agreements, as we often enter into contracts with biopharmaceutical partners, other business-to-business customers and insurance companies. We incur the expenses associated with a unit in the period in which the unit is processed regardless of when payment is received with respect to that unit. We believe the number of billable units in any period is an important indicator of the growth in our testing business, and with time, this will translate into the number of customers accessing our platform.
Number and size of research and commercial partnerships
Pharma development services revenue, which we recognize within other revenue in our consolidated statements of operations, is generated primarily from services provided to biopharmaceutical companies and other partners and is related to companion diagnostic development, clinical research, and clinical trial services across the research, development, and commercialization phases of collaborations. The result of these relationships may include the development of new targeted companion diagnostics, which underscore and expand the need for genetic testing and in some cases may lead to intellectual property and/or revenue sharing opportunities with third-party partners.
In addition to research partnerships, we also seek to grow the number of biopharmaceutical partners and other business-to-business customers for whom we provide testing technologies, analysis, supplies and expertise to institutions that provide independent testing services to customers in their respective regions.
Success obtaining and maintaining reimbursement
Our ability to increase volume and revenue will depend in part on our success achieving broad reimbursement coverage and laboratory service contracts for our tests from third-party payers and agreements with institutions and partners. Reimbursement may depend on a number of factors, including a payer’s determination that a test is appropriate, medically necessary and cost-effective, as well as whether we are in contract, where we get paid more consistently and at higher rates. Because each payer makes its own decision as to whether to establish a policy or enter into a contract to reimburse for our testing services and specific tests, seeking these approvals is a time-consuming and costly process. In addition, clinicians and patients may decide not to order our tests if the cost of the test is not covered by insurance. Because we require an ordering physician to requisition a test, our revenue growth also depends on our ability to successfully promote the adoption of our testing services and expand our base of ordering clinicians. We believe that establishing coverage and obtaining contracts from third-party payers is an important factor in gaining adoption by ordering clinicians. Our arrangements for laboratory services with payers cover approximately 322 million lives, comprised of Medicare, national commercial health plans, and Medicaid in most states, including California (Medi-Cal), our home state.
Ability to lower the costs associated with performing our tests
Reducing the costs associated with performing our genetic tests is both a focus and a strategic objective of ours. Over the long term, we will need to reduce the cost of raw materials by improving the output efficiency of our assays and laboratory processes, modifying our platform-agnostic assays and laboratory processes to use materials and technologies that provide equal or greater quality at lower cost, improve how we manage our materials, port some tests onto a next generation sequencing platform and negotiate favorable terms for our materials purchases. We also intend to continue to design and implement hardware and software tools that are designed to reduce personnel-related costs for both laboratory and clinical operations/medical interpretation by increasing personnel efficiency and thus lowering labor costs per test. Finally, we plan to reduce the cost of providing test equipment and software to laboratories and other facilities in the United States and internationally. Those efforts are designed to enable more rapid expansion of genetic testing and patient access, enlarging our geographic footprint outside the United States while achieving lower costs.
Ability to expand our genetic content and create new pathways to test
We believe our focus on reducing the average cost per test will have a countervailing force - increasing the number of tests we offer, the content of each test and the means to connect our testing services with patients and physicians. We intend to continue to expand our test menus by steadily releasing additional genetic content for affordable prices, ultimately leading to affordable whole genome services. The breadth and flexibility of our offering will be a critical factor in our ability to address new markets, including internationally, for genetic testing services. Both of these, in conjunction with our continued focus on strategic partnerships, will be important to our ability to continue to grow the volume of billable tests we deliver. We have and will continue to identify new ways to connect our testing services and information to patients. These include direct patient outreach and ordering capacity, the use of automated assistants for physician customers to improve the ease of ordering and processing genetic tests and programs designed to reach underserved patient populations with genetic testing.
Investment in our business and timing of expenses
We plan to continue to invest in our genetic testing and information management business. We deploy state-of-the-art technologies in our genetic testing services, and we intend to continue to scale our infrastructure, including our testing capacity and capabilities as well as our information systems. We plan to do this through the acquisition of assets and businesses and expansion of our workforce and facilities, such as our new laboratory and production facility in North Carolina and the genomic laboratory space added through the acquisition of Genosity, which we expect to support our continued growth by significantly expanding our testing capacity. We also expect to incur software development costs as we seek to further automate our laboratory processes and our genetic interpretation and report sign-out procedures, scale our customer service capabilities to improve our customers' experience, and expand the functionality of our website. We also expect to incur costs as we seek to provide the testing equipment and software necessary to enable decentralized genetic and genomic testing in the United States and internationally. We will incur costs related to marketing and branding as we spread our initiatives beyond our current customer base and focus on providing access to customers through our website. We plan to hire additional personnel as necessary to support anticipated growth, including software engineers, sales and marketing personnel, billing personnel, research and development personnel, medical specialists, biostatisticians and geneticists. We will also incur additional costs related to the expansion of our production facilities to accommodate growth and as we expand domestically and internationally, including increased operating costs and capital expenditures related to the buildout of our new laboratory and production facility in North Carolina. In addition, we will incur ongoing expenses as a result of operating as a public company. The expenses we incur may vary significantly by quarter as we focus on building out different aspects of our business.
How we recognize revenue
We generally recognize revenue on an accrual basis, which is when a customer obtains control of the promised goods or services, typically a test report, or upon shipment of our precision oncology products. Accrual amounts recognized are based on estimates of the consideration that we expect to receive, and such estimates are adjusted and subsequently recorded until fully settled. Changes to such estimates may increase or decrease revenue recognized in future periods. Revenue from our tests may not be equal to billed amounts due to a number of factors, including differences in reimbursement rates, the amounts of patient payments, the existence of secondary payers and claim denials. Some test orders are placed under signed requisitions or contractual agreements, and we often enter into contracts with biopharmaceutical partners, other business-to-business customers and insurance companies that include pricing provisions under which such tests are billed.
Pharma development service revenues are generated primarily from custom assay design services, sample processing activities and consultative inputs, which is separate from revenue generated by any related or unrelated product component. Revenue is recognized as samples are processed or scope of work is completed based on contracted agreements with those biopharmaceutical customer companies.
Under these collaborations we also generate revenue from achievement of milestones, provision of on-going support, and related pass-through costs and fees. We generally have distinct performance obligations for development milestones related to our development of a companion diagnostic device. We use a cost plus a margin approach to estimate the standalone value of our companion diagnostic development service performance obligations. Revenue is recognized over time using input methods based on our assessments of performance completed to date toward each milestone.
Financial overview
Revenue
We primarily generate revenue from testing services and sales of distributed precision oncology products. Customers are typically billed upon delivery of test results or shipment of products. We also generate revenue from development agreements, access to data, data analytics and other related services provided for biopharmaceutical partners and other parties. Our ability to increase our revenue will depend on our ability to increase our market penetration, obtain FDA and other international regulatory authority approvals on future products and services offerings, obtain contracted reimbursement coverage from third-party payers, and grow our relationships with biopharmaceutical customers.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue reflects the aggregate costs incurred in delivering our products and services and includes expenses for materials and supplies, personnel-related costs, freight, costs for lab services, genetic interpretation and clinical trial support, equipment and infrastructure expenses and allocated overhead including rent, information technology, equipment depreciation, amortization of acquired intangibles, and utilities. We expect cost of revenue to generally increase in line with the increase in billable volume, however, we expect a future increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets that is not dependent on billed volume. We anticipate our cost per unit for existing tests will generally decrease over time due to the efficiencies we expect to gain as volume increases and from automation and other cost reductions. These reductions in cost per unit will likely be offset by new offerings which often have a higher costs per unit during the introductory phases before we are able to gain efficiencies. The cost per unit may fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses are classified into three categories: research and development, selling and marketing, and general and administrative. For each category, the largest component is generally personnel-related costs, which include salaries, employee benefit costs, bonuses, commissions, as applicable, and stock-based compensation expense.
Research and development
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to develop our technology and future offerings. These costs are principally for process development associated with our efforts to expand the number of genes we can evaluate, our efforts to lower the costs per unit and our development of new products to expand our platform. We have and may continue to partner with other companies to develop new technologies and capabilities we expect to invest capital and incur significant operating costs to support these development efforts. In addition, we incur process development costs to further develop the software we use to operate our laboratories, analyze generated data, process customer orders, validate clinical activities, enable ease of customer ordering, deliver reports and automate our business processes. These costs consist of personnel-related costs, laboratory supplies and equipment expenses, consulting costs, amortization of acquired intangible assets, and allocated overhead including rent, information technology, equipment depreciation and utilities.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. We expect our research and development expenses to significantly increase as we continue our efforts to develop additional offerings, make investments to reduce costs, streamline our technology to provide patients access to testing, scale our business domestically and internationally and acquire and integrate new technologies. As a percentage of revenue, we expect research and development expenses to trend lower as we continue our efforts on scaling our business and operations and expanding our testing capabilities.
During October 2020 through our acquisition of ArcherDX, we recognized $512.4 million of in-process R&D technology for two assets representing a therapy selection IVD and PCM technologies, both using an income approach. We estimate these technologies to be developed in the next few years with significant development costs through completion.
Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist of personnel-related costs, including commissions, client service expenses, advertising and marketing expenses, educational and promotional expenses, market research and analysis, and allocated overhead including rent, information technology, equipment depreciation, amortization of
acquired intangibles, and utilities. We expect our selling and marketing expenses to increase as we continue to build our brand and focus on advertising our products and services. As a percentage of revenue, we expect our selling and marketing expenses to trend lower as we continue our efforts on scaling our business and operations and expanding our testing capabilities.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses include executive, finance and accounting, billing and collections, legal and human resources functions as well as other administrative costs. These expenses include personnel-related costs; audit, accounting and legal expenses; consulting costs; allocated overhead including rent, information technology, equipment depreciation, and utilities; costs incurred in relation to our co-development agreements; and post-combination expenses incurred in relation to companies we acquire. We expect our general and administrative expenses to generally increase as we support continued growth of operations.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Changes in fair value of contingent consideration are adjustments to contingent consideration related to business combinations. We expect these changes to fluctuate significantly from period to period due to fair value adjustments that are dependent on many factors, including the value of our common stock and our assessment of the probability of meeting certain acquisition-related milestones within the terms of the respective acquisition agreements, including certain prescribed deadlines for achievement.
With respect to the ArcherDX final milestone, the liability was reduced to nil as of as of June 30, 2021 from $262.5 million as of March 31, 2021 from $287.7 million as of December 31, 2020, with the offsetting change recorded as changes in fair value of contingent consideration in our consolidated statements of operations. The removal of the liability balance and the associated change in fair value of contingent consideration was a result of our reassessment of the steps necessary to achieve clearance or approval based on FDA feedback received principally in the three months ended June 30, 2021. As a result of our reassessment, we do not believe achievement of the conditions will occur within the specified timeframe prescribed in the acquisition agreement. We expect FDA clearance or approval of a therapy selection IVD at a later date subject to resolution of the necessary steps.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net, primarily consists of adjustments to the fair value of our stock payable liabilities arising from business combinations, and we expect it to fluctuate significantly from period to period due to the volatility of our common stock. Other income (expense), net also includes income generated from our cash equivalents and marketable securities and amounts received under the CARES Act.
Interest expense
Interest expense is primarily attributable to interest incurred related to our debt financings and finance leases. See Note 8, “Commitments and contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report for more details.
Income tax benefit
Since we generally establish a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax balances, our income tax benefit primarily consists of tax impacts of our deferred income tax assessments resulting from our acquisitions.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on current facts, our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are
critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. All revenues are generated from contracts with customers. We utilize the following practical expedients and exemptions:
•Costs to obtain or fulfill a contract are expensed when incurred because the amortization period would have been one year or less, and
•No adjustments to promised consideration were made for financing as we expect, at contract inception, that the period between the transfer of a promised good or service and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less.
Test revenue
Test revenue is comprised of testing services and sales of distributed precision oncology products.
The majority of our test revenue is generated from genetic testing, in addition to somatic testing for therapy selection and personalized cancer monitoring. These testing services provide analysis and associated interpretation of the sequencing of parts of the genome. Test orders are placed under signed requisitions or contractual agreements, and we often enter into contracts with biopharmaceutical partners, other business-to-business customers and insurance companies that include pricing provisions under which such tests are billed. Billing terms are generally net 30 to 60 days.
While the transaction price of diagnostic tests is originally established either via contract or pursuant to our standard list price, we often provide concessions for tests billed to insurance carriers, and therefore the transaction price for patient insurance-billed tests is considered to be variable and revenue is recognized based on an estimate of the consideration to which we will be entitled at an amount for which it is probable that a reversal of cumulative consideration will not occur. Making these estimates requires significant judgments based upon such factors as length of payer relationship, historical payment patterns, changes in contract provisions and insurance reimbursement policies. These judgments are reviewed each reporting period and updated as necessary.
We look to transfer of control in assessing timing of recognition of revenue in connection with each performance obligation. In general, revenue in connection with the service portion of our diagnostic tests is recognized upon delivery of the underlying clinical report or when the report is made available on our web portal. Outstanding performance obligations pertaining to orders received but for which the underlying report has not been issued are generally satisfied within a 30-day period.
We also generate test revenue through the sale of our precision oncology products, which is comprised primarily of sales of our distributed RUO and IVD products for therapy selection. We recognize revenue on these sales once shipment has occurred. Product sales are recorded net of discounts and other deductions. Billing terms are generally net 30 days.
Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are recorded as revenue on the consolidated statements of operations. The associated shipping and handling costs are recorded in cost of revenue.
Other revenue
Other revenue is primarily generated from pharma development services provided to biopharmaceutical companies related to companion diagnostic development as well as through collaboration agreements and genome network contracts.
Contracts for companion diagnostic development consist primarily of milestone-based payments along with annual fees and marked-up pass-through costs. The arrangements are treated as short-term contracts for revenue recognition purposes because they allow termination of the agreements by the customers with 30 to 120 days’ written notice without a termination penalty. Upon termination, customers are required to pay for the proportion of services provided under milestones that were in progress. We recognize revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. We recognize revenue over time based on the progress made toward achieving the performance obligation, utilizing input methods, including labor hours expended, tests processed, or time elapsed, that measure our progress toward the achievement of the milestone.
We also enter into collaboration and genome network contracts. Collaboration agreements provide customers with diagnostic testing and related data aggregation reporting services that are provided over the contract term. Collaboration revenue is recognized as the data and reporting services are delivered to the customer. Genome network offerings consist of subscription services related to a proprietary software platform designed to connect patients, clinicians, advocacy organizations, researchers and therapeutic developers to accelerate the understanding, diagnosis and treatment of hereditary disease. Such services are recognized on a straight-line basis over the subscription periods. Amounts due under collaboration and genome network agreements are typically billable on net 30-day terms.
Business combinations
We apply Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB"), Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 805, Business Combinations, which requires recognition of assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and contingent consideration at their fair value on the acquisition date with subsequent changes recognized in earnings; requires acquisition-related expenses and restructuring costs to be recognized separately from the business combination and expensed as incurred; requires in-process research and development to be capitalized at fair value as an indefinite-lived intangible asset until completion or abandonment; and requires that changes in accounting for deferred tax asset valuation allowances and acquired income tax uncertainties after the measurement period be recognized as a component of provision for taxes.
We account for acquisitions of entities that include inputs and processes and have the ability to create outputs as business combinations. The tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination are recorded based on their estimated fair values as of the business combination date, including identifiable intangible assets which either arise from a contractual or legal right or are separable from goodwill. We base the estimated fair value of identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination on third-party valuations that use information and assumptions provided by our management, which consider our estimates of inputs and assumptions that a market participant would use. Any excess purchase price over the estimated fair value assigned to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded to goodwill. The use of alternative valuation assumptions, including estimated revenue projections, growth rates, estimated cost savings, cash flows, discount rates, estimated useful lives and probabilities surrounding the achievement of contingent milestones could result in different purchase price allocations and amortization expense in current and future periods.
In circumstances where an acquisition involves a contingent consideration arrangement that meets the definition of a liability under ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, we recognize a liability equal to the fair value of the contingent payments we expect to make as of the acquisition date. We remeasure this liability each reporting period and record changes in the fair value in change in fair value of contingent consideration in our consolidated statements of operations.
Transaction costs associated with acquisitions are expensed as incurred in general and administrative expenses. Results of operations and cash flows of acquired companies are included in our operating results from the date of acquisition.
Asset acquisitions
In circumstances where substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or group of similar identifiable assets, the asset is not considered a business and we account for the transaction as an asset acquisition. We recognize the assets acquired based on their relative fair value, which generally includes the transaction costs of the asset acquisition, and no gain or loss is recognized unless the fair value of noncash assets given as consideration differs from the assets’ carrying amounts. The form of consideration transferred may be cash, liabilities incurred, or equity interests issued.
Goodwill and indefinite lived intangibles
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other we do not amortize goodwill or other intangible assets with indefinite lives, including in-process research and development, but rather test them for impairment. ASC 350 requires us to perform an impairment review of our goodwill balance at least annually, which we do in the fourth quarter of each year for our single consolidated reporting unit, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. We did not incur any goodwill impairment losses in any of the periods presented.
Stock-based compensation
We incur stock-based compensation expense for awards granted to employees and directors and for inducement awards granted in connection with our business acquisitions. Stock-based compensation expense is measured at the date of grant and is based on the estimated fair value of the award. Compensation cost is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period for options and restricted stock unit ("RSU") awards, and on an accelerated basis for performance-based restricted stock unit ("PRSU") awards. We recognize stock-based compensation expense associated with PRSU grants when we determine the achievement of performance conditions is probable. In determining the fair value of stock options and employee stock purchase plan ("ESPP") purchases, we estimate the grant date fair value and the resulting stock-based compensation expense using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. We estimate the grant date fair value of RSU and PRSU awards based on the grant date share price.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions, which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Expected term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method to determine the expected term, which is based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term.
Expected volatility-We estimate expected volatility based on the historical volatility of our common stock over a period equal to the expected term of awards and over the expected six-month term ESPP purchase periods.
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of an option.
Dividend yield-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
In addition to the Black-Scholes assumptions, we estimate our forfeiture rate based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures and will continue to evaluate the adequacy of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover behavior and other factors. The impact from any forfeiture rate adjustment would be recognized in full in the period of adjustment and if the actual number of future forfeitures differs from our estimates, we might be required to record adjustments to stock-based compensation in future periods.
Income taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining the net valuation allowance which includes our evaluation of all available evidence including past operating results, estimates on future taxable income and acquisition-related tax assets and liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets because we expect that it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will not be realized in the foreseeable future. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted.
Results of operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found under Part II, Item 7. in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The increase in revenue of $180.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due primarily to increased billable volume due to growth in our business. Billable volume increased to approximately 1,169,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 659,000 in the same period in 2020, an increase of 77% due to growth in the business as well as lower billable volume in the prior year period as a result of the impact of COVID-19. Average revenue per unit decreased to $380 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $413 in the same period in 2020, primarily due to changes in payer and product mix, as well as reductions in pricing for some payers as we focus on providing cost effective genetic testing.
Cost of revenue
The increase in the cost of revenue of $150.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to increased billable volume. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of units billed increased to approximately 1,169,000 from approximately 659,000 for the same period in 2020. Cost per unit was $298 in 2021 compared to $299 in 2020. The slight decrease in cost per unit is primarily attributable to the significant increase in billable volume in 2021. The billable volume during the prior year period was lower as a result of the impact of COVID-19. The decrease was offset by changes in product mix, an increase in amortization of acquired intangible assets of $28.0 million, an increase in stock-based compensation of $10.1 million as well as an increase in write downs of certain inventory items of $9.7 million.
Research and development
The increase in research and development expense of $175.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due to the growth of the business as well as the impact of acquisitions. The increase in research and development expenses principally consisted of the following elements: personnel-related costs increased by $83.3 million as a result of headcount growth; professional fees increased by $32.4 million; lab-related expenses increased by $20.8 million primarily due to costs related to lab services and supplies; technology costs increased by $18.5 million due to higher spending on networking cloud computing services and software licenses; facilities-related expenses increased by $8.3 million primarily due to expansion initiatives; acquisition and other expenses increased by $6.3 million; and depreciation and amortization increased by $5.9 million.
Selling and marketing
The increase in selling and marketing expenses of $57.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to the growth of the business and our increased spending on sales initiatives subsequent to our cut backs in the second quarter of 2020 in response to COVID-19. The increase in
selling and marketing expenses principally consisted of the following elements: personnel-related costs increased by $39.0 million due to increases in headcount and sales commissions; marketing costs increased by $6.3 million principally for branding initiatives and advertising; depreciation and amortization increased by $2.9 million; information technology costs increased by $2.9 million; facilities-related expenses by $2.3 million; professional services and other increased by $2.2 million; and travel and entertainment increased by $2.0 million.
General and administrative
The decrease in general and administrative expenses of $22.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due to the nonrecurring effect of acquisitions in 2020, partially offset by growth in the business. Acquisition-related expenses declined by $105.5 million due to the post-combination expense related to the acceleration of unvested equity from our acquisition of ArcherDX included in the prior year period. These decreases were partially offset by increases due to growth in the business including personnel-related costs, which increased by $49.0 million primarily due to higher headcount; legal fees increased by $14.3 million primarily for litigation-related expenses; professional services increased by $11.8 million related to consulting services; and other corporate expenses increased by $8.4 million.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
The decrease in the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $441.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due principally to adjustments to decrease our contingent consideration liability related to ArcherDX resulting from a decrease in the value of our common stock and the removal of our contingent consideration liability relating to the outstanding milestone for FDA clearance or approval of a therapy selection IVD. The adjustments to decrease our contingent consideration were due to our determination that this milestone will not be achieved in the timeframe prescribed in the acquisition agreement, although we expect to receive FDA clearance or approval at a later date.
Other income (expense), net
The increase in other income (expense), net of $58.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was principally due to fair value adjustments related to our stock payable liabilities resulting from business combinations of $62.7 million due to the decrease in the price of our common stock, partially offset by amounts received under the CARES Act and the net changes in income recognized related to our marketable securities.
Interest expense
The increase in interest expense of $20.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was principally due to increased debt outstanding as compared to the prior year period, partially offset by the impact of the adoption of Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2020-06, which reduced the interest expense recognized related to our convertible senior notes during 2021. See Note 8, “Commitments and contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report.
Income tax benefit
The decrease in income tax benefit of $75.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to the net deferred tax liabilities assumed in connection with our acquisitions of One Codex, Genosity, Ciitizen and Stratify in 2021 which provided a future source of income to support the realization of our deferred tax assets and resulted in a partial release of our valuation allowance as compared to the partial release of our valuation allowance from our acquisition of YouScript and ArcherDX in 2020. As the short period tax returns for our 2021 acquisitions have not yet been filed, material changes to the tax returns may have a material impact on the net deferred tax liabilities assumed in connection with the acquisition and related income tax benefit.
Liquidity and capital resources
Liquidity and capital expenditures
We have generally incurred net losses since our inception. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our net losses were $379.0 million, $602.2 million and $242.0 million, respectively, and we expect to incur additional losses in the future. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.7 billion. While our revenue has increased over time, we may never achieve revenue sufficient to offset our expenses.
Since inception, our operations have been financed primarily by fees collected from our customers, net proceeds from sales of our capital stock as well as borrowing from debt facilities and the issuance of convertible senior notes.
In April 2020, we issued, in an underwritten public offering, an aggregate of 20.4 million shares of our common stock at a price of $9.00 per share, for gross proceeds of $184.0 million and net proceeds of $173.0 million. In 2020, we issued 3.6 million shares of common stock at an average price of $26.33 per share in an "at the market" offering for aggregate proceeds of $93.7 million and net proceeds of $90.7 million. In January 2021, we issued, in an underwritten public offering, an aggregate of 8.9 million shares of our common stock at a price of $51.50 per share, for gross proceeds of $460.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $434.3 million.
In September 2019, we issued $350.0 million of aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2024, which bear cash interest at a rate of 2.0% per year. Also in September 2019, we used the funds received through the issuance of our convertible senior notes due 2024 to settle our 2018 Note Purchase Agreement we entered into in November 2018. In April 2021, we issued $1,150.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2028, which bear cash interest at a rate of 1.5% per year.
In October 2020 in connection with our acquisition of ArcherDX, we issued $275.0 million of our common stock in a private placement at a price of $16.85 per share. We also entered into a credit facility to borrow $135.0 million. The private placement and credit facility closed concurrently with the merger in October 2020. The terms of this credit facility restrict our ability to incur certain indebtedness, pay dividends, make acquisitions and take other actions.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $1.1 billion and $360.7 million, respectively, of cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations as we continue to grow our business, enter into partnerships and acquire businesses and technologies. Cash used to fund operating expenses is affected by the timing of when we pay expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. We estimate our capital expenditures will be approximately $60.0 million for 2022.
We have incurred substantial losses since inception, and we expect to continue to incur losses in the future. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 and fees collected from the sale of our products and services will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months.
We may need or choose to raise additional funding to finance operations prior to achieving profitability or should we make additional acquisitions. We regularly consider fundraising opportunities and will determine the timing, nature and size of future financings based upon various factors, including market conditions and our operating plans. We may in the future elect to finance operations by selling equity or debt securities or borrowing money. We also may elect to finance future acquisitions. If we issue equity securities, dilution to stockholders may result. Any equity securities issued may also provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. If we raise funds by issuing additional debt securities, these debt securities would have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. In addition, the terms of additional debt securities or borrowings could impose significant restrictions on our operations. If additional funding is required, there can be no assurance that additional funds will be available to us on acceptable terms on a timely basis, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional funding when needed, we may need to curtail planned activities to reduce costs. Doing so will likely have an unfavorable effect on our ability to execute on our business plan and have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations and future prospects.
The following table summarizes our cash flows (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $559.8 million and principally resulted from our net loss of $379.0 million, non-cash charges for remeasurements of liabilities associated with business combinations of $411.8 million primarily related to ArcherDX development milestones and a $36.9 million income tax benefit primarily generated from our acquisitions of One Codex, Genosity, Ciitizen and Stratify. These were partially offset by non-cash charges of $180.1 million for stock-based compensation, $80.5 million for depreciation and amortization, $14.2 million for amortization of debt discount and issuance costs related to our outstanding debt, $9.5 million of post-combination expense primarily comprised of hold-back cash consideration related to our acquisition of Ciitizen and the acceleration of unvested equity from our acquisition of One Codex, $6.2 million of amortization of premiums on investment securities and $5.0 million of other adjustments. The net effect on cash for changes in net operating assets was a decrease of cash of $27.6 million due principally to increases in accounts receivable due to timing of collections, inventory and accounts payable, partially offset by increases in accrued liabilities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $298.5 million and principally resulted from our net loss of $602.2 million and $112.1 million related to our income tax benefit generated from business combinations completed in 2020 partially offset by noncash charges of $158.7 million for stock-based compensation, $92.3 million in remeasurements of liabilities associated with business combinations such as contingent consideration, $91.0 million related to post-combination expense due to the acceleration of unvested equity in the acquisition of ArcherDX, $39.1 million for depreciation and amortization, $17.2 million of amortization of debt discount and issuance costs and $1.4 million of other adjustments. The net effect on cash for changes in net operating assets was an inflow of cash of $16.0 million due principally to increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities partially offset by increases in inventory and accounts receivable due to timing of collections.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities of $145.1 million principally resulted from our net loss of $242.0 million and $18.5 million related to our income tax benefit generated from business combinations completed in 2019 offset by non-cash charges of $75.9 million for stock-based compensation, $16.2 million for depreciation and amortization, $8.9 million for debt extinguishment costs related to the settlement of our 2018 Note Purchase Agreement and $1.1 million of other adjustments. The net effect on cash for changes in net operating assets was a use of cash of $8.8 million due principally to increases in accrued liabilities which include acquisition-related liabilities for 2019 business acquisitions partially offset by increases in accounts receivable due to timing of collections and increases in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Cash flows from investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities of $204.1 million was primarily due to net cash used to acquire One Codex, Genosity and Ciitizen of $247.4 million and cash used for purchases of property and equipment of $54.7 million, partially offset by proceeds from net maturities and purchases of marketable securities of $99.3 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $400.6 million was primarily related to net cash used to acquire Orbicule BV ("Diploid"), Genelex, YouScript and ArcherDX of $383.8 million, purchases of property and equipment of $22.9 million, and other cash outflows of $4.0 million, all partially offset by net sales and maturities of marketable securities of $10.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities of $280.3 million resulted primarily from purchases of marketable securities exceeding proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities by $226.4 million, net cash used to acquire Singular Bio, Jungla Inc., and Clear Genetics, Inc. of $33.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $20.0 million.
Cash flows from financing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities of $1.6 billion primarily consisted of net proceeds from the issuance of convertible senior notes due 2024 of $1.1 billion and the public offering of common stock of $434.3 million as well as cash received from issuances of common stock totaling $23.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $673.0 million consisted of cash received from issuances of common stock totaling $284.2 million, including cash received from shares issued through a private placement in October 2020 upon the close of the ArcherDX acquisition, exercises of stock options and employee stock plan purchases; net proceeds from the public offerings of common stock of $263.7 million; and net proceeds from debt financings of $129.2 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by other cash outflows of $4.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $464.8 million consisted of net proceeds from the issuance of convertible senior notes due 2028 of $339.9 million, net proceeds from the public offerings of common stock of $204.0 million and cash received from issuances of common stock totaling $9.5 million, including cash received from exercises of stock options of $3.5 million and employee stock plan purchases of $5.8 million. These cash inflows were partially offset by payments related to the settlement of our 2018 Note Purchase Agreement through repayment of loan obligations of $75.0 million and payment of debt extinguishment costs of $10.6 million, as well as finance lease payments of $2.1 million.
Contractual obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations, including interest, as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
See Note 8, “Commitments and contingencies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8. of this Annual Report for additional details regarding our leases, convertible senior notes, 2020 Term Loan and purchase commitments.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See “Recent accounting pronouncements” in Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and accounting pronouncements not yet adopted, and their expected effect on our financial position and results of operations.