Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to the “Company,” “we,” “us, or “our” refer to the business of Navitas and its subsidiaries. Throughout this section, unless otherwise noted, “Navitas” refers to Navitas Semiconductor Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections and elsewhere in this annual report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
Founded in 2013, Navitas is a Dublin, Ireland-based developer of gallium nitride power integrated circuits that provide superior efficiency, performance, size and sustainability relative to existing silicon technology. Our solutions offer faster charging, higher power density and greater energy savings compared to silicon-based power systems with the same output power. By unlocking this speed and efficiency, we believe we are leading a revolution in high-frequency, high-efficiency and high-density power electronics to electrify our world for a cleaner tomorrow. We maintain operations around the world, including the United States, Ireland, Hong Kong, China, Taiwan and the Philippines, with principal executive offices in Dublin, Ireland.
We design, develop and market gallium nitride (“GaN”) power integrated circuits (“ICs”) used in power conversion and charging. Power supplies incorporating our products may be used in a wide variety of electronics products including mobile phones, consumer electronics, data centers, solar inverters and electric vehicles. We utilize a fabless business model, working with third parties to manufacture, assemble and test our designs. Our fabless model allows us to run the business today with minimal capital expenditures.
Our go-to-market strategy is based on partnering with leading manufacturers and suppliers through focused product development, addressing both mainstream and emerging applications. We consider ourselves to be a pioneer in the GaN market with a proprietary, proven GaN power IC platform that is shipping in mass production to tier-1 companies including
Dell, Lenovo, LG, Xiaomi, OPPO and Amazon. Most of the products we ship today are used primarily as components in mobile device chargers. The majority of charger manufacturers we ship to today are in China, supporting major international mobile brands. Other emerging applications will be addressed in China, other parts of Asia, and worldwide.
In support of our technology leadership, we have formed relationships with numerous Tier 1 manufacturers and suppliers over the past eight years, gaining significant traction in mobile and consumer charging applications. We are now in mass production with eight out of the top world-wide 10 mobile players and when considering customer projects in development, Navitas GaN technology has now been adopted by all of the top 10 mobile players. In addition, our customers have introduced over 170 GaN chargers into mass production, with an additional 240 GaN chargers in development across all of our mobile customers world-wide. Moreover, our supply chain partners have committed significant manufacturing capacity in excess of what we consider to be necessary to support our continued growth and expansion.
The core strength of our business lies in our industry leading IP position in GaN Power ICs. Navitas invented the first commercial GaN Power ICs and along the way we patented many fundamental circuit elements which are needed in most power systems from 10 W to 100 kW. Today, we have over 145 patents that are issued or pending.
In addition to our comprehensive patent portfolio, our biggest proprietary advantage is our process design kit (PDK), the ‘how-to’ guide for designers to create new GaN based device and circuits. Our GaN power IC inventions and intellectual property translate across all of our target markets from mobile, consumer, EV, enterprise, and renewables. We evaluate various complementary technologies and look to improve our PDK, in order to keep introducing newer generations of GaN technology. In 2021, we spent approximately 117% of our revenue on research and development. Navitas’ research and development activities are located primarily in the US and China. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 96 full-time personnel in our research & development team, with approximately 53% with advanced degrees (PhD and MS).
Business Combination and Reverse Recapitalization
On May 6, 2021, Navitas Semiconductor Limited (“Navitas Ireland”), a private company limited by shares organized under the Laws of Ireland and domesticated in the State of Delaware as Navitas Semiconductor Ireland, LLC, (“Navitas Delaware”, and together with Navitas Ireland, “Legacy Navitas”) a Delaware limited liability company, entered into a business combination agreement and plan of reorganization (the “Business Combination Agreement” or “BCA”) with Live Oak Acquisition Corp. II, (“Live Oak”). Pursuant to the BCA, through a series of transactions, Navitas Ireland merged with and into Live Oak effective October 19, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), with Navitas Ireland’s newly formed parent, Navitas Semiconductor Corporation (“Navitas Corp” or after the Business Combination, the “Company”, formerly named Live Oak Acquisition Corp. II), surviving the transaction. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this annual report for additional information about the Business Combination.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with US GAAP. Under the guidance in ASC 805, Live Oak was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. We were deemed the accounting predecessor and the post-combination company is the successor SEC registrant, meaning that our financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in this annual report filed on Form 10-K and in our future periodic reports filed with the SEC. The Business Combination had a significant impact on our reported financial position and results as a consequence of the reverse recapitalization. The most significant change in our reported financial position and results of operations was net cash proceeds of $298,054 from the merger transaction, which includes $173,000 in gross proceeds from the PIPE financing that was consummated in conjunction with the Business Combination. The increase in cash was offset by transaction costs incurred in connection with the Business Combination of approximately $24,967. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements elsewhere in this annual report for additional information. Navitas expects to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Results of Operations
Revenue
We design, develop and manufacture GaN ICs. Our revenue represents the sale of semiconductors through specialized distributors to original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”), their suppliers and other end customers.
Our revenues fluctuate in response to a combination of factors, including the following:
•our overall product mix and sales volumes;
•gains and losses in market share and design win traction;
•pace at which technology is adopted in our end markets;
•the stage of our products in their respective life cycles;
•the effects of competition and competitive pricing strategies;
•availability of specialized field application engineering resources supporting demand creation and end customer adoption of new products;
•achieving acceptable yields and obtaining adequate production capacity from our wafer foundries and assembly and test subcontractors;
•market acceptance of our end customers’ products; governmental regulations influencing our markets; and
•the global and regional economic cycles.
Our product revenue is recognized when the customer obtains control of the product and the timing of recognition is based on the contractual shipping terms of a contract. We provide a non-conformity warranty which is not sold separately and does not represent a separate performance obligation. The vast majority of our product revenue originates from sales shipped to customer locations in Asia.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from subcontractors, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging, manufacturing support costs, including labor and overhead (which includes depreciation and amortization) associated with such purchases, final test and wafer level yield fallout, consumables, system and shipping costs. Cost of goods sold also includes compensation related to personnel associated with manufacturing.
Research and Development Expense
Costs related to research, design, and development of our products are expensed as incurred. Research and development expense consists primarily of pre-production costs related to the design and development of our products and technologies, including costs related to cash and share-based employee compensation, benefits and related costs of sustaining our engineering teams, project material costs, third party fees paid to consultants, prototype development expenses, and other costs incurred in the product design and development process.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative costs include employee compensation, including cash and share-based compensation and benefits for executive, finance, business operations, sales, field application engineers and other administrative personnel. In addition, it includes marketing and advertising, IT, outside legal, tax and accounting services, insurance, and occupancy costs and related overhead based on headcount. Selling, general and administrative costs are expensed as incurred.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest under our term loan facility.
Income Taxes
We are a dual domesticated corporation for Ireland and U.S. federal income tax purposes. Refer to note 13, Provision for Income Taxes, in our accompanying financial statements elsewhere in this annual report.
Results of Operations
The table and discussion below present our results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $23.7 million compared to $11.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11.9 million, or 100%. The significant increase primarily reflected the Company’s customer growth trajectory, evolving from aftermarket customers to the top mobile companies and total sales volumes increasing 127%, from 11.3 million to 25.7 million units shipped, while the average selling price declined 12% to $0.92 per unit.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $13.1 million, an increase of $4.9 million or 60% compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by significant revenue growth, partially offset by lower costs on third generation (“Gen 3”) products launched in the second half of 2021.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $27.8 million increased by $14.8 million, or 113%, when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by increases in headcount and stock based compensation, resulting in $4.6 million and $6.1 million higher compensation costs, respectively, along with an increase of $4.0 million in non-compensation costs related to new applications and reliability expenses devoted to next generation product development. We expect research and development expense to continue to increase as we grow our headcount to support our expansion into new applications.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $51.4 million increased by $41.9 million, or 443%, when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase is
primarily due to an $34.4 million increase in stock-based compensation, a $3.9 million increase in compensation costs related to growth in headcount and a $3.6 million increase in other costs of growing the business.. We expect selling, general and administrative costs to increase to support our growth and as a result of the increased costs for infrastructure required as a public company.
Other Income (Expense), net
Net interest expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 of $257 thousand increased by 9%, when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher outstanding debt.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we recognized losses from the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities, earn out liabilities and an equity method investment of $45.6 million, $38.1 million and $0.1 million, respectively. The losses represented the following:
i) Warrants: Subsequent to the recognition of the warrant liability upon the consummation of the Business Combination on October 19, 2021, we remeasure the fair value of the warrant liability at each reporting date. The increase in fair value of our warrant liability of $45.6 million was primarily a result of the increase of the closing price of our Class A common stock listed on the Nasdaq to $17.01 per share on December 31, 2021 from $13.38 per share on October 19, 2021.
ii) Earnout liability: Subsequent to the recognition of the earnout liability upon the consummation of the Business Combination on October 19, 2021, we remeasure the fair value of this liability at each reporting date. The increase in fair value of our earn-out liability of $38.1 million was primarily a result of the increase of the closing price of our Class A common stock listed on the Nasdaq to $17.01 per share on December 31, 2021 from $13.38 per share on October 19, 2021.
iii) Other expense reflects our minority interest in the net loss of a joint venture.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 increased by $42 thousand when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. We expect our tax rate to remain close to zero in the near term due to full valuation allowances against deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, working capital requirements related to inventory, accounts payable and accounts receivable, and selling, general and administrative expenditures. In addition, we use cash to fund our debt service obligations, and purchases of capital and software assets.
We expect to continue to incur net operating losses and negative cash flows from operations and we expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses and capital expenditures will continue to increase. We expect our expenses and capital requirements to increase in connection with our ongoing initiatives to expand our operations, product offerings and end customer base.
Prior to the Business Combination, we derived our liquidity and capital resources primarily from the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock. We raised $110.9 million from preferred stockholders, including $53.1 million from the issuance of Navitas Ireland Series B-2 Preferred Shares in 2020. We have also raised funds from term loans from multiple sources, of which $6.9 million is outstanding as of December 31, 2021. The term loan principal balance is payable in monthly installments beginning in September 2021.
As December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $268.3 million. We currently use cash to fund operations, meet working capital requirements, for capital expenditures and strategic investments. Post-Business Combination, the Company has additional access to capital resources through public market transactions and the historical focus on near-term working capital and liquidity has shifted to more strategic and forward-looking capital optimization plans. We believe that the influx of capital from the Business Combination is sufficient to finance our operations, working capital requirements and capital expenditures for the foreseeable future.
We expect our operating and capital expenditures to increase as we increase headcount, expand our operations and grow our end customer base. If additional funds are required to support our working capital requirements, acquisitions or other purposes, we may seek to raise funds through additional debt financing or from other sources. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, the percentage ownership of our equityholders could be significantly diluted, and these newly issued securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing equityholders. If we raise additional funds by obtaining loans from third parties, the terms of those financing arrangements may include negative covenants or other restrictions on our business that could impair our operating flexibility and would also require us to incur interest expense. We can provide no assurance that additional financing will be available at all or, if available, that we would be able to obtain additional financing on terms favorable to us.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
We derive liquidity primarily from debt and equity financing activities. As of December 31, 2021, our balance of cash and cash equivalents was $268.3 million, which is an increase of $229.4 million or 590% compared to December 31, 2020. Our total outstanding debt principal balance as of December 31, 2021 was $6.9 million, which is an increase of $0.9 million from the $6.0 million of total debt outstanding at December 31, 2020.
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $41.7, which primarily reflects a net loss of $152.7 million , adjusted for non-cash share-based compensation of $41.4 million and non-cash, non-operating losses of $83.7 million and includes an aggregate decrease of $15.2 million due to higher operating assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $20.6 million, which reflects a net loss of $19.0 million, adjusted for non-cash share-based compensation of $1.0 million and includes an aggregate $6 million decrease due to higher operating assets, offset by an increase in cash of $3.6 million due to higher accounts payable.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $3.5 million was primarily due to $0.7 million cash consideration paid for an asset acquisition, $0.7 million cash funding of a joint venture and $2.1 million for purchases of fixed assets.
Net cash used in investing activities of $215 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily related to the purchase of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $274.5 million was primarily the result of $298.1 million in proceeds from the reverse recapitalization and $0.9 million in net proceeds from the issuance and repayment of debt, offset by $25.0 million of stock issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $53.6 million was primarily the result of $53.1 million in proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and $1.2 million in net proceeds from the issuance and repayment of debt, offset by $0.7 million of preferred stock issuance costs.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, Navitas enters into contractual arrangements that may require future cash payments. The following table sets forth information related to anticipated future cash payments as of December 31, 2021:
1Interest is projected based on current rates and scheduled principal payments.
Off-Balance Sheet Commitments and Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires our management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in our accompanying consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this annual report. Our management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience, current economic and industry conditions and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The methods, estimates, and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results that we report in our consolidated financial statements. Some of our accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain.
Our most critical accounting estimates include revenue recognition and the assumptions used in the determination of accounting for earnout shares and share-based compensation.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of products or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy performance obligations. We recognize revenue when the control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for such goods or services.
The majority of our revenue is derived from the sale of semiconductor products. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate whether the price is subject to refund or adjustment to determine the net consideration to which we expect to be entitled.
Revenue is recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer (i.e., when our performance obligation is satisfied), which is defined by the commercial terms of each purchase but typically occurs at shipment. In determining whether control has transferred, we consider if there is a present right to payment and legal title, and whether risks and rewards of ownership have transferred to the customer. Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for additional discussion of our revenue recognition policy.
Share-Based Compensation
The fair value of stock option awards to employees and, prior to the Business Combination, restricted stock awards to non-employees with service based vesting conditions is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and for awards with market conditions, incorporate Monte Carlo simulations. The value of an award is recognized as expense over the requisite service period in the consolidated statements of operations. The option pricing model requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment in determining fair value of the awards. The most significant assumptions and judgments include the expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividend rate and expected term of the award, in addition to the fair value of the underlying common stock.
Prior to the Business Combination, there was no public market for our common stock and the estimated fair value of our common stock was historically determined by our board of directors, with input from management, and considering our most recently available third-party valuation of our common stock. The board of directors determined fair value at the time of grant of the option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including financing investment rounds, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of share capital and general and industry specific economic outlook, among other factors. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The fair value of our common stock was derived by first determining the equity value of our company. The equity value of our company was historically determined using the market approach by reference to the closest round of equity financing, if any, preceding the date of valuation and analysis of the trading values of publicly traded companies deemed comparable to us. In allocating the equity value of our company among various classes of stock, we used an option pricing model (“OPM”). The OPM takes into account our classes of equity, dividend policy and conversion rights to determine how proceeds from a liquidity event shall be distributed among the various ownership classes at a future date. The OPM arrives at a final estimated fair value per share of the common stock before a discount for lack of marketability is applied.
Beginning with the common stock valuation as of February 2021 and for all subsequent valuations prior to the Business Combination, the equity value of our company was determined using the probability weighted expected return method (“PWERM”) approach, which assigns a probability or weighting to valuations determined under distinct scenarios. The February 12, 2021 valuation incorporated two scenarios under the PWERM method. The first scenario is a stay-private scenario in which the estimated current enterprise value was allocated to the various securities using an OPM, reflecting the rights and preferences for each security (i.e., convertible notes, preferred equity, common equity, options and warrants). The second scenario was a form of PWERM in which a single future exit event, a near-term IPO, was assumed. Under this scenario the future total enterprise value at the near-term IPO date was allocated to various equity and equity-linked securities using a common stock equivalent method reflecting as-converted common stock equivalents for each security class, since, upon an IPO, these outstanding equity-linked securities will convert into common stock. The future value of each security is then discounted to the valuation date.
In addition to considering the results of these third-party valuations, we considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date. The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment, including the probability and timing of liquidity events. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different. The fair value of the Company’s common stock ranged from $1.16 per share in the second half of 2020 to $10.53 per share as of August 25, 2021, the date of the most recent contemporaneous valuation report prior to the Business Combination.
Earnout Shares
Certain of the Company’s stockholders are entitled to receive up to 10,000,000 Earnout Shares of the Company’s Class A common stock if the Earnout Milestones are met. The Earnout Milestones represents three independent criteria, which each entitles the eligible stockholders to 3,333,333 earn-out shares per milestone met. Each Earnout Milestone is considered met if at anytime 150 days following the Business Combination and prior to October 19, 2026, the volume weighted average price of the Company’s Class A common stock is greater than or equal to $12.50, $17.00 or $20.00 for any twenty trading days within any thirty trading day period, respectively
These earnout shares have been categorized into two components: (i) the “Vested Shares” - those associated with stockholders with vested equity at the closing of the Business Combination that will be earned upon achievement of the Earnout Milestones and (ii) the “Unvested Shares” - those associated with stockholders with unvested equity at the closing of the Business Combination that will be earned over the remaining service period with the Company on their unvested
equity shares and upon achievement of the Earnout Milestones . The Vested Shares are classified as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet and the Unvested Shares are equity-classified share-based compensation to be recognized over time (see Note 7 - Share-based Compensation). The earnout liability was initially measured at fair value at the closing of the Business Combination and subsequently remeasured at the end of each reporting period. The change in fair value of the earn-out liability is recorded as part of Other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations.
The estimated fair value of the earnout liability was determined using a Monte Carlo analysis of 20,000 simulations of the future path of the Company’s stock price over the earnout period. The assumptions utilized in the calculation are based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones including projected stock price, volatility, and risk-free rate.
Recent Developments
Navitas is pursuing key strategic initiatives, including bringing to market multiple generations of GaN technology that enhance our margin profile and continually evaluating acquisition opportunities that are complementary to our existing portfolio and increase power semiconductor content in our targeted applications. See “Information about Navitas - Company Strategy.” Consistent with these key strategic initiatives, Navitas recently entered into a collaborative arrangement with a manufacturer of power management ICs to develop products and technology relating to ac-dc converters. Structured as a joint venture, Navitas’ initial contribution was the sale of its GaN integrated circuit die at cost & non-material expenses to contribute to the operating expenses of the venture in exchange for a minority interest, with the right to acquire the balance of the joint venture based on the future results of the venture (among other rights and obligations).
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report for a discussion of accounting pronouncements recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted and their potential impact to our financial statements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies, allowing them to delay the adoption of those standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act. As a result, following the Business Combination, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of companies that are required to comply with the effective dates for new or revised accounting standards that are applicable to public companies, which may make common stock less attractive to investors.