Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Annual Report”) includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and the Company’s actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
References in this Annual Report to “we,” “us” and “our” and to “Nuvve” and the “Company” are to Nuvve Holding Corp. and its subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
Nuvve is a green energy technology company that provides, directly and through business ventures with its partners, a globally-available, commercial V2G technology platform that enables EV batteries to store and resell unused energy back to the local electric grid and provide other grid services. Its proprietary V2G technology - Nuvve’s Grid Integrated Vehicle (GIVe) platform - has the potential to refuel the next generation of EV fleets through cutting-edge, bi-directional charging solutions.
Nuvve’s proprietary V2G technology enables it to link multiple EV batteries into a virtual power plant to provide bi-directional services to the electrical grid. Nuvve’s GIVe software platform was created to harness capacity from “loads” at the edge of the distribution grid (i.e., aggregation of EVs and small stationary batteries) in a qualified, controlled and secure manner to provide many of the grid services offered by conventional generation sources (i.e., coal and natural gas plants). Nuvve’s current addressable energy and capacity markets include grid services such as frequency regulation, demand charge management, demand response, energy optimization, distribution grid services and energy arbitrage.
Nuvve’s customers and partners include owner/operators of light duty fleets, heavy duty fleets (including school buses), automotive manufacturers, charge point operators, and strategic partners (via joint ventures, other business ventures and special purpose financial vehicles). Nuvve also operates a small number of company-owned charging stations serving as demonstration projects funded by government grants. Nuvve expects growth in company-owned charging stations and the related government grant funding to continue, but for such projects to constitute a declining percentage of its future business as its commercial operations expand.
Nuvve offers its customers networked charging stations, infrastructure, software, professional services, support, monitoring and parts and labor warranties required to run electric vehicle fleets, as well as low and in some cases free energy costs. Nuvve expects to generate revenue primarily from the provision of services to the grid via its GIVe software platform and sales of V2G-enabled charging stations. In the case of light duty fleet and heavy duty fleet customers, Nuvve also may receive a mobility fee, which is a recurring fixed payment made by fleet customers per fleet vehicle. In addition, Nuvve may generate non-recurring engineering services revenue derived from the integration of its technology with automotive OEMs and charge point operators. In the case of recurring grid services revenue generated via automotive OEM and charge point operator customer integrations, Nuvve may also share the recurring grid services revenue with the customer.
On August 4, 2021, Nuvve formed Levo Mobility LLC ("Levo"), a Delaware limited liability company with Stonepeak Rocket Holdings LP ("Stonepeak"), a Delaware limited partnership and Evolve Transition Infrastructure LP ("Evolve"), a Delaware limited partnership. Levo is a consolidated entity of Nuvve. Please see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for a summary description of the key items of the venture agreements.
Levo is a sustainable infrastructure company focused on rapidly advancing the electrification of transportation by funding V2G-enabled EV fleet deployments. Levo utilizes Nuvve’s V2G technology and committed capital from Stonepeak and Evolve to offer Fleet-as-a-Service for school buses, last-mile delivery, ride hailing and ride sharing, municipal services, and more to eliminate the primary barriers to EV fleet adoption including large upfront capital investments and lack of expertise in securing and managing EVs and associated charging infrastructure.
Levo's turnkey solution simplifies and streamlines electrification, can lower the total cost of EV operation for fleet owners, and support the grid when the EVs are not in use. For a fixed monthly payment with no upfront cost, Levo will provide the EVs, such as electric school buses, charging infrastructure powered by Nuvve’s V2G platform, EV and charging station maintenance, energy management, and technical advice.
Levo will initially focus on electrifying school buses, providing associated charging infrastructure, and delivering V2G services to enable safer and healthier transportation for children while supporting carbon dioxide emission reduction, renewable energy integration, and improved grid resiliency.
Business Combination
On March 19, 2021, Nuvve consummated the Business Combination with Newborn and Nuvve Corp. contemplated by the Merger Agreement. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information. The Business Combination was effected in two steps, as follows: (i) Newborn reincorporated to the State of Delaware by merging with and into the Nuvve, with the Nuvve surviving the merger as the new public company (the "Reincorporation Merger"), and (ii) immediately after the Reincorporation Merger, Merger Sub merged with and into Nuvve Corp., with Nuvve Corp. surviving the merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Nuvve (the "Acquisition Merger"). Also on March 19, 2021, the Nuvve consummated the Private Investment in Public Equity ("PIPE"), generating net proceeds of $14,250,000.
The most significant change in the Nuvve's future reported financial position and results as a result of the completion of the Business Combination and the PIPE was an estimated net increase in cash of approximately $62,018,410. Total transaction costs of $3,702,421 were treated as a reduction of the cash proceeds with capital raising costs being deducted from the Company's additional paid-in capital. In addition, the net cash proceeds were reduced by Nuvve's payment of $6,000,000 to EDF Renewables in connection with the repurchase from them of 600,000 shares of Nuvve’s common stock pursuant to the Purchase and Option Agreement, payment of $487,500 to NeoGenesis Holding Co. Ltd., the sponsor of Newborn, in repayment of loans made by the sponsor to Newborn, and deposit of $495,000 into escrow for the potential repayment of Nuvve Corp.'s PPP loan. Upon forgiveness of the PPP loan in June 2021, the $495,000 was released to Nuvve.
Upon consummation of the Business Combination, Nuvve Corp-designated directors were appointed to five of the seven seats of the combined Nuvve’s board of directors; Nuvve Corp’s Chief Executive Officer was appointed as Chairman of the combined Nuvve's board of directors; Nuvve Corp’s senior management became the senior management of the combined Nuvve company; and the former stockholders of Nuvve Corp became the owners of approximately 48.3% of the outstanding shares of common stock of the combined Nuvve company. Accordingly, the Business Combination is being accounted for as a Reverse Recapitalization, whereby Nuvve Corp is the acquirer for accounting and financial reporting purposes and Newborn is the legal acquirer. A Reverse Recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting, and the financial statements of the combined entity represent the continuation of the consolidated financial statements of legacy Nuvve Corp in many respects. The shares of Newborn remaining after redemptions, and the unrestricted net cash and cash equivalents on the date the Business Combination is consummated, are being accounted for as a capital infusion to Nuvve Corp.
As a consequence of the Business Combination, Nuvve Corp effectively became an SEC-registered, Nasdaq-listed company, which has required the combined Nuvve company to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. The combined Nuvve company expects to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative expenses.
Additionally, the combined Nuvve company expects its capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with ongoing activities as the combined Nuvve company invests additional working capital for heavy-duty DC-V2G charging stations and level 2 AC-V2G charging stations, additional investments in equipment to meet increased project needs, and additional operating expenses to hire project managers, technicians, sales, partnership and customer service personnel, data scientists, trading teams, software engineers and administrative staff.
Nuvve’s historical operations and statements of assets and liabilities may not be comparable to the operations and statements of assets and liabilities of the combined Nuvve company as a result of the Business Combination.
COVID-19
The outbreak of disease cause by a novel coronavirus discovered in December 2019 (COVID-19), which was declared a pandemic in March 2020, and the related restrictive measures such as travel restrictions, quarantines, and shutdowns, have negatively impacted the global economy. As national and local governments in different countries ease COVID-19 restrictions, and vaccines are distributed and rolled out successfully, Nuvve continues to see improved economic trends. However, COVID-19 and actions taken to mitigate its spread have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including the geographical area in which Nuvve operates.
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, Nuvve believes the extent of the impact to its business, operating results, cash flows, liquidity and financial condition will be primarily driven by the severity and duration of the coronavirus pandemic, the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies and the timing, scope and effectiveness of federal, state and local governmental responses to the pandemic. Those primary drivers are beyond Nuvve’s knowledge and control, and as a result, at this time Nuvve is unable to predict the cumulative impact, both in terms of severity and duration, that the coronavirus pandemic will have on its business, operating results, cash flows and financial condition, but it could be material if the current circumstances continue to exist for a prolonged period of time. In addition to any direct impact on Nuvve’s business, it is reasonably possible that the estimates made by management in preparing Nuvve’s financial statements have been, or will be, materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, and if so, Nuvve may be subject to future impairment losses related to long-lived assets as well as changes to recorded reserves and valuations. Although Nuvve has made its best estimates based upon current information, there can be no assurance that such estimates will prove correct due to the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak or otherwise.
Key Factors Affecting Nuvve’s Business
Nuvve believes its performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for it but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the Risk Factors described in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual report.
Growth in EV Adoption
Nuvve’s revenue growth is tied to the overall acceptance of commercial fleet and passenger EVs, which it believes will help drive the demand for intelligent vehicle-grid-integration solutions. The market for EVs is still rapidly evolving and although demand for EVs has grown in recent years, there is no guarantee of such future demand. Factors impacting the adoption of EVs include but are not limited to: perceptions about EV features, quality, safety, performance and cost; perceptions about the limited range over which EVs may be driven on a single battery charge; volatility in the cost of oil and gasoline; availability of services for EVs; consumers’ perception about the convenience and cost of charging EVs; and increases in fuel efficiency. In addition, macroeconomic factors could impact demand for EVs, particularly since they can be more expensive than traditional gasoline-powered vehicles when the automotive industry globally has been experiencing a recent decline in sales. If the market for EVs does not develop as expected or if there is any slow-down or delay in overall EV adoption rates, this would impact Nuvve’s ability to increase its revenue or grow its business.
Fleet Expansion
Nuvve’s future growth is highly dependent upon the fleet applications associated with its technology. Because fleet operators often make large purchases of EVs, this cyclicality and volatility may be more pronounced, and any significant decline from these customers reduces Nuvve’s potential for future growth.
Government Mandates, Incentives and Programs
The U.S. federal government, foreign governments and some state and local governments provide incentives to end users and purchasers of EVs and EV charging stations in the form of rebates, tax credits, and other financial incentives, such as payments for regulatory credits. The EV market relies on these governmental rebates, tax credits, and other financial incentives to significantly lower the effective price of EVs and EV charging stations to customers. However, these incentives may expire on a particular date, end when the allocated funding is exhausted, or be reduced or terminated as a matter of regulatory or legislative policy.
In the future, Nuvve will derive other revenue from fees received for transferring regulatory credits earned for participating in low carbon fuel programs in approved states. Generally, only the owner of EV charging stations can either claim or assign such regulatory credits. If a material percentage of Nuvve’s customers were to claim these regulatory credits or choose to not assign the regulatory credits to Nuvve, Nuvve’s revenue from this source could decline significantly, which could have an adverse
effect on its revenues and overall gross margin. Further, the availability of such credits depends on continued governmental support for these programs. If these programs are modified, reduced or eliminated, Nuvve’s ability to generate this revenue in the future could be adversely impacted. While Nuvve has derived an immaterial percentage of its other revenue from these regulatory credits, Nuvve expects revenue from this source as a percentage of revenue may increase over time.
Competition
Nuvve offers proprietary V2G technology and services and intends to expand its market share over time in its product categories, leveraging the network effect of its V2G technology, services and GIVe software platform. Existing competitors may expand their product offerings and sales strategies, and new competitors may enter the market. Furthermore, Nuvve’s competition includes other types of electric vehicle charging technologies, such as uni-directional “smart-charging” and lower cost (unmanaged) charging solutions. If due to increased competition Nuvve’s market share does not grow, its revenue and ability to generate profits in the future may be impacted.
Geographic Expansion
Nuvve operates in North America, selected countries in Europe (directly and through its business venture with EDF), and Japan. Revenue from North America and Europe is expected to contribute significantly to Nuvve’s total revenue in the near-to-intermediate term, while revenue from Japan is expected to increase over the longer run due to the early stage nature of Japan's market for V2G technology and services. Nuvve plans to use a portion of the proceeds from the Business Combination to increase its sales and marketing activities, as well as to potentially pursue strategic acquisitions in North America and Europe. Nuvve is also positioned to grow its North American and European business through future partnerships with charge point operators, OEMs and leasing companies. However, Nuvve may experience competition with other providers of EV charging station networks for installations. Many of these competitors have limited funding, which could lead to poor customer experiences and have a negative impact on overall EV adoption. Nuvve’s growth in North America and Europe requires differentiating itself as compared to the several existing competitors. If Nuvve is unable to penetrate the market in North America and Europe, its future revenue growth and profits will be impacted.
Backlog
Nuvve's total backlog represents the estimated transaction prices on unsatisfied and partially satisfied performance obligations to Nuvve's customers for products and services. Backlog is converted into revenue in future periods as Nuvve satisfies the performance obligations to its customers for products and services, primarily based on the cost incurred or at delivery and acceptance of products, depending on the applicable accounting method.
Our estimated backlog at December 31, 2021 was $6.2 million.
Market Opportunity
Nuvve see a significant market opportunity for V2G, totaling approximately over $6 trillion and its management believes it is well positioned to capture this global opportunity for a variety of reasons:
•First, Nuvve's intellectual property ("IP") includes key patents, making it difficult for competitors to perform V2G functions without violating its IP. Nuvve technology originated with an academic unit at the University of Delaware starting in 1996 and not only had decades of development but tens of millions of dollars in project funding invested prior to Nuvve's acquisition of the IP and commercialization of the technology.
•Second, Nuvve is already qualified by multiple Transmission System Operators, which typically take anywhere from one to three years to get approval. With this qualification, it makes it easier for Nuvve to expand in other areas.
•Third, Nuvve has over a decade of experience. Nuvve's history and strong relationships with key customers optimize our market participation and value proposition.
•Fourth, Nuvve has collected a huge amount of data which is a key element for rapid and accurate development, as well as monetization.
Because of these factors, Nuvve has a significant competitive advantage which is a key differentiator. Further, Nuvve's global experience allows it to bring the lessons it has learned into each new region which, in turn, enables Nuvve to bring the unique experience and incredible benefits of its V2G technology to customers at a faster rate.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth information regarding our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue
Total revenue was flat at $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in products and services revenue, was mostly offset by a decrease in grants revenue. Products revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 consist of DC and AC Chargers of about $2.2 million, grid services revenue of $0.4 million, and engineering services of $0.3 million.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue
Cost of product and service revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $1.5 million, or 284.2%, primarily due to the sales of charging stations in the United States, with no similar activity in the comparable period. Product and service margins decreased by 41.7%, to 31.4%, from 73.2% compared to the same prior year period mostly due to a higher mix of hardware charging stations sales and a lower mix of engineering services in the current year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $22.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $17.4 million, or 317.3%.
The increases during the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily attributable to increases in compensation expenses of $12.3 million, including share-based compensation and non-recurring severance costs related to departures of former employees, $0.5 million of professional fees related to internal operational reviews, $3.2 million of governance and other public company costs associated with the completion of the Business Combination and the Company becoming a recapitalized publicly traded company in March 2021, and $0.8 million representing expenses resulting from the consolidation of Levo's activities beginning in the third quarter of our year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $3.6 million, or 125.8%, from $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increases during the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily attributable to hiring of engineering personnel, which resulted in increases in compensation expenses and subcontractor expenses used to advance the Company's platform functionality and integration with more vehicles.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense, change in fair value of private warrants liability and derivative liability, change in fair value of conversion option on convertible notes, and other, net. Other income (expense) increased by $0.27 million, from $0.20 million of other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.07 million in other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The increases during the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily attributable to the interest expense on the convertible debenture, the change in fair value of the private warrants liability and derivative liability, and the beneficial conversion feature associated with the convertible debenture, partially offset by the gains on the forgiveness write-off of the PPP loan. The debenture was converted upon the closing of the Business Combination and will not be recurring.
Income Taxes
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded nominal income tax expenses. The income tax expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were nominal primarily due to operating losses that receive no tax benefits as a result of a valuation allowance recorded for such losses.
Net loss
Net loss includes the net loss attributable to Stonepeak and Evolve, the holders of non-controlling interests in Levo, on our consolidated statements of operations. We began consolidating the results of operations of Levo during the third quarter of our year ended December 31, 2021.
Net loss increased by $22.3 million, or 456.0%, from $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $27.2 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in net loss primarily due to increase in expenses of $22.5 million and increase in other expense of $0.3 million for the aforementioned reasons.
Net Loss Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest
Net loss attributable to the non-controlling interest in Levo was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net loss is allocated to non-controlling interests in proportion to the relative ownership interests of the holders of non-controlling interests in Levo, an entity formed by us with Stonepeak and Evolve (see Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for details). We own 51% of Levo's common units and Stonepeak and Evolve own 49% of Levo's common units. We have determined that Levo is a variable interest entity (“VIE”) in which we are the primary beneficiary. Accordingly, we consolidate Levo and record a non-controlling interest for the share of Levo owned by Stonepeak and Evolve during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Nuvve is an early-stage business enterprise. Nuvve has not yet demonstrated a sustained ability to generate sufficient revenue from sales of its technology and services or conduct sales and marketing activities necessary for the successful commercialization of its GIVe platform. Nuvve has not yet achieved profitability and has experienced substantial net losses, and it expects to continue to incur substantial losses for the foreseeable future. Nuvve incurred net losses of approximately $27.2 million and $4.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, Nuvve had a cash balance, working capital, and stockholders’ equity of $32.4 million, $37.3 million and $79.3 million, respectively.
Prior to the Business Combination, Nuvve funded its business operations primarily with the issuance of equity and convertible notes, borrowings and cash from operations. Nuvve has incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since its inception. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Nuvve raised net proceeds of $61.8 million from the Business Combination, the PIPE offering, and related transactions. Nuvve has been able to raise funds primarily through the Business Combination and PIPE Offering to support its business operations, although there can be no assurance it will be successful in raising necessary funds in the future, on acceptable terms or at all.
Nuvve believes that its cash balance as of December 31, 2021, in addition to its cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to fund its working capital and capital expenditure requirements for the next 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report.
Equity Forward Purchase
Pursuant to a letter agreement dated April 23, 2021, Nuvve’s Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating Officer committed to purchase from Nuvve, and Nuvve is committed to sell to them, 134,499 shares of Nuvve common stock for $14.87 per share or a total of $2,000,000. The parties are committed to purchase/sell the shares on or before April 23, 2022.
Levo
On August 4, 2021, we formed Levo with Stonepeak and Evolve to rapidly accelerate the deployment of electric fleets, including zero-emission electric school buses for school districts in the United States through V2G hubs and TaaS. Levo utilizes our proprietary V2G technology, and the capital commitments from Stonepeak and Evolve of $750 million, subject to project approval process as outlined under the terms of the definitive agreements, to fund acquisition of electric fleets, and construction of EV infrastructure. Stonepeak and Evolve have the option to increase their capital commitments to $1.0 billion when Levo has entered into contracts with third parties for $500 million in aggregate capital expenditures. See Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for details of the definitive agreements.
PPP and SBA Loans
In April 2020, Nuvve applied for, and in May 2020 received, a loan in the amount of $0.5 million as a part of the CARES Act. The loan is also known as a PPP loan. The loan had a term of two years at an interest rate of 1% with principal and interest deferred for six months. The loan also was eligible for forgiveness if certain criteria were met. Upon the closing of the Business Combination, $495,000 of the proceeds received from Newborn’s trust account were set aside in trust for the possible repayment of the PPP loan. We applied for forgiveness of the PPP loan in June 2021, and the PPP loan was fully forgiven and the $495,000 in trust was released to us.
Nuvve has two contracts, E-FLEX and Project Local Energy Oxfordshire, with a United Kingdom government agency, Innovate UK ("IUK"). Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, IUK offered, and in March 2020, Nuvve accepted a grant of disaster relief funds of 0.1 million British pounds (equivalent to approximately US$0.1 million) to only be used in performance under these contracts.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.2 million as compared to net cash used of $3.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The $26.1 million increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to higher use of cash for working capital during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same prior period. Working capital during the year ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by, among other items, lower net revenues and the related net loss of $27.2 million, increased compensation and professional expenses associated with the Company becoming a recapitalized publicly traded company, and cash purchases to fund higher inventory levels. These were partially offset by improved timing and management of vendor terms compared to the cash settlement of such items.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in investing activities was $0.27 million and $0.02 million, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities in both years were for used to purchase fixed assets.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $59.7 million, of which $58.2 million was provided in connection with the Business Combination, $14.3 million was provided in connection with the PIPE offering, $3.1 million was provided through the issuance of Levo's preferred stock, and $0.6 million was provided from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by issuance costs of $4.0 million, the repayment of Newborn sponsor loans of $0.5 million, the $6.0 million repurchase of common stock, the payment of investor stock liability of $2.0 million and the payment of legal and accounting costs of $1.0 million associated with the Business Combination.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.2 million, of which $4.0 million was provided from proceeds from issuance of convertible debenture, and $1.2 million was provided from proceeds from PPP and EDF loans.
Purchase Commitments
On July 20, 2021, Nuvve issued a purchase order (“PO”) to a supplier for 250 DC Chargers, for a total amount of $13.2 million, with the delivery date specified as the week of November 15, 2021. However, the supplier subsequently notified Nuvve that it would be unable to meet the contracted delivery date as a result of supply chain issues. The parties therefore agreed to change the delivery date to on or about December 15, 2021. On December 23 and December 27, 2021, Nuvve received a partial shipment of 80 of the DC Chargers, for which Nuvve paid $3.1 million. The delivered DC Chargers did not fully conform to required software and hardware specifications. The supplier is in the process of bringing the delivered DC Chargers into full conformance and the parties are negotiating a revised PO for the delivery of the remaining DC Chargers subject to the original PO.
In the event Nuvve and the supplier are unable to agree to a revised PO, Nuvve believes it has duly terminated the original PO, based on Nuvve's belief that the supplier failed to timely delivery conforming DC Chargers. The supplier asserts, however, that the original PO was non-cancellable and non-refundable, notwithstanding such alleged breach. Nuvve believes the supplier’s position does not have merit and Nuvve would defend itself vigorously should any proceeding result from such dispute. However, the outcome of any such proceeding would be inherently uncertain, and there can be no assurance that Nuvve would prevail. The amount and/or timing of any liability resulting from such a proceeding is not reasonably estimable at this time.
Business Combination and PIPE Investment
Immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination on March 19, 2021, Newborn consummated the sale of $14,250,000 of Newborn’s ordinary shares and warrants in the PIPE pursuant to the Subscription Agreements. See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for more information. In addition, immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, the principal and interest earned on the Bridge Loan (see Note 11 to
the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for further information) was automatically converted into 2,562,005 shares of common stock of Nuvve Corp. based on a stated conversion price of $1.56 per share of Nuvve Corp. common stock (equivalent to $7.50 per share of the Nuvve’s common stock). At the effective time of the Business Combination, subject to the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, each share of Nuvve Corp. common stock (including the shares of Nuvve Corp. common stock issued upon conversion of Nuvve Corp.'s Series A preferred stock and upon conversion of the Bridge Loan immediately prior to the closing) was canceled and converted into the right to receive the number of shares of Nuvve’s common stock equal to the Closing Exchange Ratio. As part of the Business Combination, Newborn was merged with and into Nuvve, the separate corporate existence of Newborn ceased and Nuvve continued as the surviving corporation. Upon the closing of the merger with Nuvve, each of Newborn’s outstanding units was automatically separated into its constituent securities and Newborn’s outstanding securities (including the Newborn ordinary shares and Newborn warrants purchased by the PIPE Investors) were converted into a like number of equivalent securities of the Company, except that each of Newborn’s rights was converted automatically into one-tenth of one share of Nuvve’s common stock in accordance with its terms. In connection with the closing, Nuvve changed its name to Nuvve Holding Corp.
On the closing date of the Business Combination, the proceeds from Newborn's Trust Account, which were generated from Newborn's initial public offering and a concurrent private placement, were released to the combined company. In Newborn’s initial public offering, Newborn issued 5,750,000 units at $10.00 per unit. Concurrently with the initial public offering, Newborn sold to its sponsor 272,500 units at $10.00 per unit in a private placement. Newborn received net proceeds of approximately $57,989,380 from the public and private units. Upon closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, $57,500,000 was placed in a trust account with a trust company acting as trustee. On the closing Date of the Business Combination, the balance in the Trust Account, net of $18,630 of redemptions by Newborn shareholders, was $58,453,331.
Pursuant to a Purchase and Option Agreement between Nuvve and a former stockholder of Nuvve Corp., 600,000 shares of Nuvve’s common stock were repurchased immediately after the closing for $6,000,000 out of the proceeds available from the Trust Account.
After the closing of the above transactions, payment of transaction costs of $3,702,421, repayment of loans made by Newborn’s sponsor to Newborn of $487,500, and deposit into escrow of $495,000 to cover the balance of the PPP Loan (see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report on Form 10-K for further information), Nuvve received total net proceeds in cash of $62,018,410 result of the above transactions.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Nuvve is not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of Nuvve’s financial condition and results of operations is based on its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires Nuvve to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Nuvve’s estimates are based on its historical experience and on various other factors that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While Nuvve’s significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to its consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, it believes the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Nuvve recognizes revenue using the five-step model under ASC 606 in determining revenue recognition that requires Nuvve to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contracts, which includes: (a) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (b) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (c) determination of the transaction price; (d) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (e) recognition of revenue when, or as, it satisfies a performance obligation.
Nuvve may enter into contracts with customers that include promises to transfer multiple products and services, such as charging systems, software subscriptions, extended maintenance, and professional services. For arrangements with multiple products and services, Nuvve evaluates whether the individual products and services qualify as distinct performance obligations. In Nuvve’s assessment of whether products and services are a distinct performance obligation, it determines whether the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or with other readily available resources and whether the service is separately identifiable from other products or services in the contract. This evaluation requires Nuvve to assess the nature of each of its networked charging systems, subscriptions, and other performance obligations and how they are provided in the context of the contract with the customer, including whether the performance obligations are significantly integrated, which requires judgment based on the facts and circumstances of the contract.
The transaction price for each customer contract is determined based on the amount Nuvve expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for transferring the promised products or services to the customer. For the most part, collectability of revenue is reasonably assured based on historical evidence of collectability of fees Nuvve charges its customers. However, judgement may be required in estimating variable consideration promised in customer contracts. The transaction price in the contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation in an amount that represents the relative amount of consideration expected to be received in exchange for satisfying each performance obligation. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied. Revenue is recorded based on the transaction price excluding amounts collected on behalf of third parties such as sales taxes, which are collected on behalf of and remitted to governmental authorities, or driver fees, collected on behalf of customers who offer public charging for a fee.
When agreements involve multiple distinct performance obligations, Nuvve accounts for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. Nuvve applies significant judgment in identifying and accounting for each performance obligation, as a result of evaluating terms and conditions in contracts. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. Nuvve determines SSP based on the observable standalone selling price when it is available, as well as other factors, including the price charged to its customers, its discounting practices and its overall pricing objectives, while maximizing observable inputs. In situations where pricing is highly variable, or a product is never sold on a stand-alone basis, Nuvve estimates the SSP using the residual approach.
Nuvve has entered into various agreements for research and development services. The terms of these arrangements typically include terms whereby Nuvve receives milestone payments in accordance with the scope of services outlined in the respective agreement or is reimbursed for allowable costs. At the inception of each arrangement that includes milestone payments, Nuvve evaluates whether a significant reversal of cumulative revenue associated with achieving the milestones is probable and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Nuvve applies considerable judgment in evaluating factors such as the scientific, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that
must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, Nuvve reevaluates the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to certain constraints, such as construction of EV charging stations site, and, if necessary, adjusts its estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Revenue for other service contracts is recognized over time using an input method where progress on the performance obligation is measured based on the proportion of actual costs incurred to date relative to the total costs expected to be required to satisfy the performance obligation. The payment terms for some of the Company’s service contracts include revenue sharing arrangements whereby the Company is entitled to the right to receive a portion of the revenue generated by the customer selling energy through the GIVe platform or from carbon credits received as a result of the customer using the GIVe platform.
During 2017, Nuvve was awarded grant funding from the California Energy Commission, which contract continued through 2020. Nuvve has concluded as of January 1, 2019 that this government grant is not within the scope of ASC 606, as government entity does not meet the definition of a “customer” as defined by ASC 606, as there is not considered to be a transfer of control of goods or services to the government entity funding the grant. Revenues from this grant are based upon internal costs incurred that are specifically covered by the grant. Revenue is recognized as Nuvve incurs expenses that are related to the grant. Nuvve believes this policy is consistent with the overarching premise in ASC 606, to ensure that it recognizes revenues to reflect the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which it expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, even though there is no “exchange” as defined in the ASC. Nuvve believes the recognition of revenue as costs are incurred and amounts become earned/realizable is analogous to the concept of transfer of control of a service over time under ASC 606.
For sales of finished products (charging stations) to customers which are distinct performance obligations, Nuvve satisfies its performance obligation and records revenues when transfer of control has passed to the customer, which Nuvve has determined as the date at which the product ships and generally does not include any variable considerations. The transaction price is determined based upon the invoiced sales price and generally does not include any variable consideration. Payment terms generally require remittance from customer within 30 days of the sale date. When charging stations are sold as part of a solution, Nuvve satisfies its performance obligation and records revenues when the charging stations are installed and commissioned.
The Company occasionally enters into agreements with customers in which EV charging stations are sold at a discount in exchange for a higher percentage of revenue share from the customer selling energy through the GIVe platform or from carbon credits. Due to the long-term nature of these payment terms, certain contracts are considered to have significant financing components as it relates to the equipment. The Company estimates the effect of any significant financing component and records the revenue associated with the equipment at the estimated present value of the expected stream of payments. As payments are received, the difference between the total payment and the amortized value of the receivable is recorded to interest income using the effective yield method.
Areas of Judgment and Estimates
Determining whether multiple promises in a contract constitute distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately or as a single performance obligation requires significant judgment. In reaching its conclusion, Nuvve assesses the nature of each individual service or product offering and how the services and products are provided in the context of the contract, including whether the services are significantly integrated which may require judgment based on the facts and circumstances of the contract. Determining the relative SSP for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations requires significant judgment. Nuvve determines SSP using observable pricing when available, which takes into consideration market conditions and customer specific factors. When observable pricing is not available, Nuvve first allocates to the performance obligations with established SSPs and then applies the residual approach to allocate the remaining transaction price.
Principles of Consolidation
We consolidate entities based on either a variable interest model or voting interest model. As such, for entities that are determined to be VIEs, we consolidate those entities where we have both significant economics and the power to direct the activities of the entity that impact economic performance.
The consolidation guidance requires qualitative and quantitative analysis to determine whether our involvement, through holding interests directly or indirectly in the entity or contractually through other variable interests would give us a controlling financial interest. This analysis requires judgment. These judgments include: (1) determining whether the equity investment at risk is sufficient to permit the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support, (2) evaluating whether the equity holders, as a group, can make decisions that have a significant effect on the success of the entity, (3)
determining whether two or more parties’ equity interests should be aggregated, (4) determining whether the equity investors have proportionate voting rights to their obligations to absorb losses or rights to receive returns from an entity and (5) evaluating the nature of relationships and activities of the parties involved in determining which party within a related-party group is most closely associated with a VIE and hence would be deemed the primary beneficiary.
The creditors of the consolidated VIEs do not have recourse to us other than to the assets of the consolidated VIEs. See Note 2 to its consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for details.
Stock-based compensation
Nuvve grants stock options and restricted stock awards to employees and non-employees. Determining the grant date fair value of options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires management to make certain assumptions and judgments. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties, and, if different assumptions had been used, stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different from the amounts recorded. Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Nuvve recognizes forfeitures as they occur.
The determination of the grant date fair value of stock option awards issued is affected by a number of variables, including the fair value of Nuvve’s underlying common stock, its expected common stock price volatility over the term of the option award, the expected term of the award, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of Nuvve Common Stock.
The following table summarizes the weighted-average assumptions used in estimating the fair value of stock options granted during each of the periods presented:
There were no stock options granted during the year ended December 31, 2020.
•Expected Life. The expected term represents the expected life of options is the average of the contractual term of the options and the vesting period.
•Dividend Yield. The expected dividend yield is zero as Nuvve has never declared or paid cash dividends and has no current plans to do so over the expected life of the options.
•Risk Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yields on U.S. Treasury debt securities with maturities approximating the estimated life of the options.
•Expected Volatility. As Nuvve has only been a public company for a short period of time, the volatility rate was estimated by management based on the average volatility of certain public company peers within Nuvve’s industry corresponding to the expected term of the awards.
Common Stock Valuation
Historically for financial statement periods prior to the Business Combination, the fair value of Nuvve Common Stock has been determined by the Nuvve’s Board of Directors with the assistance of management. In the absence of a public trading market for Nuvve Common Stock, on each grant date, Nuvve developed an estimate of the fair value of Nuvve Common Stock based on the information known on the date of grant, upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated fair value per share of Nuvve Common Stock, and in part on input from third-party valuations. For periods subsequent to the Business Combination, the Company determines the fair value of its common stock based on the price of its publicly traded stock.
Nuvve’s valuations of Nuvve Common Stock prior to Nuvve becoming a public company are determined in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement and the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
The assumptions used to determine the estimated fair value of Nuvve Common Stock prior to Nuvve becoming a public company are based on numerous objective and subjective factors, combined with management’s judgment, including:
•third-party valuations of its common stock;
•external market conditions affecting the EV industry and trends within the industry;
•the rights, preferences, and privileges of Nuvve convertible Series A preferred stock relative to those of Nuvve Common Stock;
•the prices at which Nuvve sold shares of its common stock;
•Nuvve financial condition and operating results, including its levels of available capital resources;
•the progress of Nuvve research and development efforts, its stage of development, and business strategy;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of Nuvve given prevailing market conditions;
•the history and nature of Nuvve’s business, industry trends, and competitive environment;
•the lack of marketability of Nuvve Common Stock;
•equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; and
•general U.S. and global market conditions.
In determining the fair value of Nuvve Common Stock prior to Nuvve becoming a public company, Nuvve established the enterprise value of its business using the market approach and the income approach. Nuvve also estimated the enterprise value by reference to the closest round of equity financing preceding the date of the valuation if such financing took place around the valuation date. Under the income approach, forecasted cash flows are discounted to the present value at a risk-adjusted discount rate. The valuation analyses determine discrete free cash flows over multiple years based on forecasted financial information provided by Nuvve’s management and a terminal value for the residual period beyond the discrete forecast, which are discounted at its estimated weighted-average cost of capital to estimate its enterprise value. Under the market approach, a group of guideline publicly-traded companies with similar financial and operating characteristics to Nuvve are selected, and valuation multiples based on the guideline public companies’ financial information and market data are calculated. Based on the observed valuation multiples, an appropriate multiple was selected to apply to Nuvve’s historical and forecasted revenue results.
In allocating the equity value of Nuvve’s business among the various classes of equity securities, Nuvve used the option pricing model (“OPM”) method, which models each class of equity securities as a call option with a unique claim on its assets. The OPM treats Nuvve Common Stock and convertible Series A preferred stock as call options on an equity value with exercise prices based on the liquidation preference of its redeemable convertible preferred stock. The common stock is modeled as a call option with a claim on the equity value at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after its redeemable convertible preferred stock is liquidated. The exclusive reliance on the OPM is appropriate when the range of possible future outcomes was difficult to predict and resulted in a highly speculative forecast.
Since August 2020, Nuvve used a hybrid method utilizing a combination of the OPM and the probability weighted expected return method (“PWERM”). The PWERM is a scenario-based methodology that estimates the fair value of common shares based upon an analysis of future values of Nuvve, assuming various outcomes.
The common share value was based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns considering two possible scenarios available as well as the rights of each class of shares. These two scenarios are: (i) a transaction with a SPAC and (ii) remaining a private company. The value of the common shares was determined based on an analysis of Nuvve’s operations and projections as of the valuation date, as well as its expected SPAC value for which we have discounted back to the valuation date at an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate. We then probability weighted each outcome to arrive at an indication of value for the common shares. Nuvve used the OPM and the PWERM to allocate the equity value of its business among the various classes of stock.
After the allocation to the various classes of equity securities, a discount for lack of marketability (“DLOM”) was applied to arrive at a fair value of common stock. The DLOM was meant to account for the lack of marketability of Nuvve's common stock that was not publicly traded. In making the final determination of the common stock value, consideration was also given to recent sales of common stock.
Application of these approaches and methodologies involves the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding Nuvve’s expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies, and the probability of and timing associated with possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions
impact Nuvve’s valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of Nuvve Common Stock. Following the Business Combination, it is not necessary to estimate the fair value of the Company’s Common Stock as the shares are traded in a public market.
Income Taxes
Nuvve utilizes the asset and liability method in accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the estimated future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax expense or benefit is the result of changes in the deferred tax asset and liability. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets where it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Nuvve makes estimates, assumptions, and judgments to determine its provision for its income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. Nuvve assesses the likelihood that its deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent it believes that recovery is not likely, it establishes a valuation allowance.
Nuvve recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits which, as of the date of this report, have not been material, are recognized within provision for income taxes.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to Nuvve’s consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report for more information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Emerging Growth Company Accounting Election
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. Nuvve is an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(A) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and has elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period.
Nuvve expects to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public business entities and non-public business entities until the earlier of the date Nuvve (a) is no longer an emerging growth company or (b) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare Nuvve’s financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements of Nuvve included elsewhere in this report for the recent accounting pronouncements adopted and the recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted for the year ended December 31, 2021.
In addition, Nuvve intends to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an emerging growth company, Nuvve intends to rely on such exemptions, Nuvve is not required to, among other things: (a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on Nuvve’s system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act; (b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (c) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); or (d) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
Nuvve will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) the last day of Nuvve’s first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of Newborn’s IPO, (b) the last date of Nuvve’s fiscal year in which Nuvve has total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the date on which the Company is deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates or (d) the date on which Nuvve has issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.