Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on management’s current expectations, estimates, and projections about our business and operations, and involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion and analysis is expected to better allow investors to view the company from management’s perspective.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company committed to discovering and developing novel, first-in-class immunomedicines to treat cancer and other immune-related diseases by restoring normal immune function. We view the immune system holistically and, rather than target one specific immune cell type, we focus on understanding biological pathways, the interactions of cells and the role each interaction plays in an immune response. Through our proprietary Functional, Integrated, NextCure Discovery in Immuno-Oncology, or “FIND-IO”, platform, we study various immune cells to discover and understand targets and structural components of immune cells and their functional impact in order to develop immunomedicines. We are focused on patients who do not respond to current therapies, patients whose cancer progresses despite treatment and patients with cancer types not adequately addressed by available therapies. We are committed to discovering and developing first-in-class immunomedicines, which are immunomedicines that use new or unique mechanisms of action to treat a medical condition, for these patients.
Our lead product candidate NC318 is a first-in-class immunomedicine against a novel immunomodulatory protein called Siglec-15, or “S15”. In October 2018, we initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of NC318 in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors. We completed enrollment of the Phase 1 portion of this trial in August 2019, and preliminary data from the Phase 1 portion were presented at the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer annual meeting, or the “SITC Meeting”, in November 2019. Updated data were presented in December 2020 and November 2021.
We began enrolling patients in the Phase 2 portion of the Phase 1/2 clinical trial of NC318 in October 2019. In this portion, we planned to enroll up to 100 patients with tumor types that have been shown to have elevated S15 expression, including non-small cell lung cancer, or “NSCLC”, ovarian cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, or “HNSCC”, and triple-negative breast cancer, or “TNBC”.
We have modified the Phase 2 portion of the trial for S15 selection, whereby clinical sites can select for S15-positive patients through screening biopsies in a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (“CLIA”)-certified laboratory. In the second quarter of 2021, we revised the dosing regimen to 800 mg weekly to increase overall drug exposure to NC318. We provided a data update from our ongoing Phase 2 monotherapy trial of NC318 at the SITC Meeting in November 2021. Based on combined Phase 1 and Phase 2 data from the NC318 study, NC318 continued to show early evidence of possible clinical benefit in patients with HNSCC, lung and breast cancer and other advanced/metastatic solid tumors, with dosing once every two weeks during dose escalation and a dose of 400 mg selected for the Phase 2 studies. NC318 continued to be well-tolerated in the Phase 2 portion of the trial, with primarily mild or moderate treatment-related adverse events, or “TRAE”. We expect to provide further data from the Phase 2 portion of this trial in the fourth quarter of 2022.
In April 2021, Yale University commenced a Phase 2 investigator-initiated clinical trial of NC318 in combination with pembrolizumab in patients with NSCLC. Initial data are anticipated in the second half of 2022.
Our second product candidate, NC410, is a novel immunomedicine designed to block immune suppression mediated by an immune modulator called Leukocyte-Associated Immunoglobulin-like Receptor, or “LAIR”, -1. In June 2020, we initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of NC410 in patients with advanced or metastatic solid tumors. The Phase 1 dose-escalation portion of this open-label trial is designed to evaluate the safety and tolerability of NC410 and determine its pharmacologically active and/or maximum tolerated dose. Interim data presented from the Phase 1 dose-escalation study shows that NC410 appears to be safe and well-tolerated in patients with advanced tumors and show evidence of immune modulation. We expect to provide further data from the Phase 1 portion of this trial in the second half of 2022.
Our third product candidate, NC762, is an immunomedicine targeting an immunomodulatory molecule called human B7 homolog 4 protein, or “B7-H4”. In July 2021, we initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of NC762 in patients with lung cancer, breast cancer, ovarian cancer or potentially other tumor types. The Phase 1 dose-escalation portion of this open-label trial is being designed to evaluate the safety and tolerability of NC762 and determine its pharmacologically active and/or maximum tolerated dose. We expect to announce initial data from the Phase 1 portion of this trial in the second half of 2022.
Our fourth product candidate, NC525, is a novel LAIR-1 antibody that selectively targets Acute Myeloid Leukemia, or “AML”, blast cells and leukemic stem cells, or “LSCs”. Preclinical data show that NC525 kills AML blast cells and LSCs while sparing hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, or “HSPCs”. Preclinical data were presented at the American Society for Hematology annual meeting, or the “ASH Meeting”, in December 2021. The data showed that NC525 (i) inhibits colony formation of AML LSCs in vitro, (ii) inhibits AML growth in the MV4-11 derived xenografts, or “CDX”, animal model in vivo and (iii) restricts AML progression in patient-derived xenografts, or “PDX”, in vivo. An IND submission is planned for the fourth quarter of 2022.
Financial Overview
Since commencing operations in 2015, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to organizing and staffing our company, identifying business development opportunities, raising capital, securing intellectual property rights related to our product candidates, building and optimizing our manufacturing capabilities and conducting discovery, research and development activities for our product candidates, discovery programs and FIND-IO platform.
We have not generated any revenue from product sales and only limited revenue from other sources. As a result, with the exception of the three months ended March 31, 2020, for which we reported a profit due to recognition of deferred revenue in connection with the termination of our former research and development collaboration agreement with Eli Lilly and Company, or “Lilly”, we have never been profitable and have incurred net losses since the commencement of our operations. Our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $69.4 million and $36.6 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $187.0 million primarily as a result of research and development and general and administrative expenses. We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and commercialize a product candidate, and we cannot assure you that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
We have funded our operations to date primarily with proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, with private placements of our preferred stock and with upfront fees received under our former research collaboration and development agreement with Lilly, or the “Lilly Agreement,” which was terminated in March 2020. From our inception through December 31, 2021, we received gross proceeds of $164.4 million through private placements of preferred stock.
In November 2018, we entered into the Lilly Agreement, to use our FIND-IO platform to identify novel oncology targets for additional collaborative research and drug discovery by us and Lilly. We received an upfront payment of $25.0 million in cash and an equity investment of $15.0 million from Lilly upon entering into the Lilly Agreement, and we were eligible for quarterly research and development support payments during a portion of the term of the Lilly Agreement. Effective March 3, 2020, Lilly terminated the Lilly Agreement without cause.
On May 13, 2019, we closed our initial public offering, or IPO, in which we sold 5,750,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $15.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $86.3 million. The net offering proceeds to us were approximately $77.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $6.0 million and offering expenses of $3.4 million. See Note 1 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more information.
On November 19, 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering, in which we issued and sold 4,077,192 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $36.75 per share. On December 2, 2019, the underwriters exercised in full their option to purchase an additional 611,578 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $36.75, for total net proceeds to us of approximately $160.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $10.3 million and offering expenses of approximately $1.0 million.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, excluding restricted cash, of $219.6 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our
planned operations into the first quarter of 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates through clinical development, the regulatory approval process and, if approved, commercialization, and as we expand our pipeline through research and development activities related to our FIND-IO platform and discovery programs. Specifically, in the near term, we expect to incur substantial expenses relating to our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial and planned Phase 2 clinical trial of NC318, our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial of NC410, our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial for NC762, and other research and development activities. We expect to incur significantly increased costs as a result of operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and to pursue our development strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public and private equity offerings, debt financings, marketing and distribution arrangements, other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate preclinical studies, clinical trials, or other research and development activities or one or more of our development programs.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized deferred revenue related to the terminated Lilly Agreement of $22.4 million. Through December 31, 2021, we have not generated any revenue from product sales.
For additional information about our revenue recognition policy, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our discovery efforts, research activities, development and testing of our product candidates as well as for clinical trials, including:
● salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including agreements with third parties that conduct research, preclinical activities or clinical trials on our behalf, such as our license agreement with Yale University, or “Yale”;
● costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
● the costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials; and
● facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Our expenses related to clinical trials are based on actual costs incurred and estimates of other incurred costs. These estimated costs are based on several factors, including patient enrollment and related expenses at clinical investigator sites, contract services received, consulting agreement costs and efforts expended under contracts with research institutions and third-party contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. We generally accrue estimated costs related to clinical trials based on contracted amounts applied to the level of patient enrollment and other activity according to the protocol. If future timelines or
contracts are modified based on changes in the clinical trial protocol or scope of work to be performed, we would modify our estimates of accrued expenses accordingly on a prospective basis. Historically, any such modifications have not been material.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates through development and expand the number of trials we are conducting and the patients enrolled in those trials, and as we utilize our current good manufacturing practice, or “cGMP”, manufacturing capacity, including to provide drug supply of NC318, NC410, NC762 and NC525 for future clinical trials, and as we expand our pipeline through research and development activities, including through our FIND-IO platform and discovery programs.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of future clinical trials of NC318, NC410, NC762, NC525 or any other product candidate we may develop or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any product candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any product candidate. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of NC318, NC410, NC762, NC525 and any other product candidate we may develop will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● the scope, progress, results and costs of clinical trials of NC318, NC410 and NC762, as well as of any future clinical trials of other product candidates and other research and development activities that we may conduct;
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including delays and slowdowns as a result of strain on our clinical trial sites and concerns about patient safety;
● uncertainties in selection of indications, clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
● the probability of success for our product candidates, including safety and efficacy, early clinical data, competition, ease and ability of manufacturing and commercial viability;
● significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
● the timing and receipt of any development or marketing approvals; and
● the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could lead to a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time to complete clinical development for any such product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, including payroll and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, human resources, business and corporate development and other administrative functions, professional fees for legal, intellectual property, consulting and accounting services, rent and other facility-related costs, depreciation and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses. General and administrative expenses also include all patent-related costs incurred in connection with filing and prosecuting patent applications, which are expensed as incurred.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase substantially during the next few years, including as a result of expected staff expansion, additional occupancy costs, higher legal and accounting fees, investor relations costs, higher insurance premiums and other compliance costs.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on marketable securities and payment of interest on our term loan with a commercial bank, or the “Term Loan”, which was paid in full and closed in August 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Revenue from Research and Development Arrangement
Revenue was $0 and $22.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The 2020 revenue exclusively relates to the recognition of all of the remaining deferred revenue under the Lilly Agreement as of the Lilly Termination Date. Effective with the termination of the Lilly Agreement, no further quarterly research and development support payments are payable to us.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate for the periods indicated (in thousands):
We do not allocate personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation costs, or other indirect costs to specific programs, as they are deployed across multiple projects under development and discovery and, as such are separately classified as internal research and development expenses in the table above.
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $3.6 million to $50.2 million compared to $46.6 million for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by $2.3 million in clinical-related and $2.1 million in personnel-related expenses, offset by a $1.6 million decrease in contract manufacturing expenses. Another $0.8 million of increased expense was due to other items, primarily depreciation.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $3.5 million to $20.5 million as compared to $17.0 million for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase was driven primarily by $2.7 million in personnel-related costs. Another $0.8 million of increased expense was due to other items, including professional services and insurance.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $3.2 million to $1.4 million from $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to lower investment balances and a reduction in interest rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from public offerings of our common stock, with private placements of our preferred stock and with upfront fees received under the Lilly Agreement. On May 13, 2019, we closed our IPO in which we sold 5,750,000 shares of common stock, at a public offering price of $15.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $86.3 million. The net offering proceeds to us were approximately $77.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. On November 19, 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering, in which we sold 4,077,192 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $36.75 per share. On December 2, 2019, the underwriters exercised in full their option to purchase an additional 611,578 shares of common stock at the public offering price of $36.75 per share. The total gross proceeds to us were $172.2 million and the total net offering proceeds to us were approximately $160.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Since inception, we have received aggregate gross proceeds of $164.4 million from the sale and issuance of shares of our preferred stock. In addition, in November 2018, we received an upfront payment of $25.0 million in cash from Lilly pursuant to the Lilly Agreement. Our cash equivalents are held in money market funds.
On May 6, 2021, the Company entered into a sales agreement, or the “Sales Agreement”, with SVB Leerink LLC, or the “Agent”, pursuant to which the Company may sell, from time to time, up to an aggregate sales price of $75 million of its common stock through the Agent in negotiated transactions that are deemed to be an “at the market offering.” The Agent will be entitled to compensation equal to 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of all shares of common stock sold through it as Agent under the Sales Agreement. Actual sales will depend on a variety of factors to be determined by the Company from time to time, including, among other things, market conditions, the trading price of the common stock, capital needs and determinations by the Company of the appropriate sources of funding for the Company. We have not yet sold any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, excluding restricted cash, of $219.6 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our planned operations into the first quarter of 2024.
In April 2016, we entered into the Term Loan to finance laboratory equipment purchases. In January 2019, we amended the Term Loan to increase our borrowing capacity from $1.0 million to $5.0 million. In August 2021, we fully paid the remaining principal on the Term Loan, and there are no outstanding payments due from us.
We will continue to require additional capital to develop our product candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We may seek to raise capital through sale of equity, debt financings, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all, including as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development of our product candidates or delay our efforts to expand our pipeline of product candidates. Our need to raise additional capital will depend on many factors, including:
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing NC318, NC410, NC762, NC525 and our other programs, including targets identified through our FIND-IO platform, and of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining marketing approvals for NC318, NC410, NC762, NC525 and any future product candidates we develop, if clinical trials are successful;
● the costs of manufacturing NC318, NC410, NC762, NC525 and any future product candidates we develop for preclinical studies and clinical trials in preparation for marketing approval and commercialization;
● the costs of commercialization activities, including marketing, sales and distribution costs, for NC318, NC410, NC762, NC525 and any future product candidates we develop, whether alone or with a collaborator, if any such product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
● our ability to establish and maintain additional collaborations, licenses or other arrangements on favorable terms, if at all;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, expanding, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of any such litigation;
● our current collaboration and license agreements remaining in effect and our achievement of milestones and the timing and amount of milestone payments we are required to make, or that we may be eligible to receive, under those agreements;
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, our future products, if any; and
● the emergence of competing therapies and other adverse developments in the oncology market.
Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through government or private grants, collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may be required to relinquish valuable rights to our future revenue streams, product candidates or research programs or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others rights to our product candidates in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to retain for ourselves. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $57.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to our net loss of $69.4 million. Net cash used in operating activities was $45.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to our net loss of $36.6 million, inclusive of our recognition of deferred revenue related to the terminated Lilly Agreement of $22.4 million.
Cash Provided by Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $36.6 million, which was primarily due to net proceeds from marketable securities of $39.0 million, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $2.4 million. Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $43.5 million, which was primarily due to net proceeds from marketable securities of $50.6 million, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $7.1 million.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities was $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted primarily of payments related to the closure of the Term Loan. Cash used in financing activities was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted primarily of payments related to the Term Loan.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Operating Leases
In February 2016, we entered into a non-cancelable facilities operating sublease, or the 2016 Sublease, for our current headquarters that expires in August 2025. The base rent under the 2016 Sublease is $32,254 per month, plus our prorated share of the sublandlord’s operating expense and is subject to annual rent increases of 3%.
In January 2019, we entered into a new lease to be used for office and laboratory space, or the 2019 Lease, that expires in March 2030. Upon expiration of the 2016 Sublease, the 2019 Lease will also cover the space we are currently subleasing under the 2016 Sublease. The base rent under the 2019 Lease is $37,824 per month, subject to annual rent increases of 3%.
Term Loan
In April 2016, we entered into a $1.0 million term loan, or the Term Loan. In January 2019, we amended the Term Loan to increase our borrowing capacity to $5.0 million, secured by our certificates of deposit, money market account, investment property and deposit or investment accounts. In August 2021, we fully paid the remaining principal balance of $2.4 million of the Term Loan. Interest expense under the Term Loan was approximately $77,000 and $183,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The outstanding balance on the Term Loan totaled $0 and $3.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We also have potential contingent payment obligations upon the achievement by us of clinical, regulatory, and commercial events, as applicable, or royalty payments that we may be required to make under license agreements we have entered into with various entities pursuant to which we have in-licensed intellectual property, including our license agreement with Yale. The timing and amount (if any) of any such payments cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. See “Business-Our Collaboration Agreements” for additional information.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with third-party contract organizations for clinical trials, non-clinical studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination following a certain period after notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or “GAAP”. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. The most significant assumptions used in the financial statements are valuing share-based compensation, including the fair value of our common stock in periods before our IPO. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Research and Development Expenses, Including Clinical Trial Accruals
Research costs consist of employee-related costs, contractor expenses, laboratory supplies and facility costs, for research and development of product candidates are expensed as incurred. Development costs, including clinical trial-related expenses, incurred by third parties, such as CROs, are expensed as the contracted work is performed. Where contingent milestone payments are due to third parties under research and development arrangements, the milestone payment obligations are expensed when the milestone results are probable of being achieved. When evaluating the adequacy of the accrued liabilities, we analyze progress of the studies, including the phase or completion of events, invoices received and contracted costs. For further discussion of research and development expenses, including clinical trial accruals, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. For further discussion of revenue recognition, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation, including stock options and restricted stock units, based on the fair value of the award as of the grant date. We utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model as the method for estimating the fair value of our stock option grants. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the options’ expected term and the price volatility of the underlying stock. The fair value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over the award’s requisite service period. We recognize stock-based compensation to expense using the straight-line method and recognize forfeitures as they occur. If there are any modifications or cancelations of stock-based awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase, or decrease any remaining unrecognized stock-based compensation expense.
Before our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock to date and the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock, and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Our common stock valuations were prepared using an option pricing method, or “OPM”, which used market approaches to estimate our enterprise value. The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on the total equity value of a company, with exercise prices based on the value thresholds at which the allocation among the various holders of a company’s securities changes. Under this method, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to stockholders exceeded the value of the preferred stock liquidation preferences at the time of the liquidity event, such as a strategic sale or a merger. A discount for lack of marketability of the common stock is then applied to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock.
Since the closing of our IPO, we have determined the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Select Market as reported on the date of grant.
For further discussion of our accounting for stock-based compensation, see Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or “the JOBS Act”, permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to take advantage of this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
For so long as we remain an emerging growth company, we are permitted and intend to rely on certain exemptions from various public company reporting requirements, including not being required to have our internal control over financial reporting audited by our independent registered public accounting firm pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2024, (ii) the last day of the first fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the first fiscal year in which the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million on June 30th and (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that have impacted or may impact our financial position and results of operations.