Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited annual consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this “Report”). In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations, and involve risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly under Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and “Note About Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
Outbrain Inc., together with our subsidiaries, (“Outbrain”, the “Company”, “we”, “our” or “us”) was incorporated in August 2006 in Delaware. The Company is headquartered in New York, New York and has wholly owned subsidiaries in Israel, Europe, Asia, Brazil and Australia.
Outbrain is a leading recommendation platform powering the open web. Our technology provides personalization, engagement and monetization solutions to thousands of digital media properties, including many of the world’s most prestigious publishers. Through powering discovery feeds on the open web, Outbrain helps over a billion unique users on a monthly basis discover content, offers, services and products they might be interested in. For tens of thousands of advertisers around the world, Outbrain helps attract new customers and grow their businesses, driving measurable results and return on investment.
Over the past decade, consumers have become increasingly accustomed to seeing highly curated digital content and ads that align with their unique interests. Similar to the way in which social media and search have simplified discovery by synthesizing billions of consumer data points to offer personalized feeds, we provide media partners with a platform that encompasses data at scale as well as prediction and recommendation capabilities, helping media partners deliver a discovery feed personalized to their users, based on context and each user’s interests and preferences.
Over the past decade, consumers have become increasingly accustomed to seeing highly curated digital content and ads that align with their unique interests. Similar to the way in which social media and search have simplified discovery by synthesizing billions of consumer data points to offer personalized feeds, we provide media partners with a platform that encompasses data at scale as well as prediction and recommendation capabilities, helping them deliver a discovery feed personalized to their users, based on context and each user’s unique interests and preferences. Our platform is built for user engagement and, as a mobile-first company, is designed to be highly effective on mobile devices. our technology is deployed on the mobile apps and websites of most of our media partners, generating 68% of our revenue in 2021.
Since inception, we have been guided by the same core principles pertaining to our three constituents: media partners, users, and advertisers.
Media Partners. We are committed to the long-term success of our media partners. Consistent with this philosophy, we focus on establishing a true win-win partnership. We strive to develop trusted, transparent, multi-year contracts with media partners, which are typically exclusive with us. Our media partners include both traditional publishers and companies in new and rapidly evolving categories such as mobile device manufacturers and web browsers.
Users. We believe that by focusing on improving the user experience we are able to cultivate user behavior patterns that compound engagement over time, delivering superior long-term monetization for ourselves and for our media partners.
Advertisers. We strive to grow our advertising business by increasing overall user engagement, rather than price per engagement. Our emphasis on user engagement helps us improve advertisers’ return on ad spend (“ROAS”) thus unlocking more advertising spend and attracting more advertisers. In turn this enables us to better match ads to users and further grow user engagement and overall monetization.
Through our direct, usually exclusive, integrations with media partners, we have become one of the largest online advertising platforms on the open web. In 2021, we provided personalized feeds and ads to over 1 billion monthly unique users, delivering on average over 10 billion recommendations to content, services and products per day, with over 24,000 advertisers directly using our platform.
The following is a summary of our performance for the periods presented:
•Our revenue grew to $1,015.6 million in 2021, from $767.1 million in 2020, and $687.3 million in 2019.
•Our gross profit was $240.3 million and our gross margin was 23.7% in 2021, compared to gross profit of $165.1 million and gross margin of 21.5% in 2020, and gross profit of $141.8 million and gross margin of 20.6% in 2019.
•Our Ex-TAC Gross Profit(1) increased to $272.1 million in 2021, from $194.3 million in 2020 and $170.3 million in 2019.
•Our net income increased to $11.0 million, or 4.6% of gross profit in 2021, compared to $4.4 million, or 2.6% of gross profit in 2020, and a net loss of $20.5 million, or (14.5)% of gross profit, in 2019. Net income for the 2021 included a one-time tax benefit of $31.8 million due to a release of the valuation allowance on certain U.S. deferred tax assets. Net income for 2021 also included charges of $42.0 million (pre-tax) to recognize the unamortized discount and deferred financing costs on our senior subordinated secured notes that were exchanged for convertible notes upon our IPO, as well as $16.5 million of one-time incremental cumulative stock-based compensation expense (pre-tax) for awards with an IPO performance condition.
•Our Adjusted EBITDA(1) increased to $88.9 million in 2021, from $41.1 million in 2020 and $19.3 million in 2019. Adjusted EBITDA(1) was 32.7%, 21.2% and 11.3% of Ex-TAC Gross Profit(1) in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
______________________
(1)Ex-TAC Gross Profit and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” in this Report for the definitions and limitations of these measures, and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP financial measures.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
On July 22, 2021, our Form S-1 was declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) in connection with our IPO of our common stock and our common stock began trading on Nasdaq on July 23, 2021. On July 27, 2021, we closed our IPO and issued 8,000,000 shares of our common stock at an initial offering price of $20.00 per share, receiving aggregate net proceeds of $145.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering costs.
In connection with the IPO, all of the shares of our convertible preferred stock outstanding automatically converted into an aggregate of 28,091,267 shares of the Company’s common stock, with all series converted on a one-to-one basis, with the exception of Series F, which was converted at 1.14-to-1, based on the terms of the Series F agreement and the IPO price. The total carrying value of convertible preferred stock of $162.4 million was reclassified to stockholders’ equity (deficit).
Reverse Stock Split
In connection with our IPO, our Board of Directors (the “Board”) and our stockholders approved a 1-for-1.70 reverse stock split of our common stock, which became effective on July 13, 2021. All share and per-share amounts for all periods presented in our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto have been adjusted retroactively to reflect the reverse stock split and adjustment of the conversion ratio of the convertible preferred stock.
Convertible Notes
On July 1, 2021, we completed the sale of $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior subordinated secured notes due July 1, 2026 (the “Notes”), in a private placement to institutional investors affiliated with and funds managed by The Baupost Group, L.L.C., pursuant to a Senior Subordinated Secured Note Purchase Agreement dated July 1, 2021 (the “Note Purchase Agreement”). On July 27, 2021, in connection with the closing of our IPO and pursuant to the terms of the Note Purchase Agreement, we exchanged $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes due July 1, 2026 for $236.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.95% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”), pursuant to an indenture, dated July 27, 2021, between the Company and The Bank of New York Mellon, as trustee. The Convertible Notes will mature on July 27, 2026, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information.
Acquisitions
On November 19, 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement, by and among Outbrain and the shareholders of video intelligence AG (“vi”), a Swiss-based contextual video technology company for digital media owners, for the acquisition of all of the outstanding shares of vi for a purchase price of approximately $55 million. The acquisition was completed on January 5, 2022. The purchase price was paid in the form of cash and Outbrain common stock, with the first installment of $37.3 million in cash and the equity portion paid at closing, and the substantial majority of the remaining cash balance payable in the third quarter of 2022. The equity portion of the purchase price is subject to a post-closing adjustment based on market price of our stock to be determined one year from closing, at which time any required adjustment is to be paid in cash. Aggregate consideration for the acquisition of vi will not exceed approximately $55 million in total. The purpose of the acquisition was to expand our video product offerings to include in-stream high-quality video content, delivering a better user experience and more value to its advertisers. This acquisition will be accounted for as a business combination and the results of the acquired entity will be included in our results of operations beginning as of the acquisition date in 2022.
On April 1, 2019, we completed the acquisition of all the outstanding shares of Ligatus, a German-based native advertising company, pursuant to a share purchase agreement with Gruner + Jahr GmbH. The acquisition date fair value of the consideration transferred was approximately $40.1 million, which consisted of 3,603,179 shares of our common stock. The acquisition was accounted for as a business combination and the results of operations of the acquired entity have been included in our results of operations as of the acquisition date.
As part of our growth strategy, we plan to continue to evaluate strategic acquisition or investment opportunities to add incremental growth with compounding benefits to our business, to further expand our offerings, add key technology and/or reach new markets.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the spread of the COVID-19 disease as a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a global slowdown of economic activity causing a decrease in demand for a broad variety of goods and services, including those provided by certain advertisers using our platform. Many of our advertisers reduced their advertising spending, which had a negative impact on our revenue during the first half of 2020. As the world quickly shifted to online activities and advertisers gradually shifted their spending toward digital advertising, our revenue trends improved meaningfully and returned to growth beginning in the second half of 2020. Although the advertising market and our business have generally recovered from the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, variables such as global supply chain disruptions, labor shortages and stoppages, and cost inflation impacted certain categories of advertisers, such as the automotive advertisers, and could adversely impact us in the future, including if our advertisers were to reduce or cut their advertising spending as a result of any of these factors. We continue to monitor our operations, and the operations of those in our ecosystem (including media partners, advertisers and agencies), as well as government recommendations.
Factors Affecting Our Business
Retention and Growth of Relationships with Media Partners
We rely on relationships with our media partners for a significant portion of our advertising inventory and for our ability to increase revenue through expanding their use of our platform. To further strengthen these relationships, we continuously invest in our technology and product functionality to drive user engagement and monetization by (i) improving our algorithms; (ii) effectively managing our supply and demand; and (iii) expanding the adoption of our enhanced products by media partners.
Our relationships with media partners are typically long-term, exclusive and strategic in nature. Our top 20 media partners, based on our 2021 revenue, have been using our platform for an average of over seven years, despite their typical contract length being two to three years. Net revenue retention is an important indicator of media partner satisfaction, the value of our platform, as well as our ability to grow revenue from existing relationships.
We calculate media partner net revenue retention at the end of each quarter by starting with revenue generated on media partners’ properties during the same period in the prior year, “Prior Period Retention Revenue.” We then calculate the revenue generated on these same media partners’ properties in the current period, “Current Period Retention Revenue.” Current Period Retention Revenue reflects any expansions within the media partner relationships, such as any additional placements or properties on which we extend our recommendations, as well as contraction or attrition. Our media partner net revenue retention in a quarter equals the Current Period Retention Revenue divided by the Prior Period Retention Revenue. To calculate media partner net revenue retention for year-to-date and annual periods, we sum the quarterly Current Period Retention
Revenue and divide it by the sum of the quarterly Prior Period Retention Revenue. These amounts exclude certain revenue adjustments and revenue recognized on a net basis. Our media partner net revenue retention was 126% for the year ended December 31, 2021, 104% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 95% for the year ended December 31, 2019 (104% excluding one media partner that we chose not to renew in 2019).
Our growth also depends on our ability to secure new partnerships with media partners. New media partners are defined as those relationships in which revenue was not generated in the prior period, except for limited instances where residual revenue was generated on a media partner’s properties. In such instances, the residual revenue would be excluded from net revenue retention above. Revenue generated on new media partners’ properties contributed approximately 7% to revenue growth for the year ended December 31, 2021, 7% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 10% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
User Engagement with Relevant Media and Advertising Content
We believe that engagement is a key pillar of the overall value that our platform provides to users, media partners and advertisers. Our algorithms enable effective engagement of users by facilitating the discovery of content, products and services that they find most interesting, as well as connecting them to personalized ads that are relevant to them. We believe that the user experience has a profound impact on long-term user behavior patterns and thus “compounds” over time improving our long-term monetization prospects. This principle guides our behavior, and, as a result, we do not focus on the price of ads, nor on maximizing such prices, as may be the case with some of our competitors. Given this view, we do not focus on cost-per-click or cost-per-impression as key performance indicators for the business. Consequently, we have a differentiated approach to monetization as we optimize our algorithms for the overall user experience rather than just for the price of each individual user engagement.
Growth in user engagement is driven by several factors, including enhancements to our recommendation engine, growth in the breadth and depth of our data assets, the increase in size and quality of our content and advertising index, expansion on existing media partner properties where our recommendations can be served and the adoption of our platform by new media partners. As we grow user engagement, we are able to collect more data, enabling us to further enhance our algorithms, which in turn helps us make smarter recommendations and further grow user engagement, providing our platform and our business with a powerful growth flywheel. We measure the impact of this growth flywheel on our business by reviewing the growth of Click Through Rate (“CTR”) for ads on our platform. CTR improvements increase the number of clicks on our platform. We believe that we have a significant opportunity to further grow user engagement, and thus our business, as today CTR on our platform is less than 1% of recommendations served.
Advertiser Retention and Growth
We focus on serving ads that are more engaging rather than on the price of the ads. Our growth is partially driven by retaining and expanding the amount of spend by advertisers on our platform, as well as acquiring new advertisers. Improving our platform’s functionality and features increases the attractiveness of our platform to existing and new advertisers while also growing our share of their advertising budgets. We continuously invest in enhancing our technological capabilities to deliver better ROAS and transparency on ad spend, and market these attributes to grow our advertiser base and share of wallet.
Prices paid by advertisers on our platform fluctuate period to period for a variety of reasons, including supply and demand, competition and seasonality. While in 2019 and 2020 average prices on an annual basis were down relative to prior year, we have noted an upward trend resulting in a higher average price in 2021, compared to 2019 and 2020 levels. Movements in average prices do not necessarily correlate to our revenue or Ex-TAC Gross Profit trends. In order to grow our revenue and Ex-TAC Gross Profit and maximize value for our advertisers and media partners, our focus as a business is on driving user engagement and ROAS for advertisers, not on optimizing for price.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, over 24,000 unique advertisers were active on our platform. In addition, we continue to grow our programmatic partnerships, enabling us to grow our advertiser base efficiently.
Expansion Into New Environments, New Content Experiences and New Ad Formats
The accelerating pace of technological innovation and adoption, combined with continuously evolving user behavior and content consumption habits, presents multiple opportunities for growth. The emergence of new devices, platforms and environments in which users spend time consuming content is one area of expansion for us. Similarly, the formats in which content can or will be consumed continue to evolve, as well as user-friendly and impactful ad formats that can be delivered in or alongside that content. Fundamentally, we plan to continue making our platform available for media partners on all types of devices and platforms, and all formats of media, that carry their content.
Examples of new environments in which content consumption is expected to grow include connected TVs, screens for autonomous vehicles and public transport, pre-installed applications on new smartphones, smartphone native content feeds, push notifications and email newsletters. We are developing solutions that allow media partners, service providers and manufacturers to provide better curated, personalized and more engaging content feeds and recommendations in these environments.
The development and deployment of new ad formats allow us to better serve users, media partners and, ultimately, advertisers who seek to target and engage users at scale; this continues to open and grow new types of advertiser demand, while ensuring relevance as the environments in which we operate diversify.
Investment in Our Technology and Infrastructure
Innovation is a core tenet of our Company and our industry. We plan to continue our investments in our people and our technology in order to retain and enhance our leadership position. For example, improvements to our algorithms help us deliver more relevant ads, driving higher user engagement, thereby improving ROAS for advertisers and increasing monetization for our media partners. In addition, we continue to invest in media partner and advertiser focused tools, technology and products as well as privacy-centric solutions.
We believe that our proprietary micro-services, API-based cloud infrastructure provides us with a strategic competitive advantage as we are able to deploy code an average of 300 times per day and grow in a scalable and highly cost-effective manner. As we develop and deploy solutions for enhanced integration of our technologies in new environments, with new content and ad formats, we anticipate activity through our platform to grow. We anticipate that the investment in our technology, infrastructure and solutions will contribute to our long-term growth.
Industry Dynamics
Our business depends on the overall demand for digital advertising and on the continuous success of our current and prospective media partners. Digital advertising is a rapidly evolving and growing industry, with growth that has outpaced the growth of the broader advertising industry, and it has been more resilient to economic downturns compared to the advertising industry in general. Content consumption is increasingly shifting online, requiring media owners to adapt in order to successfully attract, engage and monetize their users. Given the large and growing volume of content being generated online, content curation tools are increasingly becoming a necessity for users and media owners alike. Advertisers increasingly rely on digital advertising platforms that deliver highly targeted ads and measurable performance. Regulators across most developed markets are increasingly focused on enacting and enforcing user privacy rules as well as tighter oversight of the major ‘walled garden’ platforms. Industry participants have recently been, and likely will continue to be, impacted by changes implemented by platform leaders such as Apple’s change to its Identifier for Advertisers policy and Google’s evolving roadmap pertaining to the use of cookies within its Chrome web browser. See Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Report for additional information regarding changing industry dynamics with respect to industry participants and the regulatory environment. Given our focus on innovation, the depth and length of our media partner relationships and our scale, we believe that we are well positioned to address and potentially benefit from many of these industry dynamics.
Seasonality
The global advertising industry experiences seasonal trends that affect most participants in the digital advertising ecosystem. Our revenue generally fluctuates from quarter to quarter as a result of a variety of factors, including seasonality, as many advertisers allocate the largest portion of their budgets to the fourth quarter of the calendar year to coincide with increased holiday purchasing, as well as the timing of advertising budget cycles. Historically, the fourth quarter of the year has reflected the highest levels of advertiser spending, and the first quarter generally has reflected the lowest level of advertiser spending. In addition, expenditures by advertisers tend to be cyclical and discretionary in nature, reflecting changes in brand advertising strategy, budgeting constraints and buying patterns and a variety of other factors, many of which are outside of our control. The quarterly rate of increase in our traffic acquisition costs is generally commensurate with the quarterly rate of increase in our revenue. However, traffic acquisition costs have, at times, grown at a faster or slower rate than revenue, primarily due to the mix of the revenue generated or contracted terms with media partners. We generally expect these seasonal trends to continue, though historical seasonality may not be predictive of future results given the potential for changes in advertising buying patterns. These trends will affect our operating results and we expect our revenue to continue to fluctuate based on seasonal factors that affect the advertising industry as a whole.
Definitions of Financial and Performance Measures
Revenue
We generate revenue from advertisers through ads that we deliver across a variety of media partner properties. We charge advertisers for clicks on and, to a lesser extent, impressions of their ads, depending on how they choose to contract with us. We recognize revenue in the period in which the click or impression occurs.
The amount of revenue that we generate depends on the level of demand from advertisers to promote their content to users across our media partners’ properties. We generate higher revenue at times of high demand, which is also impacted by seasonal factors. For any given marketing campaign, the advertiser has the ability to adjust its price in real time and set a maximum daily spend. This allows advertisers to adjust the estimated ad spend attributable to the particular campaign. Due to the measurable performance that our advertisers achieve with us, a significant portion of our advertisers spend with us on an unlimited basis, as long as their ROAS objectives are met.
Our agreements with advertisers provide them with considerable flexibility to modify their overall budget, price (cost-per-click or cost-per-impression), and the ads they wish to deliver on our platform.
Traffic Acquisition Costs
We define traffic acquisition costs (“TAC”) as amounts owed to media partners for their share of the revenue we generated on their properties. We incur traffic acquisition costs in the period in which the revenue is recognized. Traffic acquisition costs are based on the media partners’ revenue share or, in some circumstances, based on a guaranteed minimum rate of payment from us in exchange for guaranteed placement of our ads on specified portions of the media partner’s digital properties. These guaranteed rates are typically provided per thousand qualified page views, whereas our minimum monthly payment to the media partner may fluctuate based on how many qualified page views the media partner generates, subject to a maximum guarantee. Traffic acquisition costs also include amounts payable to programmatic supply partners.
Other Cost of Revenue
Other cost of revenue consists of costs related to the management of our data centers, hosting fees, data connectivity costs and depreciation and amortization. Other cost of revenue also includes the amortization of capitalized software that is developed or obtained for internal use associated with our revenue-generating technologies.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses. The largest component of our operating expenses is personnel costs. Personnel costs consist of wages, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and, with respect to sales and marketing expenses, sales commissions.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses are related to the development and enhancement of our platform and consist primarily of personnel and the related overhead costs, amortization of capitalized software for non-revenue generating infrastructure and facilities costs.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and the related overhead costs for personnel engaged in marketing, advertising, client services, and promotional activities. These expenses also include advertising and promotional spend on media, conferences and other events to market our services, and facilities costs.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and the related overhead costs, professional fees, facilities costs, insurance, and certain taxes other than income taxes. General and administrative personnel costs include, among others, our executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal functions. Our professional service fees consist primarily of accounting, audit, tax, legal, information technology and other consulting costs, including our implementation of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requirements.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net is comprised of charges related to exchange of senior notes upon IPO, interest expense and interest income and other income (expense), net.
Charges related to exchange of senior notes upon IPO. Charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 include a one-time charge of $42.0 million related to accelerated amortization of the unamortized discount and deferred issuance costs on the $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior subordinated secured notes issued on July 1, 2021 and exchanged to Convertible Notes upon our IPO.
Interest Expense. Interest expense consists of interest expense on our 2.95% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”), our revolving credit facility and capital leases. Interest expense may increase if we incur borrowings periodically under our revolving credit facility or if we enter into new debt facilities or capital leasing arrangements.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), Net. Interest and other income (expense), net primarily consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and money market funds, as well as foreign currency exchange gains and losses. Foreign currency exchange gains and losses, both realized and unrealized, relate to transactions and monetary asset and liability balances denominated in currencies other than the functional currencies. Foreign currency gains and losses may continue to fluctuate in the future due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
(Benefit) provision for income taxes consists of federal and state income taxes in the United States (U.S.) and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions, as well as deferred income taxes and changes in valuation allowance, reflecting the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes.
Realization of our deferred tax assets depends on the generation of future taxable income. In considering the need for a valuation allowance, we consider our historical and future projected taxable income, as well as other objectively verifiable evidence, including our realization of tax attributes, assessment of tax credits and utilization of net operating loss carryforwards.
Results of Operations
We have one operating segment, which is also our reportable segment. The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
______________________
(1)Ex-TAC Gross Profit and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” in this Report for the definitions and limitations of these measures, and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP financial measures.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $248.5 million, or 32.4%, to $1,015.6 million in 2021 from $767.1 million in 2020. Revenue grew approximately 25.8%, or $198.5 million, from net revenue retention on existing media partners primarily due to increased monetization from higher demand on our platform and our growth in the click-through-rate, and approximately 7.0%, or $53.8 million, from new media partners. Revenue in 2021 also benefited from net favorable foreign currency effects of approximately $6.7 million.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Traffic acquisition costs increased $170.8 million, or 29.8%, to $743.6 million in 2021, compared to $572.8 million in the prior year period, including net unfavorable foreign currency effects of approximately $7.3 million. Traffic acquisition costs grew less than revenue due to favorable revenue mix from higher margin media partners and improved performance on media owners with guarantee arrangements. As a percentage of revenue, traffic acquisition costs decreased to 73.2% in 2021, from 74.7% in 2020.
Other cost of revenue increased $2.5 million, or 8.6%, to $31.8 million in 2021, compared to $29.3 million in the prior year period, primarily due to higher hosting fees due to increased revenue and increased depreciation expense on server equipment. As a percentage of revenue, other cost of revenue decreased 70 basis points to 3.1% in 2021 from 3.8% in 2020.
Gross profit increased $75.2 million, or 45.6%, to $240.3 million in 2021, compared to $165.1 million in 2020, which was primarily attributable to the increase in revenue, partially offset by the corresponding increase in cost of revenue, as previously described.
Ex-TAC Gross Profit
Our Ex-TAC Gross Profit increased $77.8 million, or 40.0%, to $272.1 million in 2021, from $194.3 million in 2020, including net unfavorable foreign currency effects of approximately $0.6 million. The increase in Ex-TAC Gross Profit was primarily driven by our revenue growth as well as favorable revenue mix from higher margin media partners and improved performance on media owners with guarantee arrangements. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for the related definition and reconciliations to our gross profit.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $50.8 million, or 32.8%, to $205.7 million in 2021, from $154.9 million in 2020. Operating expenses for 2021 included approximately $16.5 million of one-time incremental cumulative stock-based compensation expense for awards with a performance condition that was met upon the Company’s IPO, and regulatory matter costs of $6.4 million. Operating expenses for 2020 included terminated merger expenses of $11.2 million, offset in part by a $2.3 million reversal of a tax-contingency recorded in 2019. The remaining $36.8 million increase in operating expenses was primarily attributable to higher personnel-related costs of $25.0 million, primarily reflecting higher headcount and incentive-based compensation, as well as increased professional fees of $4.3 million and marketing costs of $3.8 million. Operating expenses included net unfavorable foreign currency effects of approximately $4.6 million.
The components of operating expenses are discussed below:
•Research and development expenses - increased $10.2 million, primarily attributable to increased personnel-related costs to invest in the growth of our platform, including $1.2 million of one-time incremental cumulative stock-based compensation expense related to awards with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO.
•Sales and marketing expenses - increased $18.2 million, primarily due to higher personnel-related costs of $14.3 million, including $4.2 million of one-time incremental cumulative stock-based compensation expense for awards with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO, as well as higher marketing costs of $3.6 million.
•General and administrative expenses - increased $22.4 million, largely due to higher personnel-related costs of $18.3 million, including $11.1 million of one-time incremental cumulative stock-based compensation expense for awards with a performance condition that was satisfied upon our IPO, and higher professional fees of $10.5 million, which included regulatory matter costs of $6.4 million in 2021. Operating expenses for 2020 included terminated merger expenses of $11.2 million, partially offset by a $2.3 million reversal of a tax-contingency recorded in 2019 with a corresponding charge to income tax expense in 2020.
Operating expenses as a percentage of revenue increased slightly to 20.3% in 2021 from 20.2% in 2020. We expect our operating expenses on an absolute basis, excluding one-time costs, to increase over the next twelve months due to higher personnel-related costs (including stock-based compensation) to support the growth of our business and the current and expected continued competitive labor market conditions, as well as due to an increase in other sales and marketing costs and increased expenses assuming a transition from a fully remote to a hybrid environment over the course of the year. In addition, our overall general and administrative expenses are expected to increase in future periods due to incremental costs associated with being a public company.
Total Other Expense, Net
Total other expense, net, increased to $49.1 million in 2021, compared to $2.5 million in 2020, primarily due to $42.0 million of one-time charges recorded in 2021 to recognize the unamortized discount and deferred issuance costs on senior subordinated secured notes issued on July 1, 2021, upon our IPO and convertible senior notes issuance (see Note 6 to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for additional information). The increase in total other expense, was also attributable to $3.1 million of interest expense on our convertible senior notes in 2021, as well as the absence of the $1.1 million gain on sale of an asset recorded in 2020.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
Benefit from income taxes was $25.5 million in 2021, compared to provision for income taxes of $3.3 million in 2020, primarily attributable to the release of the valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets in the U.S. Our effective tax rate was 175.6% in 2021, compared to 43.0% in 2020. Our 2021 effective tax rate was unfavorably impacted by the $31.8 million release of valuation allowance in the U.S. (See Note 11 to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for additional information.) Our 2020 effective tax rate was unfavorably impacted by approximately 16.5 percentage points due to certain non-recurring prior year taxes in a foreign tax jurisdiction.
Our future effective tax rate may be affected by the geographic mix of earnings in countries with different statutory rates. Additionally, our future effective tax rate may be affected by our ongoing assessment of the need for valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets or liabilities, or changes in tax laws, regulations, or accounting principles, as well as certain discrete items.
Net Income
As a result of the foregoing, net income increased $6.6 million, to $11.0 million in 2021, from $4.4 million in 2020. As previously discussed, net income for 2021 included a one-time tax benefit of $31.8 million due to a release of the valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets. Net income for 2021 also included charges of $42.0 million (pre-tax) to recognize the unamortized discount and deferred financing costs on our senior subordinated secured notes that were exchanged for convertible notes upon our IPO, as well as $16.5 million of one-time incremental cumulative stock-based compensation expense (pre-tax) for awards with an IPO performance condition.
Adjusted EBITDA
Our Adjusted EBITDA increased $47.7 million to $88.9 million in 2021 from $41.1 million in 2020, which was primarily attributable to the increase in Ex-TAC Gross Profit, partially offset by the corresponding increase in operating expenses as we continue to invest in our business. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for the related definitions and reconciliations to our net income.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenue
Revenue increased by $79.8 million, or 11.6%, to $767.1 million in 2020 from $687.3 million in 2019. Approximately 7%, or $52 million, of the increase in revenue was from new media partners and approximately 4%, or $27 million, was from net revenue retention on existing media partners as we continue to expand business with them. The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our revenue trends in the first half of 2020. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 benefited from net favorable foreign currency effects of $6.3 million.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Traffic acquisition costs increased $55.8 million, or 10.8%, in 2020 compared to 2019 including net unfavorable foreign currency effects of $5.3 million, and were generally commensurate with the increase in revenue. As a percentage of revenue, traffic acquisition costs decreased approximately 50 basis points to 74.7% in 2020, compared to 75.2% in 2019.
Other cost of revenue increased $0.7 million, or 2.6%, in 2020 compared to 2019, which was primarily attributable to an increase in services that fluctuate with the growth of ad traffic, largely offset by the favorable impact of cost savings initiatives and efficiency projects. As a percentage of revenue, other cost of revenue decreased 40 basis points to 3.8% in 2020, compared to 4.2% in 2019.
Gross profit increased $23.3 million, or 16.4%, to $165.1 million in 2020 compared to $141.8 million in 2019, which was primarily attributable to the increase in revenue, partially offset by the corresponding increase in cost of revenue, as previously described.
Ex-TAC Gross Profit
Our Ex-TAC Gross Profit increased 14.1% to $194.3 million in 2020, from $170.3 million in 2019, primarily due to revenue growth. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for the related definition and reconciliations to our gross profit.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses decreased by $1.5 million, or 0.9%, to $154.9 million in 2020 from $156.4 million in 2019. The decrease in operating expenses was mainly attributable to $6.5 million of reduced expenses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, including travel and entertainment, facilities, and marketing event expenses, as well as a favorable change of $4.2 million relating to a reversal of a tax-contingency recorded in 2019, as further discussed below. These declines were largely offset by an increase of approximately $9.0 million in personnel-related costs in 2020.
The components of operating expenses are discussed below:
•Research and development expenses-increased $2.6 million, primarily due to higher personnel costs, to invest in the growth of our platform.
•Sales and marketing expenses-decreased $1.4 million, primarily reflecting a decrease of $5.0 million due to reduced expenses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase of $3.4 million in personnel costs primarily related to higher incentive-based compensation.
•General and administrative expenses-decreased $2.7 million, which included a favorable change of $4.2 million relating to a reversal of a tax-contingency recorded in 2019 and a corresponding charge to income tax expense in 2020, as well as a $3.0 million reduction in expenses in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic and other travel and entertainment expenses. These decreases were partially offset by increased personnel costs of $3.6 million primarily attributable to increased incentive-based compensation costs and $0.6 million of increased acquisition-related costs.
Operating expenses as a percentage of revenue declined by 2.6%, from 22.8% in 2019 to 20.2% in 2020.
Total Other Expense, Net
Total other expense, net, increased $2.1 million, to $2.5 million in 2020 from $0.4 million in 2019, primarily due to higher foreign currency losses of $3.5 million resulting from transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currencies, partially offset by a $1.1 million gain on sale of an asset.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes decreased by $2.2 million to $3.3 million in 2020 from $5.5 million in 2019. This decrease was primarily attributable to the valuation allowance against one of our foreign subsidiaries’ net operating losses, which was recorded in 2019 and released in 2020 due to the increase in taxable income, as well as higher uncertain tax positions in 2019. Our effective tax rate was 43.0% in 2020, compared to (36.5)% in 2019 due to a loss from operations for that year. Our 2020 effective tax rate was unfavorably impacted by approximately 16.5 percentage points due to certain non-recurring prior year taxes in a foreign tax jurisdiction.
Net Income (Loss)
As a result of the foregoing, net income (loss) increased $24.9 million, to net income of $4.4 million in 2020, from a net loss of $20.5 million in 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA
Our Adjusted EBITDA increased $21.8 million, or 113%, to $41.1 million in 2020 from $19.3 million in 2019, which was primarily attributable to the increase in revenue, partially offset by the corresponding increase in cost of revenue, as previously described. See “Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for the related definitions and reconciliations to our net income.
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
We present Ex-TAC Gross Profit, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Ex-TAC Gross Profit, and Free Cash Flow because they are key profitability measures used by our management and the Board to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, develop short-term and long-term operational plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. Accordingly, we believe that these measures provide information to investors and the market in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and the Board.
These non-GAAP financial measures are defined and reconciled to the corresponding GAAP measures below. These non-GAAP financial measures are subject to significant limitations, including those identified below. In addition, other companies in our industry may define these measures differently, which may reduce their usefulness as comparative measures. As a result, this information, should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant as a substitute for revenue, gross profit, net income (loss) or net cash provided by operating activities presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Ex-TAC Gross Profit
Ex-TAC Gross Profit is a non-GAAP financial measure. Gross profit is the most comparable GAAP measure. In calculating Ex-TAC Gross Profit, we add back other cost of revenue to gross profit. Ex-TAC Gross Profit may fluctuate in the future due to various factors, including, but not limited to, seasonality and changes in the number of media partners and advertisers, advertiser demand or user engagements.
There are limitations on the use of Ex-TAC Gross Profit in that traffic acquisition cost is a significant component of our total cost of revenue but not the only component and, by definition, Ex-TAC Gross Profit presented for any period will be higher than gross profit for that period. A potential limitation of this non-GAAP financial measure is that other companies, including companies in our industry which have a similar business, may define Ex-TAC Gross Profit differently, which may make comparisons difficult. As a result, this information, should be considered as supplemental in nature and is not meant as a substitute for revenue or gross profit presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Ex-TAC Gross Profit to gross profit, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for the periods presented:
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before charges related to the exchange of senior notes upon IPO; interest expense; interest income and other income (expense), net; (benefit) provision for income taxes; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation, and other income or expenses that we do not consider indicative of our core operating performance, including, but not limited to, merger and acquisition costs, regulatory matter costs, and a tax contingency. We present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental performance measure because we believe it facilitates operating performance comparisons from period to period.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and the Board. However, Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and how we calculate Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily comparable to non-GAAP information of other companies. Adjusted EBITDA should be considered as a supplemental measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute or any measures of our financial performance that are calculated and reported in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for the periods presented:
_________________________
(1)Primarily includes costs related to our terminated merger with Taboola.com Ltd., costs related to our acquisition of vi in January 2022 and Ligatus in April 2019, and costs related to our initial public offering and SOX implementation.
(2)Reflects a reversal of a tax contingency recorded within operating expenses in 2019 and a corresponding charge to income tax expense in 2020, net of foreign exchange impact.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is defined as cash flow provided by operating activities less capital expenditures and capitalized software development costs. Free cash flow is a supplementary measure used by our management and the Board to evaluate our ability to generate cash and we believe it allows for a more complete analysis of our available cash flows.
The following table presents the reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, cash from our operations, cash generated from our IPO and from the offering of our Convertible Notes, as well as available capacity under our revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $455.4 million of cash and cash equivalents, of which $45.0 million was held outside of the United States by our non-U.S. subsidiaries. We currently do not have any plans to repatriate our earnings from our foreign subsidiaries. We intend to continue to reinvest our earnings from foreign operations for the foreseeable future, and do not anticipate that we will need funds generated from foreign operations to fund our domestic operations.
Our primary source of operating cash flows is cash receipts from advertisers. We primarily use our operating cash for payments due to media partners and vendors, as well as for personnel costs and other employee-related expenditures. We have historically experienced higher cash collections during our first quarter due to seasonally strong fourth quarter sales, and, as a result, our working capital needs typically decrease during this quarter. We expect these trends to continue as we continue to grow our business.
Our cash flow used in investing activities primarily consists of capital expenditures and capitalized software development costs. We spent $9.7 million in capital expenditures in 2021 and anticipate that our capital expenditures will be between $21 million and $24 million in 2022, including incremental leasehold improvements of approximately $5 million relating to headcount growth and adapting to post-Covid hybrid work environment. Capital expenditures for 2022 will also include expenditures for servers and related equipment and office equipment. However, actual amounts may vary from these estimates.
We believe that the net proceeds from the IPO and the offering of the Notes, together with our cash and cash equivalents and borrowings available to us, will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating expenses, capital expenditures, and interest payments on our long-term debt for at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future. In addition, we may use our available cash to make acquisitions or investments in complementary companies or technologies, such as our acquisition of vi in January 2022. We also expect to use cash from our operations to fund share repurchases under our $30 million share repurchase authorization announced in February 2022. However, there are multiple factors that could impact our future liquidity, including our ability to collect payments from our advertisers, having to pay our media partners even if our advertisers decrease their payments due to economic conditions, the continued impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors described under Item 1A “Risk Factors” included in this Report.
Convertible Notes
On July 1, 2021, we completed the sale of $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior subordinated secured notes due July 1, 2026 (the “Notes”), in a private placement to institutional investors affiliated with the funds managed by The Baupost Group, L.L.C. (the “Baupost Investors”), pursuant to a Senior Subordinated Secured Note Purchase Agreement dated July 1, 2021 (the “Note Purchase Agreement”). Upon issuance of the Notes, we recorded a $36.0 million discount in connection with embedded conversion feature, as well as deferred financing costs of $6.0 million in our consolidated balance sheet. The Notes, which were exchanged and cancelled upon the IPO, bore interest that accrued at the rate of (i) prior to July 1, 2024, 10.0% per annum and (ii) on and after July 1, 2024, 14.5% per annum, payable quarterly and were guaranteed by certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries and secured by a second priority lien on all of our and our subsidiaries’ tangible and intangible assets, subject to certain excluded assets, permitted liens and customary exceptions.
On July 27, 2021, in connection with the closing of our IPO and pursuant to the terms of the Note Purchase Agreement, we exchanged $200 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes due July 1, 2026 for $236.0 million aggregate principal amount of 2.95% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”), pursuant to an indenture, dated as of July 27, 2021 (the “Indenture”), between the Company and The Bank of New York Mellon, as trustee. Upon the issuance of such Convertible Notes, the Notes and our obligations and the guarantee thereunder have been canceled and extinguished. The Convertible Notes will mature on July 27, 2026, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased. In connection with the exchange of Notes to Convertible Notes, we recognized accelerated amortization of the unamortized discount and deferred issuance costs relating to the Notes totaling $42.0 million, which was recorded within charges related to exchange of senior notes upon IPO in our consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. Deferred financing costs related to Convertible Notes were not material.
Interest on the Convertible Notes accrues from July 27, 2021, and is payable semi-annually in arrears on January 27 and July 27 of each year, beginning on January 27, 2022, at a rate of 2.95% per year. The initial conversion rate for the Convertible Notes is 40 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of $25 per share of the Company’s common stock), subject to adjustment.
We may not redeem the Convertible Notes prior to July 27, 2024. On or after July 27, 2024, we may redeem for cash all or any portion of the Convertible Notes, at our option, if the last reported sale price of the common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. In addition, calling any Convertible Note for redemption will constitute a “make-whole fundamental change” (as defined in the Indenture) with respect to that Convertible Note, in which case the conversion rate applicable to the conversion of that Convertible Note will be increased if it is converted by holders after it is called for redemption.
Holders may convert all or any portion of their Convertible Notes, in multiples of $1,000 principal amount, into shares of our common stock at any time until the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, at the conversion rate then in effect. We will settle conversions of the Convertible Notes by paying or delivering, as the case may be, cash, shares of common stock, or a combination thereof, at our election.
Upon the occurrence of a fundamental change (as defined in the Indenture), subject to certain conditions, holders of the Convertible Notes may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their Convertible Notes in principal amounts of $1,000 or an integral multiple thereof, at a repurchase price of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the repurchase date. In addition, following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its Convertible Notes in connection with such a corporate event or convert its Convertible Notes called for redemption during the related redemption period, as the case may be.
The Indenture contains customary covenants and events of default.
Revolving Credit Facility
On November 2, 2021, we entered into the Second Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement with SVB (the “2021 Revolving Credit Facility”), which replaced our prior $35.0 million revolving credit facility that had matured. The 2021 Revolving Credit Facility provides, subject to borrowing availability and certain other conditions, for revolving loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $75.0 million (the “Facility”), with a $15.0 million sub-facility for letters of credit. Our borrowing availability under the Facility is calculated by reference to a borrowing base which is determined by specified percentages of eligible accounts receivable. The Facility will terminate on the earlier of (i) November 2, 2026 or (ii) 120 days prior to the maturity date of the Company’s 2.95% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026, unless the Convertible Notes have been converted to common equity securities of the Company.
Outstanding loans under the Facility accrue interest, at our option, at a rate equal to either (a) a base rate minus an applicable margin ranging from 1.5% to 1.0% per annum or (b) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 1.5% to 2.0% per annum, in each case based upon borrowing availability under the Facility. The undrawn portions of the commitments under the Facility are subject to a commitment fee at a rate ranging from 0.20% per annum to 0.30% per annum, based upon borrowing availability under the Facility.
The 2021 Revolving Credit Facility contains representations and warranties, including, without limitation, with respect to collateral; accounts receivable; financials; litigation, indictment and compliance with laws; disclosure and no material adverse effect, each of which is a condition to funding. Additionally, the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility includes events of default and customary affirmative and negative covenants applicable to us and our subsidiaries, including, without limitation, restrictions on liens, indebtedness, investments, fundamental changes, dispositions, restricted payments and prepayment of the Convertible Notes and of junior indebtedness. The 2021 Revolving Credit Facility contains a financial covenant that requires, in the event that credit extensions under the Facility equal or exceed 85% of the lesser of the available commitments under the Facility or upon the occurrence of an event of defaults, our Company to maintain a minimum consolidated monthly fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.00.
Our obligations and the obligations of the other subsidiary co-borrowers under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility are secured by a first-priority lien on substantially all our assets and the assets such other subsidiary co-borrowers.
We were in compliance with all of the financial covenants under the 2021 Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facilities. The available borrowing capacity under our 2021 Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021 was $75.0 million based on the defined borrowing formula. Deferred financing costs of $0.5 million were recorded within other assets on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the major components of net cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $3.8 million, to $56.8 million in 2021, as compared to $53.0 million in 2020, primarily driven by a $48.7 million increase in our net income after non-cash adjustments, largely offset by net use of cash related to working capital of $33.1 million, primarily due to the timing of payments, and increase in other assets of $9.2 million, due to higher prepayments to certain media owners in connection with long-term contracts.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased $36.3 million, to $53.0 million in 2020 from $16.7 million in 2019, primarily due to a $21.2 million increase in net income after non-cash adjustments. Net cash provided by operating activities also reflected a $14.9 million net increase related to favorable changes in working capital, primarily attributable to the growth in our business, particularly in the fourth quarter of 2020, and improved cash collections.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities increased $10.7 million, to $20.1 million in 2021 from $9.4 million in 2020, primarily due to higher capital expenditures of $8.2 million.
Cash used in investing activities increased $1.8 million, to $9.4 million in 2020 from $7.6 million in 2019, primarily due to lower cash flows related to our acquisition and disposal activities.
Financing Activities
Cash from financing activities increased $330.1 million to $325.9 million in 2021, largely due to net proceeds from common stock issuance upon our IPO of $145.1 million and net proceeds related to issuances of long-term debt of $193.3 million. These increases in cash from financing activities were partially offset by a $13.9 million increase in payments in connection with shares withheld to cover employee tax withholding obligations on vested stock-based compensation awards, primarily in connection with our IPO.
Cash used in financing activities increased by $0.5 million, to $4.2 million in 2020 from $3.7 million in 2019 reflecting lower proceeds from exercises of stock options and warrants and increased principal payments on capital lease obligations.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations are as follows:
___________________
(1)Operating lease agreements relate to leases for certain office facilities.
(2)Capital lease and other obligations relate to leases for certain servers and related equipment. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we made regular payments totaling $4.9 million on our capital lease obligations.
(3)Other commitments include data service contracts and other hosting agreements, network services, and other costs to maintain our platform.
(4)We are unable to reliably estimate the timing of future payments related to uncertain tax positions; therefore, we have excluded $3.3 million from the preceding table related to uncertain tax positions, including accrued interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021.
Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty and contracts that are variable based upon volume, such as contracts with media partners that guarantee a minimum rate of payment if the media partner reaches certain performance targets, are not included in the table above. See “Definitions of Financial and Performance Measures -Traffic Acquisition Costs.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the following policies may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in their application than most of our accounting policies and represent the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements. Readers are encouraged to consider this summary together with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes, including Note 1, for a more complete understanding of the critical accounting policies discussed below.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer control of promised services directly to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
We recognize revenue pursuant to the five-step framework contained in ASC 606: (i) identify the contract with a client; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue as we satisfy the performance obligations.
We generate revenue primarily from advertisers through user engagement with the ads that we place on media partners’ web pages and mobile applications. Our platform delivers ads to end-users that appear as links to articles, products and videos on media partners’ sites.
Our customers include brands, performance advertisers and other advertisers, which we collectively refer to as our advertisers, each of which contracts for use of our services primarily through insertion orders or through our self-service tools, allowing advertisers to establish budgets for their advertising campaigns. Advertising campaigns are primarily billed on a monthly basis. Our payment terms generally range from 30 to 60 days. Because the amount billed is representative of the value of the service delivered to advertisers, we recognize revenue as we satisfy our performance obligations based on the users’ clicks or ads displayed because the advertiser can direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the services simultaneously.
For advertising campaigns priced on a cost-per-click basis, we bill our advertisers and recognize revenue when a user clicks on an advertisement we deliver.
For campaigns priced on a cost-per-impression basis, we bill our advertisers and recognize revenue based on the number of times an advertisement is displayed to a user.
Variable consideration, including allowances, discounts, refunds, credits, incentives, or other price concessions, is estimated and recorded at the time that related revenue is recognized. Advance payments from advertisers for future services represent contract liabilities and are recorded as deferred revenue in our consolidated balance sheets.
The determination of whether revenue should be reported on a gross or net basis involves significant judgment. In general, we act as a principal on behalf of our advertisers and revenue is recognized gross of any costs that we remit to the media partners. In these cases, we determined that we control the advertising inventory before it is transferred to our advertisers. Our control is evidenced by our ability to monetize the advertising inventory before it is transferred to our advertisers. For those revenue arrangements where we do not control the advertising inventory before it is transferred to our advertisers, we are the agent and recognize revenue on a net basis. We recognize revenue net of applicable sales taxes.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation for stock-based awards, including stock options, warrants, restricted stock awards (“RSAs”), restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) based on the grant date fair value of the awards. Determining the appropriate fair value of stock-based awards requires numerous assumptions, some of which are highly complex and subjective.
Stock option awards, RSAs, RSUs and SARs generally vest subject to the satisfaction of service requirements, or the satisfaction of both service requirements and achievement of certain performance conditions. For stock awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of service requirements, stock-based compensation is measured based on the fair value of the award on the date of grant and is recognized as stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. For stock awards that have a performance component, stock-based compensation is measured based on the fair value on the grant date and is recognized over the requisite service period as achievement of the performance objective becomes probable.
We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of judgments and assumptions, including fair value of our common stock for periods prior to the completion of our IPO, the option’s expected term, the expected volatility of our common stock, risk free interest rates and the expected dividend yield. The fair value of our RSAs and RSUs is the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
There were no stock options granted in 2019. The following table summarizes the weighted-average assumptions used for the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The Black-Scholes model assumptions are further described below:
•Expected term. The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. For option grants that are considered to be “plain vanilla,” we determine the expected term using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the date of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximating the stock-based awards’ expected term.
•Expected Volatility. Because we have a short trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was derived from the average historical stock volatilities of several actively traded public companies within our industry that we consider to be comparable to our business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock-based awards.
•Dividend rate. The expected dividend rate was assumed to be zero as we have not paid and do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future.
•Fair value of our common stock. For stock options granted subsequent to our IPO, the fair value of common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock reported on NASDAQ Global Market stock exchange on the date of grant. Prior to our IPO, because there is was no public market for our common stock, our Board determined the fair value of the common stock by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including having valuations of our common stock performed by an unrelated valuation specialist, valuations of comparable peer companies, sales of our convertible preferred stock to unrelated third parties, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of our capital stock, and general and industry-specific economic outlook.
If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model change significantly, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the previously granted awards.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using an asset and liability approach, which requires recognition of deferred income tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce our deferred tax assets to the net amount that we believe is more likely than not to be realized.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions, we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We make adjustments to these reserves when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any reserves that we believe are appropriate, as well as the related interest and penalties.
Accounting for Convertible Instruments
On January 1, 2021, we early adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, “Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity,” which simplified the accounting for convertible debt instruments by reducing the number of accounting models used to allocate proceeds from five to three, removing certain conditions for equity classification and amending earnings per share calculations to assume share settlement and to require the if-converted method to be applied to all for convertible debt instruments. The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on our consolidated financial statements as of the date of adoption. We applied this guidance to its Convertible Notes issued in July 2021 and utilized the if-converted method to calculate the dilutive impact of Convertible Notes and our previously outstanding convertible preferred stock on our earnings per share.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements for recently issued accounting standards, which may have an impact on our financial statements upon adoption.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not currently engage in off-balance sheet financing arrangements. In addition, we do not have any interest in entities referred to as variable interest entities, which includes special purpose entities and other structured finance entities.
JOBS Act Transition Period
We are an emerging growth company as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company may take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards, delaying the adoption of some accounting standards until they would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act for the adoption of certain accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that have adopted new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.