Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related consolidated statements of operations, stockholders’ equity and cash flows for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related notes attached thereto. All statements contained herein that are not historical facts, including, but not limited to, statements regarding anticipated future capital requirements, our future development plans, our ability to obtain debt, equity or other financing, and our ability to generate cash from operations, are based on current expectations. The discussion of results, causes and trends should not be construed to imply any conclusion that such results or trends will necessarily continue in the future.
Business
We are a provider of patented multi-stream collaboration products and managed services for video collaboration and network solutions.
We believe there is a substantial market opportunity for Oblong Industries’ product offerings and services, and we are in the process of transforming our offerings to meet the evolving needs of our customers. As part of the transformation of our business, we are evolving certain aspects of our model by designing and developing software to include subscription-based offerings. Historically, our technology products and services have been developed and consumed in conventional commercial real estate spaces such as conference rooms. We have experienced decreases in our revenue primarily attributable to the effects of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our channel partners and customers as they evaluate how and when to re-open their commercial real estate footprints. As our core collaboration products evolve, we expect to add more contemporary software features along with expanded accessibility beyond commercial spaces through both hybrid and SaaS offerings delivered in the cloud. These initiatives will require significant investment in technology and product development and sales and marketing. We believe additional capital will be required to fund these investments and our operations. If we do not complete the transformation, or if we fail to manage the transformation successfully and in a timely manner, our revenue, business and operating results may be adversely affected.
Mezzanine™ Product Offerings
Our flagship product is called Mezzanine™, a family of turn-key products that enable dynamic and immersive visual collaboration across multi-users, multi-screens, multi-devices, and multi-locations (see further description of Mezzanine™ in Part I, Item 1). Mezzanine™ currently consists of hardware and software that function together to deliver the system’s essential functionality. We generate revenue from the shipment of Mezzanine™ products and also through maintenance agreements. Historically, customers have used Mezzanine™ products in conventional commercial real estate spaces such as conference rooms. We have experienced decreases in Mezzanine™ revenue in 2020 and 2021 primarily attributable to the effects of the global COVID-19 pandemic on our customers as they evaluate how and when to re-open their commercial real estate footprints. While pre-pandemic momentum suggested end-users were beginning to embrace simple, easy to install, intuitive, and affordable collaboration solutions that integrate with cloud-based collaboration software services, we believe as businesses begin to reopen there will be significant demand for higher forms of engagement that combines robust video conferencing with enhanced content sharing as users adapt to more flexible workplace alternatives. We believe there is a substantial market opportunity for our Mezzanine™ product offerings, and we are in the process of transforming our offerings to meet the evolving needs of our customers. We are currently designing and developing software offerings for our core collaboration products, with expanded accessibility beyond commercial spaces through both hybrid and software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) solutions delivered in the cloud. These initiatives will require significant investment in technology and product development and sales and marketing.
Managed Services
We provide a range of managed services for video collaboration, from automated to orchestrated, to simplify the user experience in an effort to drive adoption of video collaboration throughout our customers’ enterprise.
We also provide network solutions that ensure reliable, high-quality and secure traffic of video, data and internet. Network services are offered to our customers on a subscription basis. Our network services business carries variable costs associated with the purchasing and reselling of this connectivity.
See further description of our managed services in Part I, Item 1. Our managed services are offered to our customers on a subscription basis, and we generate revenue monthly as services are performed over the term of customer agreements. Our managed services business has experienced declines in revenue in recent years mainly due to loss of customers to competition.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 (“2021”) versus Year Ended December 31, 2020 (“2020”)
Segment Reporting
As discussed in Part I, Item 1 of this Report, Oblong, Inc. was formed as a Delaware corporation in May 2000. Prior to March 6, 2020, Oblong, Inc. was named Glowpoint, Inc. (“Glowpoint”). On October 1, 2019, the Company closed an acquisition of all of the outstanding equity interests of Oblong Industries, Inc., a privately held Delaware corporation founded in 2006 (“Oblong Industries”), pursuant to the terms of an Agreement and Plan of Merger (as amended, the “Merger Agreement”). Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, among other things, Oblong Industries became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Merger”). On March 6, 2020, Glowpoint changed its name to Oblong, Inc. Prior to the acquisition of Oblong Industries on October 1, 2019, the Company operated in one segment. Effective October 1, 2019, the former businesses of Glowpoint (now Oblong, Inc.) and Oblong Industries have been managed separately, and involve different products and services. Accordingly, the Company currently operates in two segments for purposes of segment reporting: (1) “Collaboration Products,” which represents the Oblong Industries business surrounding our Mezzanine™ product offerings and (2) “Managed Services,” which represents the Oblong (formerly Glowpoint) business surrounding managed services for video collaboration and network solutions.
Certain information concerning the Company’s segments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, is presented in the following table (in thousands):
Unallocated operating expenses include costs that are not specific to a particular segment but are general to the group; included are expenses incurred for administrative and accounting staff, general liability and other insurance, professional fees and other similar corporate expenses.
Revenue. Total revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes the changes in components of our revenue, and the significant changes in revenue are discussed in more detail below.
Managed Services
•The year over year decrease in revenue for managed services for video collaboration services is mainly attributable to lower revenue from existing customers (either from reductions in price or level of services) and loss of customers to competition.
•The year over year decrease in revenue for network services is mainly attributable to net attrition of customers and lower demand for our services given the competitive environment and pressure on pricing that exists in the network services business.
•The year over year decrease in revenue for professional and other services is mainly attributable to lower resale of video equipment.
Collaboration Products
•The year over year decrease in revenue for visual collaboration product offerings is primarily attributable to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our existing and target customers as they evaluate how and when to re-open their commercial real estate footprints, as Mezzanine™ products are currently used in conventional commercial real estate spaces such as conference rooms. The Company’s results reflect the challenges due to long and unpredictable sales cycles, delays in customer retrofit budgets, project starts, and supply delayed orders in our distribution channels as a direct result of customer implementation schedules shifting due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic in particular has, and may continue to have, a significant economic and business impact on our Company. During 2021 and 2020, we saw a weakness in revenue as our customers across all sectors delayed order placements in reaction to the ongoing impacts of the pandemic that caused our customers to suspend or postpone real estate retrofit projects due to budget and occupancy uncertainties. We continue to monitor the impact of the pandemic on our customers, suppliers and logistics providers, and evaluate governmental actions being taken to curtail and respond to the spread of the virus. The significance and duration of the ongoing impact on us is still uncertain. Material adverse effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on market drivers, our customers, suppliers or logistics providers could significantly impact our operating results. We will continue to actively follow, assess and analyze the ongoing impact of the pandemic and adjust our organizational structure, strategies, plans and processes to respond. Because the situation continues to evolve, we cannot reasonably estimate the ultimate impact to our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position that the pandemic may have. Continuation of the pandemic and government actions in response thereto could cause further disruptions to our operations and the operations of our customers, suppliers and logistics partners and could significantly adversely affect our near-term and long-term revenues, earnings, liquidity and cash flows.
•The year over year decrease in revenue for professional services is primarily attributable to a former customer terminating services effective April 30, 2020 due to COVID-19. Our professional services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to this customer. We did not generate revenue from professional services in 2021 and we do not expect to in the future.
•The year over year decrease in revenue for licensing is primarily attributable to a former customer terminating the licensing of our technology effective December, 31 2020. Our licensing revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to this customer. We do not expect to generate material revenue from licensing in the future.
Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization). Cost of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, includes all internal and external costs related to the delivery of revenue. Cost of revenue also includes the cost for taxes that have been billed to customers.
The year over year decrease in cost of revenue is mainly attributable to lower costs associated with the decrease in revenue during the same period, and the Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”) of $192,000 which reduced labor costs in cost of revenue for 2021. The Company’s total gross profit, as a percentage of revenue, declined in 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease in gross profit for Managed Services was primarily due to the decline in video collaboration services revenue while maintaining certain levels of personnel and other fixed costs to deliver revenue. For Collaboration Products, the decrease in gross profit was primarily due to the decline in licensing revenue from 2020 to 2021.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses include internal and external costs related to developing features and enhancements to our existing product offerings. The year over year decrease in research and development expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily attributable to a reduction in headcount, and the ERC of $271,000 attributable to research and development labor for the year ended 2021, partially offset by a increase in stock-based compensation of $33,000.
Sales and Marketing. The year over year decrease in sales and marketing expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily attributable to a reduction in headcount, a reduction in lease expense as we closed several office locations during the years ended 2020 and 2021, the ERC of $150,000 attributable to sales and marketing labor for 2021, and a reduction of stock-based compensation.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses include direct corporate expenses related to costs of personnel in the various corporate support categories, including executive, legal, finance and accounting, human resources and information technology. The year over year decrease in general and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 is mainly attributable to a reduction in headcount and the ERC of $261,000 attributable to general and administrative labor for 2021, partially offset by a increase of $851,000 in stock-based compensation and stock-based expense for services.
Impairment Charges. The impairment charges for 2021 are attributable to impairment charges on property, equipment, and intangible assets no longer in service, and the impairment charges during the year ended 2020 are attributable to property and equipment no longer in service, and goodwill related to the Managed Services segment. Future declines of our revenue, cash flows and/or stock price may give rise to a triggering event that may require the Company to record impairment charges in the future related to our goodwill, intangible assets and other long-lived assets.
Depreciation and Amortization. The year over year decrease in depreciation and amortization expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 is mainly attributable to the disposition and impairment of certain assets during 2020 and 2021 as well as a decrease in depreciation as certain assets became fully depreciated.
Loss from Operations. The year over year increase in the Company’s loss from operations is mainly attributable to lower revenue and gross profit, partially offset by lower operating expenses as addressed above.
Interest and Other Income, Net. Interest and other income, net in 2021 was primarily comprised of (i) other income resulting from the settlement of an office lease, and (ii) a gain on extinguishment of debt resulting from the forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program loan (the “PPP Loan”). Interest and other income, net in 2020 was comprised of a gain on extinguishment of debt related to the satisfaction of the Silicon Valley Bank loan (the “SVB Loan”), partially offset by interest expense on the Company’s former debt obligations.
Income Tax Benefit/Expense. We recorded an income tax benefit of $90,000 in 2021 and income tax expense of $103,000 in 2020 (see Note 17 - Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $9,000,000 of cash, consisting of $8,939,000 in available cash and $61,000 in restricted cash, and $10,258,000 of working capital. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses of $9,051,000 and $7,421,000, respectively, and net cash used in operating activities was $7,732,000 and $6,566,000, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities for 2021 and 2020 was $49,000 and $31,000, respectively, and primarily related to purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 was $11,504,000, attributable to net proceeds from an equity financing. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 was $7,272,000, primarily attributable to net proceeds of $7,371,000 from two equity financings and $2,417,000 of proceeds from the PPP Loan, partially offset by the satisfaction payment of $2,500,000 on the SVB Loan.
Future Capital Requirements and Going Concern
Our capital requirements in the future will continue to depend on numerous factors, including the timing and amount of revenue, customer renewal rates and the timing of collection of outstanding accounts receivable, in each case particularly as it relates to our major customers, the expense to deliver services, expense for sales and marketing, expense for research and development, capital expenditures, and the cost involved in protecting intellectual property rights. We expect to continue to invest in product development and sales and marketing expenses with the goal of growing the Company’s revenue in the future. The Company believes that, based on our current projection of revenue, expenses, capital expenditures, and cash flows, it will not have sufficient resources to fund its operations for the next twelve months following the filing of this Report. We believe additional capital will be required to fund operations and provide growth capital including investments in technology, product development and sales and marketing. To access capital to fund operations or provide growth capital, we will need to raise capital in one or more debt and/or equity offerings. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising necessary capital or that any such offering will be on terms acceptable to the Company. If we are unable to raise additional capital that may be needed on terms acceptable to us, it could have a material adverse effect on the Company. The factors discussed above raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from these uncertainties.
See Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for discussion regarding certain additional factors that could impact the Company’s liquidity in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 - Business Description and Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements attached hereto. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company accounts for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606.
The Company recognizes revenue using the five-step model as prescribed by Topic 606:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•Identification of the distinct performance obligations in the contract;
•Determination of the transaction price;
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•Recognition of revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company’s managed videoconferencing services are offered to our customers on either a usage basis or on a subscription. Our network services are offered to our customers on a subscription basis. Revenue for these services is generally recognized on a monthly basis as services are performed. Revenue related to professional services is recognized at the time the services are performed. The costs associated with obtaining a customer contract were previously expensed in the period they were incurred. Under Topic 606, these payments are deferred on our consolidated balance sheet and amortized over the expected life of the customer contract. Deferred revenue as of December 31, 2021 totaled $8,000 as certain performance obligations were not satisfied as of this date. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $24,000 of revenue that was included in deferred revenue as of December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $21,000 of revenue that was included in deferred revenue as of December 31, 2019.
The Company’s visual collaboration products are composed of hardware and embedded software sold as a complete package, and generally include installation and maintenance services. Revenue for hardware and software is recognized upon shipment to the customer. Installation revenue is recognized upon completion of installation, which also triggers the beginning of recognition of revenue for maintenance services which range from one to three years. Revenue is recognized over time for maintenance services. Professional services are contracts with specific customers for software development, visual design, interaction design, engineering, and project support. These contracts vary in length, and revenue is recognized over time as
services are rendered. Licensing agreements are for the Company’s core technology platform, g-speak, and are generally one year in length. Revenue for these services is recognized ratably over the service period. Deferred revenue, as of December 31, 2021, totaled $1,156,000 as certain performance obligations were not satisfied as of this date. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $1,193,000 of revenue that was included in deferred revenue as of December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded $978,000 of revenue that was included in deferred revenue as of December 31, 2019.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets, Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company assesses the impairment of long-lived assets used in operations, primarily fixed assets and purchased intangible assets subject to amortization when events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets might not be recoverable. For purposes of evaluating the recoverability of fixed assets and amortizing intangible assets, the undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are compared to the carrying amounts of those assets. If and when the carrying values of the assets exceed the undiscounted cash flows, then the related assets will be written down to fair value.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded asset impairment charges on property and equipment of $98,000 and $144,000, respectively, which pertained primarily to assets no longer used in the business. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company disposed of fixed assets of $1,092,000 and the corresponding accumulated depreciation of $993,000, partially offset by proceeds on sale of $1,000, which resulted in a loss on disposal of $98,000. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company disposed of fixed assets of $3,438,000 and the corresponding accumulated depreciation of $3,287,000, partially offset by proceeds on sale of $7,000, which resulted in a loss on disposal of $144,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded aggregate impairment charges of $465,000 on two right-of-use assets. See Note 9 - Operating Leases and Right-of-Use Assets for further discussion. There were no right-of-use asset impairments for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized but is subject to periodic testing for impairment in accordance with ASC Topic 350 “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment” (“ASC Topic 350”). As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, goodwill was $7,367,000. This goodwill was recorded in connection with the October 1, 2019 acquisition of Oblong Industries.
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis on September 30th of each year or more frequently if events occur or circumstances change indicating that the fair value of the goodwill may be below its carrying amount. The Company operates two reporting segments, Managed Services and Collaboration Products. To determine the fair value of each reporting unit for the goodwill impairment tests, we used a weighted average of the discounted cash flow method and a market-based method.
For the Managed Services reporting unit, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $541,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, as the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeded its fair value on the applicable test dates. These charges are recognized as “Impairment Charges” on our Consolidated Statements of Operations, and this segment no longer has any goodwill included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2020.
For the Collaboration Products reporting unit, the fair value of this reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount on our annual testing dates and as of December 31, 2021, therefore no impairment charges were required during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. During the three months ended December 31, 2021, we considered the decline in our stock price to be a triggering event for an interim goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2021. The fair value of this reporting unit was in excess of its carrying value by approximately 20% as of December 31, 2021. In the event we experience future declines in our revenue, cash flows and/or stock price, this may give rise to a triggering event that may require the Company to record additional impairment charges on goodwill in the future.
Intangible Assets. Intangible assets totaled $7,562,000 and $10,140,000 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company assesses the impairment of purchased intangible assets subject to amortization when events and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets might not be recoverable. The determination of related estimated useful lives and whether or not these assets are impaired involves significant judgments, related primarily to the future profitability and/or future value of the assets. Changes in the Company’s strategic plan and/or other-than-temporary changes in market conditions could significantly impact these judgments and could require adjustments to recorded asset balances. Long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment whenever an event or change in circumstances has occurred that could have a significant adverse effect on the fair value of long-lived assets. The Company performed evaluations of intangible assets as of each quarter end during 2020 and 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an impairment of $207,000 on purchased intangible assets. See Note 7 - Intangible Assets for further discussion. There were no impairments to purchased intangible assets for the
year ended December 31, 2020. Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated economic lives of the assets, which range from five to twelve years in accordance with ASC Topic 350 “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Testing Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment.”
Leases
The Company primarily leases facilities for office, warehouse, and data center space under non-cancellable operating leases for its U.S. and international locations, and accounts for these leases in accordance with ASC-842. Operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Since our lease arrangements do not provide an implicit rate, we use our estimated incremental borrowing rate for the expected remaining lease term at commencement date in determining the present value of future lease payments. Operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.Variable lease payments are not included in the lease payments to measure the lease liability and are expensed as incurred. The Company’s leases have remaining terms of one to three years and some of the leases include a Company option to extend the lease term for less than twelve months to five years, or more, which if reasonably certain to exercise, the Company includes in the determination of lease payments. The lease agreements do not contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants.
Leases with an initial term of 12 months or less are not recognized on the balance sheet and the expense for these short-term leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Common area maintenance fees (or CAMs) and other charges related to leases are expensed as incurred. See Note 9 - Operating Leases and Right-of-Use Assets for further discussion of the Company’s lease activities.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the sections titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently adopted accounting pronouncements” and “Recent accounting pronouncements not yet adopted” in Note 1 - Business Description and Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.