Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on July 28, 2020 for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on January 14, 2021. On January 20, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 14,950,000 units (including 1,950,000 units issued to the underwriters pursuant to the exercise in full of the over-allotment option granted to the underwriters) at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $149.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.8 million, inclusive of $5.2 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,057,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7.1 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and sale of the private placement warrants on January 20, 2021, $151.7 million ($10.15 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sales of the units in the initial public offering and the private placement warrants were placed in the trust account. The trust account is located in the United States with Continental acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act., having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
If we have not completed an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $4,587,621 which included a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,549,843 and interest earned on trust account of $32,632, offset by loss from operations of approximately $2,556,567 and offering cost expense allocated to warrants of approximately $438,287.
For the period from July 28, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,272, which consisted of formation and operating costs.
Our business activities from inception to December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our formation and completing our initial public offering, and since the offering, our activity has been limited to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition targets for an initial business combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $194,034 in our operating bank account and working capital deficit of $1,251,072.
The Company’s liquidity needs up to February 26, 2021 had been satisfied through a capital contribution from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor for $145,000. The outstanding balance on the promissory note from the sponsor was paid in full from the initial public offering proceeds on February 26, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the sale of the private placement warrants not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans.
On December 14, 2021, we issued the 2021 Note in the principal amount of up to $1,500,000 to our sponsor. The 2021 Note was issued in connection with advances the Sponsor has made, and may make in the future, to the Company for working capital expenses. If we complete a business combination, we will repay the 2021 Note out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the 2021 Note will be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay the 2021 Note but no proceeds from the trust account will be used to repay the 2021 Note. At the election of the sponsor, all or a portion of the unpaid principal amount of the 2021 Note may be converted into warrants of the Company at a price of $1.00 per warrant (the “Conversion Warrants”). The Conversion Warrants and their underlying securities are entitled to the registration rights set forth in the 2021 Note. As of December 31, 2021, there was $1,000,000 outstanding under the 2021 Note.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds held outside of the trust account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than deferred underwriting fees of $5,232,500, $1,000,000 outstanding under the 2021 Note and $117,223 of amounts due to our Sponsor at December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Except as set forth below, there have been no significant changes in our critical accounting policies as discussed in the final prospectus filed by us with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
Warrants Liability
We evaluated the warrants in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815-40”) and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement, dated January 14, 2021, by and between the Company and Continental, as warrant agent, related to certain tender or exchange offers as well as provisions that provided for potential changes to the settlement amounts dependent upon the characteristics of the holder of the warrant, precludes the warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the warrants meet the definition of a “derivative” as contemplated in ASC 815-40 and are not eligible for an exception from derivative accounting, the warrants are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheets in the accompanying financial statements and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the initial public offering) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statements of Operations in the accompanying financial statements in the period of change.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 14,950,000 shares of Class A commons stock sold as part of the units in the initial public offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC Topic 480-10-S99, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, all shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheets, respectively.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Common Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. The Company has two classes of shares, Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 14,532,500 of the Company’s Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net loss per common share is the same as basic net income (loss) per common share for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company follows the guidance in ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” for its financial assets and liabilities that are re-measured and reported at fair value at each reporting period, and non-financial assets and liabilities that are re-measured and reported at fair value at least annually.
The fair value of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities reflects management’s estimate of amounts that the Company would have received in connection with the sale of the assets or paid in connection with the transfer of the liabilities in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In connection with measuring the fair value of its assets and liabilities, the Company seeks to maximize the use of observable inputs (market data obtained from independent sources) and to minimize the use of unobservable inputs (internal assumptions about how market participants would price assets and liabilities). The following fair value hierarchy is used to classify assets and liabilities based on the observable inputs and unobservable inputs used in order to value the assets and liabilities:
Level 1 - Valuations based on unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Company has the ability to access. Valuation adjustments and block discounts are not being applied. Since valuations are based on quoted prices that are readily and regularly available in an active market, valuation of these securities does not entail a significant degree of judgment.
Level 2 - Valuations based on (i) quoted prices in active markets for similar assets and liabilities, (ii) quoted prices in markets that are not active for identical or similar assets, (iii) inputs other than quoted prices for the assets or liabilities, or (iv) inputs that are derived principally from or corroborated by market through correlation or other means.
Level 3 - Valuations based on inputs that are unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update Topic 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470- 20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current USGAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.