Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, include forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. These statements are based on our beliefs and expectations about future outcomes and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results to differ materially from anticipated results. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to publicly update these forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. You should read the “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing gene therapies to cure blindness diseases and developing a vaccine to save lives from COVID-19.
Our cutting-edge technology pipeline includes:
•COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate - COVAXIN is a whole-virion inactivated COVID-19 vaccine candidate being developed to prevent COVID-19 infection in humans. We are co-developing COVAXIN with Bharat Biotech International Limited (“Bharat Biotech”) for the U.S. and Canadian markets.
•Modifier Gene Therapy Platform - Based on nuclear hormone receptors ("NHRs"), we believe our modifier gene therapy platform has the potential to address many retinal diseases, including retinitis pigmentosa ("RP"), Leber congenital amaurosis ("LCA"), and dry age-related macular degeneration ("AMD").
•Novel Biologic Therapy for Retinal Diseases - We are developing OCU200, a novel biologic product candidate, to treat diabetic macular edema ("DME"), diabetic retinopathy ("DR"), and wet AMD.
COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate
In February 2021, we entered into a Co-Development, Supply and Commercialization Agreement with Bharat Biotech, pursuant to which we obtained an exclusive right and license under certain of Bharat Biotech’s intellectual property rights, with the right to grant sublicenses, to develop, manufacture, and commercialize COVAXIN for the prevention of COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 in the United States, its territories, and possessions. In June 2021, we entered into an amendment to the Co-Development, Supply and Commercialization Agreement (as so amended, the "Covaxin Agreement") pursuant to which we and Bharat Biotech agreed to expand our rights to develop, manufacture, and commercialize COVAXIN to include Canada in addition to the United States, its territories, and possessions (the "Ocugen Covaxin Territory").
COVAXIN is formulated with the inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virus, an antigen, and an adjuvant. COVAXIN requires a two-dose vaccination regimen given 28 days apart and is stored in standard vaccine storage conditions (2-8°C). COVAXIN has been authorized or approved in more than a dozen countries and was granted an Emergency Use Listing by the World Health Organization in November 2021. Over 295 million doses globally have been administered to date.
The Phase 3 clinical trial conducted by Bharat Biotech in India in 25,798 adults, who were healthy or had stable chronic medical conditions ages 18 years and older, reported an overall estimated vaccine efficacy of COVAXIN against COVID-19 infection of 77.8%, with efficacy against severe COVID-19 infection of 93.4%, and efficacy against asymptomatic COVID-19 infection of 63.6%. Approximately 30% of participants were seropositive at baseline in each dosing group and were excluded from the per protocol analysis but contributed to the safety dataset. COVAXIN was generally well tolerated, with no clinically or statistically significant differences in reported adverse events in the vaccine and placebo groups. Additionally, a Phase 2/3 immuno-bridging clinical trial was conducted by Bharat Biotech in India to assess the protective immunity of COVAXIN in children ages two to 18 years. The results demonstrated a robust neutralizing antibody response comparable to that of the adults studied in the Phase 3 clinical trial, and that COVAXIN was generally well tolerated. This study demonstrated a favorable safety profile, including no hospitalizations, myocarditis, or vaccine-induced thrombotic thrombocytopenia. Additionally, data from the clinical trials and from research conducted by third parties has shown that COVAXIN has neutralizing potential against multiple variants of concern including both the Omicron (B.1.1.529) and Delta (B.1.617.2) variants.
In June 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the "FDA") provided feedback to us regarding the data and information contained in a "Master File" that we previously submitted to the FDA and recommended that we pursue a Biologics License Application ("BLA") submission instead of the Emergency Use Authorization ("EUA") application for COVAXIN for adults ages 18 years and older in the United States. As part of the feedback provided, the FDA requested additional information and data. In October 2021, we submitted an Investigational New Drug ("IND") application to the FDA to initiate a Phase 2/3 immuno-bridging and broadening clinical trial evaluating COVAXIN for ages 18 years and older. The clinical trial is designed to evaluate whether the immune response experienced in participants in the aforementioned completed Phase 3 clinical trial in India is similar to a demographically representative, adult population in the United States. In November 2021, we were notified that the FDA issued a clinical hold on our IND application. In December 2021, the FDA sent us a letter setting forth the reasons for the clinical hold and specific guidance on steps that must be taken to have the clinical hold lifted. We provided the FDA responses to their comments and the FDA lifted its clinical hold in February 2022. We plan to initiate the Phase 2/3 immuno-bridging and broadening clinical trial for COVAXIN as soon as we are able to. We also plan to initiate a safety-bridging clinical trial in the first half of 2022, subject to discussions with the FDA. Subject to the foregoing, we anticipate submitting a BLA with the FDA near the end of 2022. In November 2021, we also submitted a request to the FDA for EUA for COVAXIN for pediatric use in ages two to 18 years in the United States. The EUA submission was based on the results of the aforementioned Phase 2/3 immuno-bridging pediatric clinical trial conducted by Bharat Biotech in India. Our EUA submission is currently under review by the FDA. In February 2022, Delta and Omicron neutralization results along with a safety database of more than 36 million teenagers who had been vaccinated with COVAXIN were submitted to the FDA to support our EUA submission.
We are also pursuing approval for COVAXIN in Canada. In July 2021, we completed our rolling submission to Health Canada for COVAXIN. The rolling submission process, which permits companies to submit safety and efficacy data and information as they become available, was recommended and accepted under the Minister of Health’s Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in Relation to COVID-19 and transitioned to a New Drug Submission ("NDS") for COVID-19. The submission was conducted through our Canadian subsidiary, Vaccigen Ltd. We are in discussions with Health Canada regarding our NDS submission for COVAXIN. In December 2021, we were provided with a Notice of Deficiency ("NOD") from Health Canada regarding our NDS submission. Health Canada requested further analyses of the COVAXIN preclinical and clinical data, as well as additional information regarding chemistry, manufacturing, and controls ("CMC"). We have responded to and provided proposed resolutions for the deficiencies included in the NOD. Our responses are currently under review by Health Canada.
We are evaluating our commercialization strategy for COVAXIN in the United States and Canada, if authorized or approved in either jurisdiction. In June 2021, we selected Jubilant HollisterStier as our manufacturing partner for COVAXIN to prepare for the potential commercial manufacturing for the Ocugen Covaxin Territory. We expect to enter into a master services agreement with Jubilant HollisterStier for the commercial manufacture of COVAXIN. The technology transfer process from Bharat Biotech to Jubilant HollisterStier for drug product manufacturing has been initiated. We expect to complete qualification manufacturing runs at Jubilant HollisterStier by mid-2022.
In September 2021, we entered into a Development and Commercial Supply Agreement with Bharat Biotech, pursuant to which Bharat Biotech will supply us with clinical trial materials and commercial supplies of COVAXIN finished drug product prior to the completion of a technology transfer. Following the completion of a technology transfer, Bharat Biotech will supply COVAXIN drug product components and continue to supply finished drug product as necessary for the commercial manufacture and supply of COVAXIN subsequent to a regulatory authorization or approval.
Modifier Gene Therapy Platform
We are developing a modifier gene therapy platform designed to fulfill unmet medical needs in the area of retinal diseases, including inherited retinal diseases ("IRDs"), such as RP and LCA, and dry AMD. Our modifier gene therapy platform is based on NHRs, which have the potential to restore homeostasis, the basic biological processes in the retina. Unlike single-gene replacement therapies, which only target one genetic mutation, we believe that our modifier gene therapy platform, through its use of NHRs, represents a novel approach that has the potential to address multiple retinal diseases caused by mutations in multiple genes with one product; and potentially address complex diseases, such as dry AMD, that are potentially caused by imbalances in multiple gene networks.
IRDs, such as RP and LCA, can lead to visual impairment and blindness and affect over two million people worldwide. RP and LCA are rooted in mutations of more than 175 different genes. We believe that OCU400, our first product candidate being developed with our modifier gene therapy platform, has the potential to be broadly effective in restoring retinal integrity and function across a range of IRDs, including RP and LCA. For example, we believe OCU400 has the potential to eliminate the need for developing more than 175 individual products and provide one treatment option for all RP and LCA patients. OCU400 has received four Orphan Drug Designations from the FDA for the treatment of certain disease genotypes: nuclear receptor
subfamily 2 group E member 3 ("NR2E3"), centrosomal protein 290 ("CEP290"), rhodopsin ("RHO"), and phosphodiesterase 6B ("PDE6ß") mutation-associated inherited retinal degenerations. In November 2021, we submitted an IND application to the FDA for OCU400 for the treatment of the NR2E3 and RHO disease genotypes. Our IND application was accepted by the FDA in December 2021. We have initiated a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in the United States for the treatment of these disease genotypes and the first patient is expected to be dosed in the first half of 2022. This Phase 1/2 clinical trial is a multicenter, open-label, dose ranging study to assess the safety of unilateral subretinal administration of OCU400 in subjects with NR2E3-related RP. OCU400 has additionally received Orphan Medicinal Product Designation from the European Commission, based on the recommendation of the European Medicines Agency, for RP and LCA. We believe OCU400 has the potential for broad-spectrum application to treat many IRDs. We are currently evaluating options to initiate OCU400 clinical trials in Europe.
Our second gene therapy candidate, OCU410, is being developed to utilize the nuclear receptor genes RAR-related orphan receptor A ("RORA") for the treatment of dry AMD. We are currently executing pre-IND studies consistent with FDA discussions to support a Phase 1/2 clinical trial. We have engaged CanSino Biologics, Inc. to manufacture clinical supplies and be responsible for the CMC development for OCU400 and OCU410.
Novel Biologic Therapy for Retinal Diseases
Our pipeline also includes our biologic product candidate, OCU200, a novel fusion protein designed to treat severely sight-threatening diseases such as DME, DR, and wet AMD. We are currently establishing a current Good Manufacturing Practice process for the production of clinical trial materials and executing pre-IND studies consistent with FDA discussions to support a Phase 1/2a clinical trial. We have completed the technology transfer of manufacturing processes to our contract development and manufacturing organization that will manufacture OCU200 clinical supplies.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic had an impact on our operations during 2021. For example, during the first half of 2021, India experienced a surge in COVID-19 infections, which created significant uncertainty as to the timing of completion for Bharat Biotech’s Phase 3 clinical trial, due in part to the diversion of medical resources and supplies of COVAXIN in India. During this time, we experienced delays in our receipt of certain additional data from Bharat Biotech’s Phase 3 clinical trial, which created uncertainty regarding our ability to timely submit required documentation to the FDA for COVAXIN. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted many of the companies within our supply chain and other third parties upon which we rely to conduct our business.
The COVID-19 pandemic is continually evolving and we are closely monitoring the situation. Impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic remain highly uncertain and subject to change and, as such, we cannot predict the specific duration or impact that the COVID-19 pandemic may have on our operations going forward, including our preclinical activities, future clinical trials, and potential commercialization. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our operations is dependent on future developments, including but not limited to: (i) the duration of the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, including the spread of variants, (ii) the future actions taken by governmental authorities and regulators with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic, and (iii) the impact on our partners, collaborators, and suppliers. We will continue to monitor the situation closely as these effects could have a material impact on our operations.
Financial Operations Overview
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated significant revenue to date. We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. We incurred net losses of approximately $58.4 million, $21.8 million, and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $131.7 million and a cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash balance of $95.1 million. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
Segment Information
As of December 31, 2021, we viewed our operations and managed our business as one operating segment consistent with how our chief operating decision-maker, our Chief Executive Officer, makes decisions regarding resource allocation and assessing performance. As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of our assets were located in the United States. Our headquarters and operations are located in Malvern, Pennsylvania.
Research and development expense
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. These costs consist of internal and external expenses, as well as depreciation expense on assets used within our research and development activities. Internal expenses include the cost of salaries, benefits, severance, and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our research and development functions, as well as allocated rent and utilities expenses. External expenses include development, clinical trials, patent costs, and regulatory compliance costs incurred with research organizations, contract manufacturers, and other third-party vendors. License fees paid to acquire access to proprietary technology are expensed to research and development, unless it is determined that the technology is expected to have an alternative future use. All patent-related costs incurred in connection with filing and prosecuting patent applications are expensed as incurred to research and development expense due to the uncertainty about the recovery of the expenditure. We record costs for certain development activities, such as preclinical studies and clinical trials, based on our evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expense, as applicable. Our recording of costs for certain development activities requires us to use estimates. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the current conditions; however, actual results may differ from these estimates.
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We plan to incur research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we expect to continue the development of our product candidates. We anticipate that our research and development expenses will be higher in fiscal year 2022 and subsequent periods as compared to the prior periods presented herein as we prepare for the commercialization of COVAXIN in the United States and Canada, if authorized or approved, as well as conduct preclinical and clinical activities with respect to our product candidates.
Our research and development expenses are not currently tracked on a program-by-program basis for indirect and overhead costs. We use our personnel and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs directed toward identifying, developing, and commercializing product candidates.
At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical developments as well as regulatory approval (or authorization) and commercialization, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur and the timelines we will require in our continued development and commercialization efforts. As a result of these uncertainties, successful development and completion of clinical trials as well as regulatory authorization or approval and commercialization are uncertain and may not result in authorized or approved and commercialized products. Completion dates and completion costs can vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. We will continue to make determinations as to which product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to our ability to enter into collaborations with respect to each product candidate, the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate as well as ongoing assessments as to the commercial potential of each product candidate.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries, benefits, severance, insurance, and stock-based compensation expense, for employees in executive, accounting, commercialization, human resources, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes expenses related to pre-commercial activities, corporate facility costs, such as allocated rent and utilities, insurance premiums, legal fees related to corporate matters, and fees for auditing, accounting, and other consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in fiscal year 2022 as compared to the prior periods presented herein as a result of higher corporate infrastructure costs including, but not limited to accounting, legal, human resources, consulting, investor relations, and public company insurance fees. Additionally, we anticipate an increase in general and administrative expenses as we prepare to support the potential commercialization of COVAXIN, if authorized or approved.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
The change in fair value of derivative liabilities was $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. This change in fair value of derivative liabilities was related to certain convertible notes issued in 2018 and 2019 (the "Convertible Notes") containing embedded conversion and change-in-control features, which were recorded at fair value as derivative liabilities and revalued at each reporting date as well as the Series B Warrants that were issued in connection with a Securities Purchase Agreement entered into with certain accredited investors in June 2019 and were classified as derivative liabilities at issuance and reevaluated each reporting period until they met the derivative scope exception allowing for stockholders' equity classification during the year ended December 31, 2019. The Convertible Notes were extinguished during the year ended
December 31, 2019. There were no derivative instruments revalued on a recurring basis during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations includes a comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the discussion and analysis of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") on March 19, 2021 (the "2020 Form 10-K"), which is incorporated herein by reference.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense increased by $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the $15.0 million upfront payment to Bharat Biotech in connection with the amendment to the Covaxin Agreement to add rights to the Canadian market in June 2021 as well as increases of $4.6 million in COVAXIN development, regulatory, and manufacturing activities, $3.1 million in OCU400 preclinical and clinical activities, $2.8 million in employee-related expenses, $1.7 million in stock-based compensation expense, and $1.6 million in OCU200 preclinical activities. The increases were partially offset by a $1.1 million decrease for the discontinuation of a product candidate in 2020.
In-process research and development expense
In-process research and development expense decreased by $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the write-off of an intangible asset held for sale during the year ended December 31, 2020 as a sale of the intangible asset was deemed not probable to be completed within one year from the date the intangible asset was initially recorded as held for sale.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expenses increased by $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases of $4.6 million in stock-based compensation expense, $3.0 million in expenses for stockholder meetings and proxy solicitation, $2.5 million in professional expenses, including legal and consulting fees, $2.3 million in employee-related expenses, and $1.3 million in COVAXIN pre-commercial expenses.
Total Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) decreased by $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income (expense) during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily relates to $0.8 million related to a loss on the write-off of the Promissory Note (as defined in Note 4 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) deemed uncollectible, partially offset by a gain on loan extinguishment of $0.4 million for the PPP Note (as defined in Note 8 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) forgiveness obtained in May 2021. Other income (expense) during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relates to debt discount interest expense on the Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes (as defined in Note 10 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) of $0.6 million, offset by the recognition of $0.2 million in deferred grant proceeds.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $95.1 million in cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash. We have not generated significant revenue to date and have primarily funded our operations to date through the sale of common stock, warrants to purchase common stock, the issuance of convertible notes, debt, and grant proceeds. Since our inception and through December 31, 2021, we have raised an aggregate of $219.6 million to fund our operations, of which $206.9 million was from gross proceeds from the sale of our common stock and warrants, $10.3 million was from the issuance of convertible notes, $2.2 million was from debt, and $0.2 million from grant proceeds.
In February 2022, we issued and sold 16.0 million shares of our common stock at an offering price of $3.13 per share in a public offering and received net proceeds of $49.8 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us. In April 2021, we issued and sold 10.0 million shares of our common stock at an offering price of $10.00 per share in a registered direct offering pursuant to a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors (the "April 2021 Registered Direct Offering") and received net proceeds of $93.4 million. In February 2021, we issued and sold 3.0 million shares of our common stock at an offering price of $7.65 per share in a registered direct offering pursuant to a securities purchase agreement with certain institutional investors ("February 2021 Registered Direct Offering") and received net proceeds of $21.2 million. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 1.0 million shares of our common stock under an at-the-market offering ("ATM") and received net proceeds of $4.8 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 108.1 million shares of our common stock under ATMs and received net proceeds of $36.3 million. See Note 9 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on our equity issuances.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantial resources to research and development and have incurred significant net losses and may continue to incur net losses in the future. We incurred net losses of approximately $58.4 million, $21.8 million, and $20.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $131.7 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $6.6 million and indebtedness of $1.7 million.
The following discussion and analysis of a summary of our cash flows includes a comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the discussion and analysis that compares our summary of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7 "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" included in our 2020 Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities was $47.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by the $15.0 million
upfront payment to Bharat Biotech in connection with the amendment to the Covaxin Agreement to add rights to the Canadian market in June 2021, an increase in our research and development expenses for our product candidates, specifically clinical trial and manufacturing expenses related to COVAXIN, an increase in employee-related expenses as we expand our headcount and continue to provide competitive compensation plans to support our development, commercialization, and business efforts, and an increase in expenses for stockholder meetings and proxy solicitation.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used by investing activities was primarily driven by an increase of $0.6 million in purchases of property and equipment and the issuance of the Promissory Note (as defined in Note 4 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) of $0.8 million.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $120.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $31.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of gross proceeds of $100.0 million and $22.9 million received from the April 2021 Registered Direct Offering and the February 2021 Registered Direct Offering, respectively, and gross proceeds of $5.0 million received under an ATM, partially offset by payments of equity issuance costs of $8.5 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of gross proceeds of $37.8 million received under ATMs and $0.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt, partially offset by payments of equity issuance costs of $1.5 million and repayments of debt of $5.6 million.
Contractual Obligations
Licensing and Development Agreements
We have obligations under certain license and development agreements for our product candidates including annual payments, payments upon the achievement of certain milestones, and royalty payments based on net sales of licensed products. See Note 3 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our obligations under licensing and development agreements.
Lease Obligations
We have obligations under our operating leases, which include leased office, laboratory, and storage space, located in Malvern, Pennsylvania. As of December 31, 2021, we had future minimum operating lease base rent payment obligations of $1.8 million, with $0.4 million payable within 12 months related to leases that have commenced. See Note 6 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our obligations under lease obligations, including the aggregate estimated base rent payments for the lease not yet commenced.
Indebtedness
We have outstanding debt related to the funds borrowed from EB5 Life Sciences, L.P. ("EB-5 Life Sciences") pursuant to the U.S. government's Immigrant Investor Program, commonly known as EB-5 program. Pursuant to the EB-5 loan agreement entered into with EB-5 Life Sciences, we can borrow up to $10.0 million in $0.5 million increments. Borrowings are at a fixed interest rate of 4.0%. Outstanding borrowings pursuant to the EB-5 Program become due upon the seventh anniversary of the final disbursement. Under the terms and conditions of the EB-5 loan agreement, we borrowed $1.0 million in 2016 and an additional $0.5 million in March 2020. As of December 31, 2021, there was $1.5 million of principal outstanding under the EB-5 loan agreement. See Note 8 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our obligations under the EB-5 loan agreement.
Consulting Agreements
We have obligations under a consulting agreement with an individual providing services to us with regard to our Canadian operations (the "Canada Consulting Agreement"). Compensation under the Canada Consulting Agreement includes, among other forms of compensation, cash payments of up to $3.0 million upon the achievement of certain milestones related to COVAXIN. See Note 10 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our obligations under the Canada Consulting Agreement.
Supply Commitments
In February 2022, we entered into a commitment to purchase $14.3 million of COVAXIN drug product components from Bharat Biotech to support the technology transfer from Bharat Biotech to Jubilant HollisterStier. We previously issued Series B Convertible Preferred Stock in March 2021 as an advance payment of $6.0 million for the supply of COVAXIN to be provided by Bharat Biotech pursuant to the Supply Agreement, which will be applied to this commitment. See Note 9 and Note 15 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock and our supply commitments.
Funding requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue research and development, including preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, contract to manufacture our product candidates, prepare for potential commercialization of our product candidates, add operational, financial, and information systems to execute our business plan, maintain, expand, and protect our patent portfolio, expand headcount to support our development, commercialization, and business efforts, and operate as a public company.
Factors impacting our future funding requirements include, without limitation, the following:
•the initiation, progress, timing, costs, and results of clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the outcome, timing, and cost of the regulatory authorization or approval process for our product candidates; including with respect to COVAXIN in the United States and Canada;
•the costs of manufacturing and commercialization, including with respect to COVAXIN, if authorized or approved;
•costs related to doing business internationally including our proposed development and commercialization of COVAXIN in Canada;
•the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending, and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•the cost of defending intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us;
•the costs of expanding infrastructure to support our development, commercialization, and business efforts;
•the expenses needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products, product candidates, or technologies; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of approximately $95.1 million. This amount will not meet our capital requirements over the next 12 months. We will need to raise significant additional capital in order to fund our future operations. Our operating and capital requirements may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us. To the extent that cash generated from future potential revenues of COVAXIN, if authorized or approved, is not sufficient, our management is currently evaluating different strategies to obtain the required funding for future operations. These strategies may include, but are not limited to: public and private placements of equity and/or debt, payments from potential strategic research and development arrangements, sales of assets, government grants, licensing and/or collaboration arrangements with pharmaceutical companies or other institutions, or other funding from the government or other third parties. There can be no assurance that these funding efforts will be successful. If we cannot obtain the necessary funding, we will need to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of our research and development programs; consider other various strategic alternatives, including a merger or sale; or cease operations. If we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, financial condition, and results of operations could be materially adversely affected.
As a result of these factors, together with the anticipated increase in spending that will be necessary to continue to research, develop, and commercialize our product candidates, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are issued.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during the periods presented, and we do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses during the reported period. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies and estimates are those most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Stock-based compensation
We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with the FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation ("ASC 718"). We have issued stock-based compensation awards including stock options and restricted stock units ("RSUs"), and we also account for certain issuances of preferred stock and warrants in accordance with ASC 718. ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments, including grants of stock options and RSUs, to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their grant date fair values. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of options granted. The fair value of the RSUs is determined by the market price of a share of our common stock on the grant date. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
Compensation expense related to stock-based compensation awards subject to service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the grant date fair value over the associated service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term. Stock-based awards generally vest over a one to three year requisite service period and have a contractual term of 10 years. To the extent a stock-based compensation award is subject to performance-based vesting conditions, the amount of compensation expense recorded reflects an assessment of the probability of achieving the performance conditions. Compensation expense for stock-based compensation awards with performance-based vesting conditions is only recognized when the performance-based vesting condition is deemed probable to occur. Shares issued upon stock option exercise and RSU vesting are newly issued shares of common stock.
Estimating the fair value of stock options requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the option, stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends. The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model represent our best estimates and involve a number of variables, uncertainties, assumptions, and the application of our judgment, as they are inherently subjective. If any assumptions change, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
The assumptions used in our Black-Scholes option-pricing model for stock options are as follows:
Expected Term. Due to the historical lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and the lack of sufficient company-specific historical data, the expected term of employee options is determined using the “simplified” method, as prescribed in SEC’s Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option.
Expected Volatility. The expected volatility is based on our historical volatilities and that of similar entities within our industry for periods commensurate with the expected term assumption.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected term.
Expected Dividends. The expected dividend yield is 0% because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend on our common stock.
Stock-based compensation expense was $7.0 million, $0.7 million, and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had $12.6 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation expense, which is expected to be recognized over a remaining weighted-average period of 2.1 years.
Research and Development and Clinical Trial Accruals
As part of the process of preparing the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are required to estimate and record expenses, for which a large portion are research and development expenses. Research and development expenses include, among other categories, development, clinical trials, patent costs, and regulatory compliance costs incurred with research organizations, contract manufacturers, and other third-party vendors. The estimation process involves identifying services that have been performed on our behalf by third-parties, estimating and accruing expenses in our consolidated financial statements based on the evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks and the facts and circumstances known to us at the time of the estimate, and assessing the accuracy of these estimates going forward to determine if adjustments are required. We periodically collaborate with the third-parties to assist in determining our estimates. Payments for these activities performed by third-parties are based on the terms of the individual arrangements with the third-parties, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expense, as applicable. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the current conditions; however, actual results may differ from these estimates. Any changes to estimates will be recorded in the period in which a circumstance causing a change in estimate becomes known and the impact of any change in estimate could be material.
Series B Convertible Preferred Stock Issuance
On March 1, 2021, we entered into a preferred stock purchase agreement, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell 0.1 million shares of our Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.01 per share (the "Series B Convertible Preferred Stock"), at a price per share equal to $109.60, to Bharat Biotech. On March 18, 2021, we issued the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock as an advance payment for the supply of COVAXIN to be provided by Bharat Biotech pursuant to a supply agreement with Bharat Biotech. The Series B Convertible Preferred Stock contains multiple conversion conditions, including our receipt of shipments by Bharat Biotech of the first 10.0 million doses of COVAXIN pursuant to the aforementioned supply agreement. We accounted for the issuance of the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock in accordance with ASC 718 and recorded the fair value of $5.0 million within stockholders' equity during the year ended December 31, 2021, with a corresponding short-term asset for the advanced payment for the doses of COVAXIN. We utilized the traded common stock price, adjusted by the Conversion Ratio (as defined in Note 9 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), to value the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock and the Finnerty model to estimate a 15% discount rate for the lack of marketability of the instrument. The valuation incorporates Level 3 inputs in the fair value hierarchy, including the estimated time until the instrument's liquidity and estimated volatility of our common stock as of the grant date. As of December 31, 2021, we had not yet received shipments from Bharat Biotech of doses of COVAXIN, and as such, the amount remains recorded as a short-term asset for the advance payment for the doses of COVAXIN. See Note 9 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Accounting for the Warrant Exchange
On October 4, 2019, we issued warrants to purchase our common stock: the Series A Warrants, Series B Warrants, and Series C Warrants. On April 22, 2020, we entered into Amendment and Exchange Agreements (each an "Exchange Agreement" and collectively, the "Exchange Agreements") with the Series A Warrants holders. Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, among other things, the number of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Series A Warrants was adjusted. Concurrently with the Exchange Agreements, the Series A Warrants holders exchanged the Series A Warrants for shares of common stock and promissory notes (the "Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes") (collectively, the "Warrant Exchange").
We accounted for the Warrant Exchange by recognizing the fair value of the consideration transferred in excess of the carrying value of the Series A Warrants as a reduction of additional paid-in capital. The fair value of the consideration transferred was comprised of (i) the fair value of the common stock issued based on the number of shares issued and our stock price on the date of issuance and (ii) the fair value at issuance of the Warrant Exchange Promissory Notes based on Level 2 fair value inputs. The fair value of the consideration transferred was in excess of the fair value of the Series A Warrants immediately prior to the consideration transfer. The excess consideration was accounted for as a deemed dividend to the Series A Warrant holders and is reflected as an additional net loss attributed to common stockholders in the calculation of basic and diluted net loss per common share for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value of the Series A Warrants immediately prior to the consideration transfer was estimated using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Inputs used in the valuation were unobservable and were
therefore classified as Level 3 fair value inputs. See Note 10 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.