ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (Dollars in millions, except per share amounts and unless otherwise indicated)
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and provides year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form 10-K and can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021.
OVERVIEW
We are a financial services company that services and originates mortgage loans. We are a leading mortgage special servicer, servicing 1.4 million loans with a total UPB of $268.0 billion on behalf of more than 3,900 investors and 125 subservicing clients as of December 31, 2021. We service all mortgage loan classes, including conventional, government-insured and non-Agency loans. Our Originations business is part of our balanced business model to generate gains on loan sales and profitable returns, and to support the replenishment and the growth of our servicing portfolio. Through our retail, correspondent and wholesale channels, we originate and purchase conventional and government-insured forward and reverse mortgage loans that we sell or securitize on a servicing retained basis. In addition, we grow our mortgage servicing volume through MSR flow purchase agreements, Agency Cash Window programs, bulk MSR purchase transactions, and subservicing agreements.
The table below summarizes the volume of Originations by channel during 2021, compared with the volume of the prior years. The volume of Originations is a key driver of the profitability of our Originations segment, together with margins, and a key driver of the replenishment and growth of our Servicing segment. In 2021, we added $152.0 billion of new volume, with $55.1 billion MSR bulk acquisitions, $55.9 billion of new subservicing and $41.0 billion of non-bulk Originations volume, as further detailed in the below table.
(1)Represents the UPB of loans that have been originated or purchased during the respective periods and for which we recognize a new MSR on our consolidated balance sheets upon sale or securitization.
(2)Represents the UPB of loans for which the MSR is purchased.
(3)Represents the UPB of reverse mortgage loans that have been securitized on a servicing retained basis. The loans are recognized on our consolidated balance sheets under GAAP without separate recognition of MSRs.
(4)Includes interim subservicing, including the volume of UPB associated with short-term interim subservicing for certain clients as a support to their originate-to-sell business, with $14.7 billion, $17.8 billion and $12.2 billion in the years 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In addition to interim subservicing, subservicing additions for 2021 in the table above include $14.3 billion in UPB of reverse mortgage loan subservicing and $9.4 billion of new subservicing on behalf of MAV. On October 1, 2021, in connection with the transaction with MAM (RMS) and its then parent, PMC became the subservicer for approximately 57,000 reverse mortgages, or approximately $14.3 billion in UPB pursuant to subservicing agreements with various clients, including MAM (RMS). Under the five-year subservicing agreement with MAM (RMS), we expect to add subservicing of approximately 60,000 reverse mortgage loans or approximately $13.1 billion in UPB upon boarding to our servicing platform in the first half of 2022, subject to investor approval. Furthermore, in the second quarter 2021, we launched our joint venture MSR investment with Oaktree with MAV purchasing approximately $9.4 billion GSE MSRs from unrelated third parties that PMC began subservicing in the third quarter of 2021.
The following table summarizes the average volume of our Servicing segment in 2021, compared with prior years. The average volume of Servicing is a key driver of the profitability of our Servicing segment. The relative weight of performing and delinquent loans drives the gross revenue and expenses, and their timing. In 2021, we have increased our total average servicing portfolio by $47.2 billion, net of runoff, with large GSE MSR bulk acquisitions driving the growth of our owned MSR portfolio, and the new subservicing volume generated from our MSR investment joint venture with Oaktree through MAV and our reverse subservicing acquisition from MAM (RMS). In addition to runoff, the NRZ portfolio declined as a result of the termination by NRZ of the PMC servicing agreement resulting in the deboarding of loans with $34.2 billion of UPB in September and October 2020. The year 2021 established the foundation of a transformed servicing portfolio, with the significant addition of a high credit quality GSE MSR portfolio and the continued reduction of our non-Agency servicing through runoff, also reducing our concentration with NRZ servicing agreements.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the total serviced and subserviced UPB amounted to $268.0 billion and $188.8 billion, respectively, a net increase of $79.2 billion or 42%.
Business Initiatives
We had established five key operating objectives to drive improved value for shareholders in 2021. As our near-term priority remains to return to sustainable profitability, we continue to execute our strategy around these objectives:
•Accelerating growth, by expanding our client base and our product offerings, and by leveraging our MSR asset vehicle with Oaktree;
•Strengthening recapture performance, by expanding our operating capacity;
•Improving our cost leadership position, by driving productivity and efficiencies, with our technology and continuous improvement initiatives;
•Maintaining high quality operational execution, through our technology and continuous improvement initiatives, and our commitment to employee engagement and customer satisfaction; and
•Expanding servicing and other revenue opportunities.
MAV and Oaktree Relationship
On May 3, 2021, we formally launched MAV, our MSR asset vehicle and entered into a number of definitive agreements with Oaktree. Oaktree and Ocwen committed 85% and 15%, respectively, to fund GSE MSR investments on a pro rata basis up to a total aggregate commitment of $250.0 million over a term of three years following closing (subject to extension). This joint venture is structured to provide Oaktree with MSR investment opportunities and returns, while providing PMC scale and incremental income through subservicing and recapture services. Additionally, PMC earns direct MSR investment income through its 15% ownership stake and carry interest on investment returns exceeding certain thresholds. Under the arrangement, MAV has a non-compete to purchase certain GSE MSRs through specific channels in cooperation with PMC. In addition, PMC must offer MAV the first opportunity to purchase GSE MSRs sold by PMC or its affiliates that meet certain criteria, which we refer to as the right of first offer. Both the non-compete and the right of first offer are subject to various restrictions and in effect
until MAV has been fully funded, or, if earlier, in the case of the right of first offer, until May 3, 2024 (subject to extension by mutual consent). In exchange, PMC receives exclusive subservicing and recapture rights, subject generally to ongoing performance and financial standards.
During 2021, PMC recognized $17.1 million of total servicing and subservicing fees, including ancillary income, and remitted $12.2 million servicing fees (as Pledged MSR liability expense) under its agreements with MAV (refer to Note 8 - MSR Transfers Not Qualifying for Sale Accounting to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further description of the accounting for the MAV agreements). In addition, PMC recognized $3.6 million earnings in 2021 from its equity method investment in MAV Canopy.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
Our financial performance in 2020 was affected by the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic and the associated historical decline in interest rates, mostly due to large losses on MSRs and lower revenue in our Servicing business, partially offset by the growth and profitability of our Originations business. Furthermore, the CARES Act allowed us to recognize income tax benefits in 2020 mostly due to the carryback of a portion of our prior net operating losses.
In 2021, our Servicing business continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with a large number of loans placed under forbearance and the moratorium on foreclosures and evictions. The collection and recognition of servicing fees and ancillary income related to forbearance loans continued to be delayed or reduced. In addition, our outreach activities with impacted borrowers have intensified to address extensions and exits of plans or to offer loan modifications. The foreclosure moratorium ended on July 31, 2021, and the eviction moratorium was extended through January 1, 2022 for foreclosed borrowers.
As of December 31, 2021, we managed 28,500 loans under forbearance (or 2.1% of our total portfolio), 6,800 of which related to our owned MSRs, or 1.1% of our owned MSR servicing portfolio (excluding NRZ and MAV), a reduction of 65% and 71%, respectively, compared to the prior year end. As of December 31, 2020, we managed 81,900 loans under forbearance, 23,100 of which related to our owned MSRs (excluding NRZ). During 2021, the number of loans under forbearance continued to trend down, as illustrated by the below chart of forbearance plans by investor for our owned MSR portfolio (excluding NRZ).
The decline in open plans of our owned MSR portfolio during 2021 is mostly driven by performing loans and pay-offs (excluding servicing transfers), as further illustrated below:
We outperformed the industry average as reported by the MBA relating to the percentage of borrowers with an Agency loan who exited forbearance with a reinstatement or loss mitigation solution in place. In addition, we consistently exceeded the industry benchmark for borrowers with a GSE loan who remained current while on forbearance. We undertook significant efforts to contact and educate borrowers in understanding their forbearance plans and resolution options, and believe our high-touch communication strategy resulted in these favorable outcomes. We continue to reach out to all borrowers who have not resumed making payments after exiting their plans with the goal of coming to an appropriate resolution.
We continue to operate through a secure remote workforce model for approximately 95% of our global workforce and continue to adhere to COVID-19 health and safety-related requirements and best practices across all of our locations. We monitor the impact of the pandemic on our workforce and have established business resiliency plans for all our locations. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately 5,700 employees, of which approximately 3,200 were located in India and approximately 500 were based in the Philippines. While we have contingency and continuity plans in place, we cannot guarantee that our operations will not be negatively impacted. To date, our operations have not been significantly affected.
Uncertainties related to the duration and severity of the pandemic and related economic impact remain and make it difficult for us to determine the continued ongoing effect the pandemic may have on us and our business, financial condition, liquidity or results of operations.
Operations Summary
Total Revenue
The below table presents total revenue by segment and at the consolidated level:
(1)The fair value change of inter-segment economic hedge derivatives reported within Total revenue (Gain on loans held for sale, net) is eliminated at the consolidated level with an offset in MSR valuation adjustments, net.
As compared to 2020, total segment revenue for 2021 was $131.9 million or 14% higher, due to a $70.6 million increase in Originations revenue and a $61.7 million increase in Servicing revenue. The 39% increase in Originations revenue is primarily due to a 159% increase in total forward and reverse production volume combined, partially offset by lower margins. The increase in Servicing revenue is primarily due to a $42.2 million increase in servicing fees and $27.1 million gain on sale of loans acquired through the exercise of call rights in 2021. The $42.2 million increase in servicing fees is mostly driven by a $123.1 million or 57% increase in servicing fee income on our owned MSRs and $15.7 million new servicing fees collected on behalf of MAV in 2021, partially offset by $79.4 million reduction in fees collected on behalf of NRZ and a $9.3 million reduction in ancillary income. The growth in our owned MSR portfolio is mostly due to bulk MSR acquisitions, MSR acquisitions through the Agency Cash Window programs and the growth in our correspondent lending volumes. The decline in the collection of NRZ servicing fees is mostly due to portfolio runoff and the termination of the PMC servicing agreement in February 2020. The decline in ancillary fees is mostly due to the COVID-19 environment and related decrease in late fees, collection and convenience fees as well as a decrease in float earnings due to lower interest rates, partially offset by the growth in our owned MSR portfolio.
Total revenue (after elimination of inter-segment derivative fair value changes) was $1.05 billion for 2021, $89.2 million or 9% higher than 2020, driven by the segment revenue factors described above and the presentation of macro-hedging derivative gains and losses reported within MSR valuation adjustments, net at the consolidated level, as disclosed in Note 4 - Loans Held for Sale, Note 17 - Derivative Financial Instruments and Hedging Activities and Note 23 - Business Segment Reporting. Effective May 2021, we replaced our macro-hedging strategies with two distinct strategies to separately hedge the pipeline and our MSR exposure with third party derivatives. However, we have and may continue to use inter-segment derivatives between the two strategies. Refer to the MSR Hedging Strategy section of