Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. These historical consolidated financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this filing, particularly in “Risk Factors.”
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
We are a molecular diagnostics company focused on developing and commercializing proprietary laboratory-developed tests or LDTs to serve unmet medical needs across the cancer care continuum. We have prioritized lung cancer as our first indication. Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer death in the United States, despite the availability of molecular testing and novel therapies to treat patients.
Our first commercial diagnostic test is a proprietary treatment stratification test called DetermaRx™ that identifies which patients with early-stage non-small cell lung cancer may benefit from chemotherapy, resulting in a significantly higher, five-year survival rate. We are also developing multi-gene molecular, laboratory-developed diagnostic tests that we have branded as DetermaIO™. DetermaIO™ is a proprietary gene expression assay with promising data supporting its potential to help identify patients likely to respond to checkpoint inhibitor drugs. This new class of drugs modulate the immune response and show activity in multiple solid tumor types including non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC). DetermaIO™ is presently available for research use through our Pharma Services operations but one of our goals is to complete development of that assay and to make it available for clinical use later this year. We also perform other assay development and clinical testing services for pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies through our Pharma Services operations.
Other tests in our development pipeline include DetermaTx™, a test that we are targeting for commercial launch later this year and that is intended to compliment DetermaIO™ by assessing the mutational status of a tumor to help identify the appropriate targeted therapy. We also plan to initiate the development of DetermaMx™ as a blood based test to monitor cancer patients for recurrence of their disease. We have added to our diagnostic test pipeline the DetermaCNI™, a patented, blood-based test from Chronix for immunotherapy monitoring.
The inherent uncertainties of developing and commercializing new diagnostic tests for medical use make it impossible to predict the amount of time and expense that will be required to complete the development and commercialization of those tests. There is no assurance that we will be successful in developing new technology or diagnostic tests, or that any technology or diagnostic tests that we may develop will be proven safe and effective in diagnosis of cancer in humans, or will be successfully commercialized.
We believe we have sufficient cash, cash equivalents, and marketable equity securities to carry out our current operations through at least twelve months from the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We expect that our operating expenses will continue to increase as we conduct our planned clinical trial of DetermaRx™, and if we successfully complete the development of DetermaIO™, DetermaTx™ and DetermaMx™ and commercialize those tests. We have hired a sales and marketing team. In addition to our CLIA-certified laboratory in Irvine, California, we are in the process of completing a separate R&D laboratory. We also acquired a laboratory in Germany through our completed merger with Chronix and we will incur additional expenses resulting from our continued investment in Chronix. We are continuing to seek other opportunities to acquire ownership of or marketing rights to additional cancer tests. Because of the expected time frame to apply for and receive Medicare reimbursement approval for our tests, our pre-Medicare approval revenues from commercialization of our tests and revenues from services we perform for pharmaceutical companies are not expected to cover our operating expenses. We will need to obtain additional financing for our operations until such time as we generate sufficient revenues from the commercialization of our tests to cover our operating expenses. Our determination as to when we will seek new financing and the amount of financing that we will need will be based on our evaluation of the progress we make in our research and development programs, any changes to or the expansion of the scope and focus of our research, progress and results of commercializing our tests after completion of development, progress in receiving Medicare and other payor reimbursement approval, and our projection of future costs. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for a discussion of our available capital resources, our need for future financing, and possible sources of capital.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. We have identified below our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe require the greatest amount of judgment. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates which are subject to significant judgment, including those related to the going concern assessments of our consolidated financial statements, revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, business combination valuation, contingent consideration valuation, allocation of direct and indirect expenses, useful lives associated with long-lived intangible assets, machinery and equipment, loss contingencies, valuation allowances related to deferred income taxes, and assumptions used to value stock-based awards, debt or other equity instruments. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates compared to historical experience and trends, which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. To the extent that there are material differences between our estimates and our actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe the assumptions and estimates associated with the following have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Going concern assessment
With the implementation of FASB’s standard on going concern, ASU No. 2014-15, we assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital, including available loans or lines of credit, if any, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15.
Business combinations
We account for business combinations in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations, which requires the purchase price to be measured at fair value. When the purchase consideration consists, in part or entirely of our common shares, we calculate the purchase price by determining the fair value, as of the acquisition date, of shares issued in connection with the closing of the acquisition. We recognize estimated fair values of the tangible assets and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date, and we record as goodwill any amount of the fair value of the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in excess of the purchase price.
Contingent consideration liabilities
ASC 805 requires that contingent consideration be estimated and recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date as part of the total consideration transferred. Contingent consideration is an obligation of the acquirer to transfer additional assets or equity interests to the selling shareholders in the future if certain future events occur or conditions are met, such as the attainment of product development milestones. Contingent consideration also includes additional future payments to selling shareholders based on achievement of components of earnings, such as “earn-out” provisions or percentage of future revenues, including royalties paid to the selling shareholders based on a percentage of revenues generated over their respective useful life.
The fair value of milestone-based contingent consideration was determined using a scenario analysis valuation method which incorporates our assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achievement of the milestones, as defined in the merger agreements, credit risk, timing of the contingent consideration payments and a risk-adjusted discount rate to estimate the present value of the expected payments, all of which require significant management judgment and assumptions. Since the contingent consideration payments are based on nonfinancial, binary events, management believes the use of the scenario analysis method is appropriate.
The fair value of royalty or revenue share-based contingent consideration was determined using a single scenario analysis method to value those payments. The single scenario method incorporates our assumptions with respect to specified future revenues generated over their respective useful lives, credit risk, and a risk-adjusted discount rate to estimate the present value of the expected royalty payments, all of which require significant management judgment and assumptions. Since the royalty-based contingent consideration payments are based on future revenues and linear payouts, management believes the use of the single scenario method is appropriate.
The fair value of all contingent consideration after the acquisition date is reassessed by us as changes in circumstances and conditions occur, with the subsequent change in fair value recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. Changes in key assumptions can materially affect the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities and, accordingly, the resulting gain or loss that we record in our consolidated financial statements. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Goodwill and intangible assets
In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, IPR&D projects acquired in a business combination that are not complete as of the acquisition date are capitalized and accounted for as indefinite-lived intangible assets until completion or abandonment of the related research and development efforts. Upon successful completion of the project, the capitalized amount is amortized over its estimated useful life. If a project is abandoned, all remaining capitalized amounts are written off immediately. We consider various factors and risks for potential impairment of IPR&D assets, including the current legal and regulatory environment, uncertainties posed by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the competitive landscape. Adverse clinical trial results, significant delays or inability to obtain local determination coverage (“LCD”) from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (“CMS”) for Medicare reimbursement for a diagnostic test, the inability to bring a diagnostic test to market and the introduction or advancement of competitors’ diagnostic tests could result in partial or full impairment of the related intangible assets. Consequently, the eventual realized value of the IPR&D project may vary from its fair value at the date of acquisition, and IPR&D impairment charges may occur in future periods. During the period between completion or abandonment, the IPR&D assets will not be amortized but will be tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests if we become aware of any events occurring or changes in circumstances that would indicate a reduction in the fair value of the IPR&D projects below their respective carrying amounts.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net identifiable assets and liabilities. Goodwill, similar to IPR&D, is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually, or if circumstances indicate its value may no longer be recoverable. Qualitative factors considered in this assessment include industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting our business. Based on the qualitative assessment, if it is determined that the fair value of goodwill is more likely than not to be less than its carrying amount, the fair value of a reporting unit will be calculated and compared with its carrying amount and an impairment charge will be recognized for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value. We continue to operate in one segment and considered to be the sole reporting unit and, therefore, goodwill is tested for impairment at the enterprise level.
Accounting for warrants
We determine the accounting classification of warrants we issue, as either liability or equity classified, by first assessing whether the warrants meet liability classification in accordance with ASC 480-10, Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both Liabilities and Equity, then in accordance with ASC 815-40, Accounting for Derivative Financial Instruments Indexed to, and Potentially Settled in, a Company’s Own Stock. Under ASC 480, warrants are considered liability classified if the warrants are mandatorily redeemable, obligate us to settle the warrants or the underlying shares by paying cash or other assets, and warrants that must or may require settlement by issuing variable number of shares. If warrants do not meet the liability classification under ASC 480-10, we assess the requirements under ASC 815-40, which states that contracts that require or may require the issuer to settle the contract for cash are liabilities recorded at fair value, irrespective of the likelihood of the transaction occurring that triggers the net cash settlement feature. If the warrants do not require liability classification under ASC 815-40, in order to conclude equity classification, we also assess whether the warrants are indexed to our common stock and whether the warrants are classified as equity under ASC 815-40 or other GAAP. After all such assessments, we conclude whether the warrants are classified as liability or equity. Liability classified warrants require fair value accounting at issuance and subsequent to initial issuance with all changes in fair value after the issuance date recorded in the statements of operations. Equity classified warrants only require fair value accounting at issuance with no changes recognized subsequent to the issuance date. We do not have any liability classified warrants as of any period presented. See Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense related to share-based payments in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for share-based payment awards made to directors and employees based on estimated fair values. We estimate the fair value of employee stock-based payment awards on the grant-date and recognize the resulting fair value over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis. For stock-based awards that vest only upon the attainment of one or more performance goals, compensation cost is recognized if and when we determine that it is probable that the performance condition or conditions will be, or have been, achieved. We utilize the Black-Scholes option pricing model for determining the fair value of stock options. Our determination of fair value of share-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, expected stock price volatility over the term of the awards, and actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we estimated the expected volatility using our own stock price volatility to the extent applicable or a combination of our stock price volatility and the stock price volatility of stock of peer companies, for a period equal to the expected term of the options. The expected term of options granted is based on our own experience and, in part, based upon the “simplified method” provided under Staff Accounting Bulletin, Topic 14, or SAB Topic 14, as necessary. The risk-free rate is based on the U.S. Treasury rates in effect during the corresponding period of grant. Although the fair value of employee stock options is determined in accordance with FASB guidance, the key inputs and assumptions may change as we develop our own company estimates, experience and key inputs including our expected term, and stock price volatility based on the trading history of our stock in the public market. Changes in these subjective assumptions can materially affect the estimated value of equity grants and the stock-based compensation that we record in our consolidated financial statements.
Leases
We account for leases in accordance with ASC 842, Leases. We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Leases are classified as either financing or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the consolidated statements of operations. Under the available practical expedients for the adoption of ASC 842, we account for the lease and non-lease components as a single lease component. We recognize right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities for leases with terms greater than twelve months in the consolidated balance sheet. ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset during the lease term and lease liabilities represent the obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. As most leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use an incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. We use the implicit rate when it is readily determinable. The operating lease ROU asset also includes any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives. Lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Operating leases are included as right-of-use assets in machinery and equipment, and ROU lease liabilities, current and long-term, in the consolidated balance sheets. Financing leases are included in machinery and equipment, and in financing lease liabilities, current and long-term, in the consolidated balance sheets. We disclose the amortization of our ROU assets and operating lease payments as a net amount, “Amortization of right-of-use assets and liabilities”, on the consolidated statements of cash flows.
On January 1, 2019, the adoption date of ASC 842, and based on the available practical expedients under the standard, we did not reassess any expired or existing contracts, reassess the lease classification for any expired or existing leases and reassess initial direct costs for exiting leases. We also elected not to capitalize leases that have terms of twelve months or less.
The adoption of ASC 842 did not have a material impact to our consolidated financial statements because we did not have any significant operating leases at the time of adoption. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we entered into various operating leases and an embedded operating lease in accordance with ASC 842 discussed in Notes 9 and 10 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. Our accounting for financing leases (previously referred to as “capital leases”) remained substantially unchanged.
Impairment of long-lived assets
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets, which consists primarily of long-lived intangible assets, machinery and equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that such assets might be impaired and the carrying value may not be recoverable. If events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable and the expected undiscounted future cash flows attributable to the asset are less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss equal to the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value is recorded.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, which prescribes the use of the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax asset or liability account balances are calculated at the balance sheet date using current tax laws and rates in effect. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our judgments regarding future taxable income may change over time due to changes in market conditions, changes in tax laws, tax planning strategies or other factors. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates change in the future, the valuation allowance may be increased or decreased, which may have a material impact on our statements of operations.
The guidance also prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not sustainable upon examination by taxing authorities. We will recognize accrued interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. No amounts were accrued for the payment of interest and penalties as of the financial statement periods presented herein. We account for uncertain tax positions by assessing all material positions taken in any assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. We are currently unaware of any tax issues under review. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Revenue recognition
Prior to January 1, 2020, we generated no revenues. Effective on January 1, 2020, we adopted the revenue recognition standard ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC) 606. Pursuant to ASC 606, revenues are recognized when control of services performed is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. ASC 606 provides for a five-step model that includes:
(i) identifying the contract with a customer,
(ii) identifying the performance obligations in the contract,
(iii) determining the transaction price,
(iv) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, and
(v) recognizing revenue when, or as, an entity satisfies a performance obligation.
DetermaRx™ testing revenue
In the first quarter of 2020, Oncocyte commercially launched DetermaRx™ and commenced performing tests on clinical samples through orders received from physicians, hospitals, and other healthcare providers. In determining whether all the revenue recognition criteria (i) through (v) above are met with respect to DetermaRx™ tests, each test result is considered a single performance obligation and is generally considered complete when the test result is delivered or made available to the prescribing physician electronically, and, as such, there are no shipping or handling fees incurred by Oncocyte or billed to customers. Although Oncocyte bills a list price for all tests ordered and completed for all payer types, Oncocyte considers constraints on the variable consideration when recognizing revenue for DetermaRx™. Because DetermaRx™ is a novel test and there are no current reimbursement arrangements with third-party payers other than Medicare, the transaction price represents variable consideration. Application of the constraint for variable consideration is an area that requires significant judgment. For all payers other than Medicare and payers subscribed to Medicare Advantage, Oncocyte must consider the novelty of the test, the uncertainty of receiving payment, or being subject to claims for a refund, from payers with whom it does not have a sufficient payment collection history or contractual reimbursement agreements. Accordingly, for those payers, Oncocyte expects to continue to recognize revenue upon payment until it has a sufficient history to reliably estimate payment patterns or has contractual reimbursement arrangements, or both, in place. In September 2020, Oncocyte received a final pricing decision for DetermaRx™ from CMS, and with Medicare coverage in effect, Oncocyte commenced recognizing revenue when DetermaRx™ tests are performed for Medicare and Medicare Advantage patients, or when payment was approved by Medicare and Medicare Advantage in the case of certain tests performed prior to September 2020.
Pharma Services revenue
Through our Insight subsidiary we provide a range of molecular diagnostic services to pharmaceutical customers referred to as “Pharma Services” including testing for biomarker discovery, assay design and development, clinical trial support, and a broad spectrum of biomarker tests in Insight’s CLIA-certified laboratory. These Pharma Services are generally performed under individual scope of work (“SOW”) arrangements with specific deliverables defined by the customer. Pharma Services are generally performed on a time and materials basis. Upon completion of the service to the customer in accordance with the SOW, we have the right to bill the customer for the agreed upon price (either on a per test or per deliverable basis) and we recognize the pharma service revenue at that time. We generally identify each sale of its pharma service offering as a single performance obligation.
Completion of the service and satisfaction of the performance obligation under a SOW is typically evidenced by access to the report or test made available to the customer or any other form or applicable manner of delivery defined in the SOW. However, for certain SOWs under which work is performed pursuant to the customer’s highly customized specifications, we have the enforceable right to bill the customer for work completed, rather than upon completion of the SOW. For those SOWs, we recognize revenue over a period of time during which the work is performed using a formula that accounts for expended efforts, generally measured in labor hours, as a percentage of total estimated efforts for the completion of the SOW. As the performance obligation under the SOW is satisfied, any amounts earned as revenue and billed to the customer are included in accounts receivable. Any revenues earned but not yet billed to the customer as of the date of our consolidated financial statements are issued are recorded as contract assets and are included in prepaids and other current assets as of the financial statement date. Amounts recorded in contract assets are reclassified to accounts receivable in our consolidated financial statements when the customer is invoiced according to the billing schedule in the contract.
We establish an allowance for doubtful accounts based on the evaluation of the collectability of Pharma Services accounts receivables after considering a variety of factors, including the length of time receivables are past due, significant events that may impair the customer’s ability to pay, such as a bankruptcy filing or deterioration in the customer’s operating results or financial position, and historical experience. If circumstances related to customers change, estimates of the recoverability of receivables would be further adjusted. We continuously monitor collections and payments from customers and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses and uncollectible accounts, if any, based upon historical experience and any specific customer collection issues that have been identified. Amounts determined to be uncollectible are written off against the allowance for doubtful accounts. As of December 31, 2021, we have not recorded any losses or allowance for doubtful accounts on accounts receivables from Pharma Services.
Licensing revenue
Revenues recognized includes licensing revenue derived from agreements with customers for exclusive rights to market Oncocyte’s proprietary testing technology. Under the agreements, Oncocyte grants exclusive rights to certain trademarks and technology of Oncocyte for the purpose of marketing Oncocyte’s tests within a defined geographic territory. A license agreement may specify milestone deliverables or performance obligations, for which Oncocyte recognizes revenue when its licensee confirms the completion of Oncocyte’s performance obligation. A licensing agreement may also include ongoing sales support from Oncocyte and typically includes non-refundable licensing fees and per-test Pharma Services revenues discussed above, for which Oncocyte treats the licensing of the technology, trademarks, and ongoing support as a single performance obligation satisfied by the passage of time over the term of the agreement.
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues generally consists of cost of materials, direct labor including benefits, bonus and stock-based compensation, equipment and infrastructure expenses, clinical sample related costs associated with performing Pharma Services and DetermaRx™ tests, and license fees due to third parties, and also includes amortization of acquired customer relationship intangible assets. Infrastructure expenses include depreciation of laboratory equipment, allocated rent costs, leasehold improvements and allocated information technology costs for operations at our CLIA laboratories. Costs associated with performing diagnostic tests and Pharma Services are recorded as the tests or services are performed regardless of whether revenue was recognized with respect to that test or pharma service. Royalties or revenue share payments for licensed technology calculated as a percentage of revenues or determined based on achieving certain aggregated amounts of revenues generated using the associated technology are recorded as expenses at the time the related revenues are recognized.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses are comprised of costs incurred to develop technology, and include salaries and benefits (including stock-based compensation), laboratory expenses (including reagents and supplies used in research and development laboratory work), infrastructure expenses (including allocated facility occupancy costs), and contract services and other outside costs. Indirect research and development expenses are allocated primarily based on headcount, as applicable, and include rent and utilities, common area maintenance, telecommunications, property taxes, and insurance. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, trade show expenses, branding and positioning expenses, and consulting fees. Sales and marketing expenses also include indirect expenses for applicable overhead allocated based on headcount, and include allocated costs for rent and utilities, common area maintenance, telecommunications, property taxes, and insurance.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and related benefits (including stock-based compensation) for executive and corporate personnel, professional and consulting fees, rent and utilities, common area maintenance, telecommunications, property taxes, and insurance.
Results of Operations
The ongoing global outbreak of COVID-19, and the various attempts throughout the world to contain it, have created significant financial volatility, economic uncertainty, and changes to the way Oncocyte conducts certain aspects of its operations. The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and may continue to have, significant effects on our operations, ability to generate revenues, and financing activities. In response to government directives and guidelines, health care advisories and employee and other concerns, a number of our employees have had to work remotely from home and those on site have had to follow our social distance guidelines, which could impact their productivity. Although employee absenteeism due to COVID-19 illness has not had an adverse impact on our operations as of the date of this Report, we face the risk of losing, at least temporarily, the services of employees if they become ill.
The consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic have led to uncertainties related to our growth and our ability to forecast the demand for our diagnostic testing and Pharma Services and resulting revenues, as we have not had time to establish a base of customers, revenues or other relevant trends prior to the outbreak of COVID-19. We had no commercial revenues until the first quarter of 2020 when we launched our first commercial diagnostic test, DetermaRx™, and acquired the Pharma Services business of Insight. We had expected that initial DetermaRx™ revenues would be constrained by the lack of Medicare coverage. CMS Medicare reimbursement pricing approval for DetermaRx™ did not become effective until September 2020. Deferrals in lung cancer surgeries due to COVID-19 may have reduced demand for DetermaRx™, but because of the lack of historical DetermaRx™ revenues, with and without Medicare reimbursement, we are unable to determine the extent to which the deferral of those surgeries impacted our DetermaRx™ revenues. Resurgences in COVID-19 cases could cause additional deferrals of lung cancer surgeries during the course of the pandemic. The lack of in-person interaction with healthcare providers for our promotion of the use of DetermaRx™ has also placed a constraint on our ability to market that test, but we cannot determine the extent to which that has impacted our revenues due to the absence of historical revenues. Similarly, our Pharma Services revenues commenced with our acquisition of Insight during the first quarter of 2020, and because we do not have a prior history of Pharma Services revenues we cannot assess how COVID-19 may have impacted those revenues, although we are aware that certain planned clinical trials of new pharmaceuticals for which we had expected to provide Pharma Services were delayed due to the pandemic.
The pandemic is affecting our revenue-generating activities. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not been, and may not be, able to maintain our preferred level of physician or customer outreach and marketing of our diagnostic testing and Pharma Services, which could negatively impact our potential new customers’ interest in our tests and services. Even if government and other COVID-19 related restrictions are relaxed and lung cancer surgeries are performed at or close to pre-pandemic levels, any growth and anticipated adoption of our diagnostic tests may not occur. Although we have not yet experienced COVID-19 related supply chain disruptions impacting our testing capacity, if the vendors of equipment and reagents used in our diagnostic laboratories experience supply, operational, or financial disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we could experience supply constraints in the future that could cause increased costs or delays in performing DetermaRx™ tests and Pharma Services and in continuing the development of new diagnostic tests.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the various responses might impact our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we will not be able to accurately predict, including: the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; the availability and cost to access COVID-19 tests, vaccines and therapies; the effect on our potential customers and their demand for our diagnostic testing and Pharma Services; the effect on our suppliers and their ability to provide the necessary equipment and materials to support our tests and services; disruptions or restrictions on our employees’ ability to work and travel; interruptions or restrictions related to the distribution of our tests in foreign markets, including impacts on logistics of shipping and receiving patient samples; and any stoppages, disruptions or increased costs associated with development, production and marketing of our diagnostic tests. In addition to the direct impacts to our business operations, the global economy is likely to continue to be significantly weakened as a result of actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and to the extent that such a weakened global economy impacts customers’ ability or willingness to purchase and pay for our tests, our business and results of operation could be negatively impacted. Due to the uncertain scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and uncertain timing of any recovery or normalization, we are currently unable to estimate the resulting impacts on our operations and financial results. We will continue to actively monitor the issues raised by the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions that alter our operations, as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, our customers, and our shareholders.
Revenues for the Year Ended December 31, 2021
The year ended December 31, 2020 is the first year in which we generated revenues. We currently derive our revenues from the sale of our novel lung cancer stratification test, DetermaRx™, which we commercially launched in early 2020, and from Pharma Services generated by our wholly owned subsidiary, Insight, which we acquired on January 31, 2020. From 2021, we also recognized revenue from our DetermaRx™ and TheraSure™ technology licensing.
The following table shows our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentage change values).
Under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, we may not recognize revenues even if we have performed the diagnostic tests we have commercialized until we have contracts for reimbursement from third-party payers and a history of experience of cash collections for the tests we perform. Until we develop that experience or have the contracts in place with payers or Medicare or other insurance coverage for a test, we recognize revenue upon receipt of payment for the tests that we perform. In September 2020, we received a final pricing decision for our DetermaRx™ test from CMS and commenced recognizing revenue on an accrual basis when DetermaRx™ tests are performed for Medicare covered patients, or when payment was approved by Medicare in the case of certain tests performed prior to September 2020. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, after accumulating additional history of cash receipts and other factors considered by management for Medicare Advantage covered tests, including the recently published Medicare rate which management believes entitles Oncocyte to get reimbursed for Medicare Advantage covered tests at the Medicare rate, Oncocyte commenced recognizing Medicare Advantage covered tests upon satisfaction of the performance obligation, upon considering no further constraints on the variable consideration, at the Medicare rate. All other payers for the DetermaRx™ test are currently recognized on a cash basis. For financial accounting purposes, regardless of when, or whether, revenues may be recognized, we incurred and accrued costs of revenues and other operating expenses discussed below related to any services we perform. Our ability to increase our testing revenue for DetermaRx™ will depend on our ability to penetrate the market and obtain coverage from additional third-party payers.
Despite COVID adversely impacting the number of surgeries performed, DetermaRx™ testing volume grew quarter over quarter in 2020, its first year of launch, driven by our rapid pivot to virtual engagements of physicians via targeted educational programs, key opinion leader or KOL webinars, continuing medical education programs, and virtual molecular tumor boards attended by over 3000 medical professionals, including thoracic surgeons, medical oncologists, pathologists and nurse navigators. Following our commercial launch in the first quarter of 2020, DetermaRx™ tests ordered during the second, third and fourth quarter of 2020 were 64, 175 and 238, respectively. DetermaRx™ tests ordered during the first, second, third and fourth quarter of 2021 were 228, 281, 289, and 444, respectively.
Pharma Services revenues in the fourth quarter of 2021 were higher sequentially when compared to the fourth quarter of 2020 and the third quarter of 2021 due to delays in customer projects resulting from the COVID surge in prior periods. Pharma services are generally performed on a time and materials basis. Upon our completion of the service to the customer in accordance with the contract, we have the right to bill the customer for the agreed upon price (either on a per test or per deliverable basis) and recognize the pharma services revenue at that time.
Revenues recognized includes licensing revenue derived from agreements with customers for exclusive rights to market Oncocyte’s proprietary testing technology. Under the agreements, Oncocyte grants exclusive rights to certain trademarks and technology of Oncocyte for the purpose of marketing Oncocyte’s tests within a defined geographic territory. A license agreement may specify milestone deliverables or performance obligations, for which Oncocyte recognizes revenue when its licensee confirms the completion of Oncocyte’s performance obligation. A licensing agreement may also include ongoing sales support from Oncocyte and typically includes non-refundable licensing fees and per-test Pharma Services revenues discussed above, for which Oncocyte treats the licensing of the technology, trademarks, and ongoing support as a single performance obligation satisfied by the passage of time over the term of the agreement.
The following table presents the percentage of consolidated revenues attributable to products or services classes that represent greater than ten percent of consolidated revenues:
The following table presents the percentage of consolidated revenues received from unaffiliated customers that individually represent greater than ten percent of consolidated revenues:
*Less than 10%
Operating Summary
The following table shows our operating net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands).
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues generally consists of cost of materials; direct labor including payroll, payroll taxes, bonus, benefit and stock-based compensation; equipment and infrastructure expenses; clinical sample costs associated with performing Pharma Services and the DetermaRx™ tests; license fees due to third parties, and amortization of acquired intangible assets. Infrastructure expenses include depreciation of laboratory equipment; allocated rent costs; leasehold improvements; and allocated information technology costs for operations at our CLIA laboratories in California and Tennessee. Costs associated with performing the tests are recorded as the tests are performed regardless of whether revenue was recognized with respect to that test. Royalties payable by Oncocyte for licensed technology, calculated as a percentage of revenues generated using the associated technology, are recorded as expenses at the time the related revenues are recognized.
We expect the cost of DetermaRx™ testing to generally increase in line with the increase in the number of tests we perform, even if we do not recognize corresponding revenues when Medicare, Medicare Advantage, or other insurance coverage is not available. We expect that our cost per test to decrease modestly over time due to the efficiencies we may gain if testing volume increases, and from automation and other cost reductions. There can be no assurance, however, that any of these efficiencies or cost savings will be achieved. Cost of revenues for Pharma Services and licensing revenue will vary depending on the nature, timing, and scope of customer projects.
Research and development expenses
A summary of the main drivers of the change in research and development expenses for the periods presented, is as follows:
We expect to continue to incur a significant amount of research and development expenses during the foreseeable future. Although we have terminated development work for our DetermaDx product line, we will continue development of DetermaIO™, DetermaTx™, and DetermaMx™, clinical trials to promote commercialization of DetermaRx™, and development of our planned DetermaCNI™ test from the Chronix merger. Our future research and development efforts and expenses will also depend on the amount of capital that we are able to raise to finance those activities and whether we acquire rights to any new diagnostic tests. A portion of our costs for leasing and operating our CLIA laboratories in California and Tennessee, and in Germany, will also be included in research and development expenses to the extent allocated to the development of our diagnostic tests.
The COVID-19 global pandemic has negatively impacted, and is expected to continue to negatively impact, patient recruitment for clinical trials necessary for us to promote the use of DetermaRx™ by physicians, and clinical trials of immunotherapies by pharma companies that may use DetermaIO™ in selecting patients for their trials. We believe that our planned DetermaRx™ clinical trials are critical to gaining physician adoption and driving favorable coverage decisions by private payers, and we expect our investment in the DetermaRx™ clinical trial to increase over time. We may also commence our own clinical trials of DetermaIO™ if we develop that diagnostic test to the point where we determine that its use as a clinical diagnostic appears to be feasible.
Sales and marketing expenses
A summary of the main drivers of the change in sales and marketing expenses for the periods presented, is as follows:
We expect to continue to incur a significant amount of sales and marketing expenses during the foreseeable future as we continue to market and sell DetermaRx™ and if we successfully complete product development and begin commercialization efforts for DetermaIO™ as a clinical test. Sales and marketing expenses will also increase if we successfully develop and begin commercializing DetermaCNI™, DetermaTx™, and DetermaMx™, or if we acquire and commercialize other diagnostic tests. Our commercialization efforts and expenses will also depend on the amount of capital that we are able to raise to finance commercialization of our tests. Our future expenditures on sales and marketing will also depend on the amount of revenue that those efforts are likely to generate. Because physicians are more likely to prescribe a test for their patients if the cost is covered by Medicare or health insurance, demand for our diagnostic and other tests and our expenditures on sales and marketing are likely to increase if our diagnostic or other tests qualify for reimbursement by Medicare or private health insurance companies
General and administrative expenses
A summary of the main drivers of the change in general and administrative expenses for the periods presented, is as follows:
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
We will pay contingent consideration if various payment milestones are triggered under the merger agreements through which we acquired Insight and Chronix. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Report. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration will be based on our reassessment of the key assumptions underlying the determination of this liability as changes in circumstances and conditions occur from the Insight acquisition date to the reporting period being presented, with the subsequent change in fair value recorded as part of our consolidated loss from operations for that period. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we recorded an unrealized loss of approximately $27.3 million and an unrealized gain of approximately $4.0 million related to the decrease in the fair value of contingent consideration primarily attributable to a revised estimate on the timing of the possible future payouts, respectively.
Other income and expenses, net
Other income and expenses, net, is primarily comprised of interest income and interest expenses, net, pro rata loss from our equity method investment in Razor prior to February 24, 2021, and unrealized gains and losses on Lineage and AgeX Therapeutics, Inc. (“AgeX”) marketable equity securities we hold. Interest income is earned from money market funds we hold for capital preservation. Interest expense was incurred under our loan payable to the Silicon Valley Bank, our loan from the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) and under financing lease obligations. Interest expense, net, reflects the interest expense incurred on our loans and financing obligations in excess of interest income earned from money market accounts. During May 2021, Oncocyte’s PPP loan obligation was forgiven and the principal amount of $1,140,930 was recognized as gain on extinguishment of debt in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. All previously accrued PPP loan interest expenses of $11,000 were reversed in the second quarter of 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded interest expense, net, of $0.2 million from our loans and financing leases. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded interest expense, net, of $0.3 million from our loans and financing leases. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $0.2 million of unrealized gain from the fair market value increase of the marketable equity securities we hold in shares of Lineage and AgeX common stock. We did not sell any marketable securities during any of the periods presented. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we held marketable equity securities with a total fair market value of $0.9 million and $0.7 million, respectively.
Income taxes
A summary of the income taxes and tax rates for the periods presented, is as follows:
In connection with the Chronix and Razor acquisitions discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included else wherein this Report, a change in the acquirer’s valuation allowance that stems from the purchase of assets should be recognized as an element of the acquirer’s income tax benefit in the period of the acquisition. Accordingly, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a $9.3 million partial release of our valuation allowance and a corresponding income tax benefit stemming from the deferred tax liability generated by the Chronix and Razor intangible assets we acquired.
In connection with the acquisition of Insight discussed in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report, and in accordance with business combination accounting standards, a change in the acquirer’s valuation allowance that stems from a business combination should be recognized as an element of the acquirer’s income tax expense or benefit in the period of the acquisition. Accordingly, for the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $1.3 million partial release of our valuation allowance with a corresponding income tax benefit stemming from the deferred tax liabilities generated by the acquired Insight in-process research and development (IPR&D) and customer relationships intangible assets.
A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Other than the partial release discussed above for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we established a full valuation allowance for all periods presented due to the uncertainty of realizing future tax benefits from our net operating loss carryforwards and other deferred tax assets. Accordingly, due to losses incurred for all periods presented, we did not record any provision or benefit for income taxes except for the tax benefit recorded in connection with the acquisitions discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We finance our operations primarily through the sale of our common stock. We have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows since inception and had an accumulated deficit of $187.8 million at December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur operating losses and negative cash flows for the near future.
At December 31, 2021, we had $35.6 million of cash and cash equivalents and held shares of Lineage and AgeX common stock as marketable equity securities valued at $0.9 million. Oncocyte believes that its current cash, cash equivalents and marketable equity securities are sufficient to carry out current operations through at least twelve months from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements included in this Report.
On October 17, 2019, we refinanced our loan with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Bank”) as further discussed in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. On April 2, 2020, as part of the Bank’s COVID-19 pandemic relief program, Oncocyte and the Bank entered into a Loan Deferral Agreement (“Loan Deferral”) with respect to the Amended Loan Agreement. Under the Loan Deferral Agreement, the Bank agreed to (i) extend the scheduled maturity date of the Amended Loan Agreement from March 31, 2022 to September 30, 2022, and (ii) deferred the principal payments by an additional 6 months whereby payments of interest only on the Bank loan principal balance will be due monthly from May 1, 2020 through October 1, 2020, followed by 23 monthly payments of principal and interest beginning on November 1, 2020, all provided at no additional fees to Oncocyte. The outstanding principal amount of the loan, with interest accrued, the final payment fee, and the prepayment fee may become due and payable prior to the applicable maturity date if an “Event of Default” as defined in the Loan and Security Agreement, as amended governing the loan (the “Loan Agreement”) occurs and is not cured within any applicable cure period. Upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an Event of Default, all obligations due to the Bank will bear interest at a rate per annum which is 5% above the then applicable interest rate. An Event of Default includes, among other events, failure to pay interest and principal when due, material adverse changes, which include a material adverse change in Oncocyte’s business, operations, or condition (financial or otherwise), failure to provide the bank with timely consolidated financial statements and copies of filings with the SEC, as required, legal judgments or pending or threatened legal actions of $50,000 or more, insolvency, and delisting from the national securities exchange on which our common stock trades. Oncocyte’s obligations under the Loan Agreement are collateralized by substantially all of its assets other than intellectual property such as patents and trade secrets that Oncocyte owns. Accordingly, if an Event of Default were to occur and not be cured, the Bank could foreclose on its security interest in the collateral. We are in compliance with the Loan Agreement, as amended, as of the filing date of this Report.
On April 23, 2020, Oncocyte obtained a U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan in the principal amount of $1,140,930 from Silicon Valley Bank (the “Bank”). The PPP loan bore interest at a rate of 1% per annum (see Note 12) and was scheduled to mature on April 23, 2022. During May 2021, the principal amount and accrued interest on the PPP loan was forgiven by the Bank through the SBA under the provisions of the PPP loan program. Although Oncocyte was obligated to make monthly payments of principal and interest on the PPP loan commencing in November 2020, each in such equal amount required to fully amortize the principal amount outstanding by the maturity date, Oncocyte was not billed or charged for any payments for the PPP loan during its loan forgiveness application. The forgiven principal amount of $1,140,930 is recognized as gain on extinguishment of debt in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
On June 11, 2021, Oncocyte entered into an at-the-market sales agreement with BTIG, LLC as sales agent and/or principal (the “Agent”) pursuant to which Oncocyte may sell up to an aggregate of $50,000,000 of shares of Oncocyte common stock from time to time through the Agent (the “ATM Offering”).
Between July 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021, Oncocyte sold 1,108,650 shares of common stock at an average offering price of $5.63 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $6.24 million through the ATM Offering. Oncocyte will need to raise additional capital to finance its operations, including the development and commercialization of its cancer diagnostic and other tests, until such time as it is able to generate sufficient revenues from the commercialization of one or more of its LDTs and other tests and performing Pharma Services to cover its operating expenses.
We expect that our operating expenses will increase as we build our marketing and sales force and add new equipment and personnel to our CLIA laboratories to commercialize DetermaRx™, followed by DetermaIO™ for clinical use and other diagnostic tests in our pipeline after development is completed, including DetermaCNITM. Although we intend to market our diagnostic tests in the United States through our own sales force, we are also beginning to make marketing arrangements with distributors in other countries. We may also explore a range of other commercialization options in order to enter overseas markets and to reduce our capital needs and expenditures, and the risks associated the timelines and uncertainty for attaining the Medicare reimbursement approvals that will be essential for the successful commercialization of additional cancer diagnostic tests. Those alternative arrangements could include marketing arrangements with other diagnostic companies through which we might receive a licensing fee and royalty on sales, or through which we might form a joint venture to market one or more tests and share in net revenues, in the United States or abroad.
In addition to sales and marketing expenses we will incur expenses from leasing and improving our new office and laboratory facilities in Irvine California, from operating our CLIA laboratories in Nashville, Tennessee and our CLIA laboratory at our Irvine facility, and from leasing our facility in Brisbane, California.
We will need to continue to raise additional capital to finance our operations, including the development and commercialization of our diagnostic tests, and making payments that may become due under our obligations to Razor shareholders and Insight shareholders, until such time as we are able to generate sufficient revenues to cover our operating expenses. Delays in the development of DetermaIO™, or obtaining reimbursement coverage from Medicare for that diagnostic test and for the other diagnostic tests that we may develop or acquire, could prevent us from raising sufficient additional capital to finance the completion of development and commercial launch of those tests. Investors may be reluctant to provide us with capital until our tests are approved for reimbursement by Medicare or reimbursement by private healthcare insurers or healthcare providers, or until we begin generating significant amounts of revenue from performing those tests. The unavailability or inadequacy of financing or revenues to meet future capital needs could force us to modify, curtail, delay, or suspend some or all aspects of our planned operations. Sales of additional equity securities could result in the dilution of the interests of our shareholders. We cannot assure that adequate financing will be available on favorable terms, if at all.
Our ability to generate revenues from operating activities and the availability of financing may be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic which could continue to cause deferrals of cancer surgeries that might otherwise have resulted in the utilization of DetermaRx™, or could cause the deferral of clinical development of therapies that might otherwise have resulted in the utilization of DetermaIO™ or our Pharma Services. The commercial release of DetermaRx™ and our acquisition of the Insight Pharma Services business during the COVID-19 pandemic has rendered it more difficult for prospective investors to forecast the demand for our diagnostic testing and Pharma Services and to assess our opportunities for growth. Although the deployment of the recently developed vaccines may quell the impact of COVID-19, the pandemic could continue to depress national and international economies and disrupt capital markets, supply chains, and aspects of our operations for a period of time, all of which may render it more difficult for us to secure additional financing when needed. The extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will ultimately impact our business, results of operations, financial condition, or cash flows is highly uncertain and difficult to predict because it will depend on many factors that are outside of our control, such as the duration, scope and severity of the pandemic, steps required or mandated by governments to mitigate the impact of the pandemic, and whether COVID-19 can be effectively prevented and contained by the new vaccines, and whether effective treatments may be developed. We do not yet know the extent to which COVID-19 will negatively impact our financial results or liquidity.
Cash used in operating activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our total research and development expenses were $13.6 million and $9.8 million, respectively, our general and administrative expenses were $22.3 million and $16.8 million, respectively, and our sales and marketing expenses were $11.2 million and $6.5 million, respectively. We also incurred $7.5 million in cost of revenues, including $3.4 million amortization of intangible expenses, in the year ended 2021. Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 amounted to $64.1 million and $30.0 million, respectively, and net cash used in operating activities amounted to $35.9 million and $26.0 million, respectively. Our cash used in operating activities during 2021 does not include the following noncash items: $27.3 million in loss from the change in fair value of contingent consideration; $9.3 million income tax benefit; $6.8 million in stock-based compensation; $4.3 million in depreciation and amortization expenses; $1.1 million gain on extinguishment of debt; $0.3 million in pro rata loss from our equity method investment in Razor; and $0.2 million in unrealized gain on marketable equity securities. Changes in operating assets and liabilities were approximately $0.1 million as an additional use of cash.
Cash used in investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $14.0 million, primarily attributable to the acquisition of the remaining interests in Razor, net of cash acquired, of $6.6 million; $2.2 million paid for construction in progress and purchase of furniture and equipment; $0.6 million repayment of the Insight cash holdback; and $4.5 million for the acquisition of Chronix.
Cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $78.4 million, primarily attributable to $74.9 million of net cash proceeds from the sale of shares of common stock, including $12.3 million of net cash proceeds from at-the-market transactions, $2.6 million from exercises of warrants, and $2.6 million from exercises of stock options, offset by repayments of principal on loans payable and financing lease obligations of $1.5 million, and $0.2 million on common shares received and retired for employee taxes paid. See Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of SEC Regulation S-K.