ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion and analysis of (i) industry operations that have an impact on the Company’s financial position and results of operations, (ii) the Company’s financial condition at December 31, 2021 and 2020 and its results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and (iii) critical accounting policies used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. All dollar amounts are presented in thousands, except daily dollar amounts and per share amounts.
GENERAL
We are a leading provider of energy transportation services, delivering crude oil and petroleum products. Our 24-vessel fleet operates as a single reportable segment. We believe that this is appropriate as our chief operating decision maker makes decisions about resource allocations and reviews and measures our results as one line of business with similar regulatory requirements, customers and commodities transported. Our active vessel fleet, of which 22 are U.S. Flag vessels, consists of three crude oil tankers doing business in Alaska, two conventional ATBs, two lightering ATBs, three shuttle tankers, ten MR tankers, and two non-Jones Act MR tankers that participate in the U.S. Maritime Security Program. The Company also owns and operates one Marshall Islands flagged MR tanker which trades internationally. Revenues are derived predominantly from time charter agreements, which provide a predictable level of revenues. We derived approximately 29% of our total shipping revenues and 27% of our total TCE revenues in the spot market and COAs for 2021.
The ongoing Coronavirus pandemic has severely impacted global and national economies. During 2020, lockdown orders, business closures and travel restrictions among many other events reduced the demand for many products, including petroleum. 2021 was characterized by the introduction of COVID-19 vaccines, business recovery and two different COVID-19 variants that all impacted overall business conditions. During the second half of 2021, there were increases in refinery operations and end user demand for transportation fuels. Demand is expected to continue to increase in 2022 to levels exceeding pre-pandemic levels. Although there has been an increase in demand, business uncertainty for our customers remains, which has resulted in a reluctance to enter into longer term transportation commitments. Customers currently favor shorter term agreements. We believe that as their visibility and confidence in the future returns there will be a resumption of more typical customer behavior and time charter activity will rebound.
The ongoing pandemic also resulted in the non-renewal of charters for vessels whose time charters ended late in 2020 and early in 2021. In response to this we placed seven vessels in layup for most of 2021. This allows us to reduce the operating costs associated with vessels that are without charter. We saw an increase in demand during the second half of 2021. As a result, two of the seven vessels came out of layup in September 2021 and operated in the spot market. One of these two vessels commenced a 26-month time charter in mid-November 2021. A third vessel came out of layup in December 2021 and operated in the spot market. In January 2022 and late February 2022, two more vessels came out of layup. As of March 1, 2022, we have two vessels remaining in layup.
Immediately prior to this filing, recent geopolitical tensions involving Russia and the Ukraine have disrupted markets and resulted in volatile oil prices. The impact of this situation is uncertain and ongoing.
OPERATIONS AND OIL TANKER MARKETS
Our revenues are highly sensitive to patterns of supply and demand for vessels of the size and design configurations owned and operated by us and the trades in which those vessels operate. Rates for the transportation of crude oil and refined petroleum products are determined by market forces such as the supply and demand for oil, the distance that cargoes must be transported, and the number of vessels expected to be available at the time cargoes need to be transported. In the Jones Act trades within which the substantial majority of our vessels operate, demand factors for transportation are affected almost exclusively by supply and distribution decisions of oil producers, refiners and distributors based in the United States. Further, the demand for U.S. domestic oil shipments is significantly affected by the state of the U.S. and global economies, the level of imports into the U.S. from OPEC and other foreign producers, oil production in the United States, and the relative price differentials of U.S. produced crude oil and refined petroleum products as compared with comparable products sourced from or destined for foreign markets, including the cost of transportation on international flag vessels to or from those markets. The number of vessels is affected by newbuilding deliveries and by the removal of existing vessels from service, principally through storage, layup, deletions, or conversions. Our revenues are also affected by the mix of charters between spot (voyage charters which include short-term time charters) and long-term (time or bareboat charters).
27 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Beginning in the 2020 first quarter, COVID-19 caused material disruptions in demand for and an oversupply of crude oil and refined products. During the second half 2020, large inventory builds around the world ensued. Managed reductions in both crude oil production levels and refinery utilization rates have combined to reduce inventory levels over the past year. As supply has been constrained, crude oil prices in particular have risen strongly in response. As a result, many analysts now consider market conditions to be favorable for increased oil production, and a corresponding rise in the demand for its transportation. These predictions reflect estimates on the prevalence of COVID-19 and the recovery of the global economy. Energy markets are global in nature and the pace and extent of COVID-19 and the changing state of its presence in all markets is an important factor in understanding the timing and extent of recovery of supply and consumption patterns within the U.S. While COVID-19 has presented our industry and markets with significant challenges, we believe that we have thus far managed its impact on our business operations well, with all of our Jones Act and internationally trading vessels able to load, transit and discharge cargo without material interruption.
Despite the foregoing, the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic continues to weigh on demand and transport pricing dynamics in the global liquid bulk transportation markets. While demand for transportation fuels in the United States has recovered strongly from 2020 lows, weak international markets have contributed to increased imports of both crude oil and refined product into the U.S. when compared with prior periods. Import substitution for domestic supply has dampened demand, especially for conventional Jones Act tankers, and continues to create conditions of business uncertainty for our customers and, accordingly, for our business. Our customers’ reluctance to enter into longer-term transportation commitments has been a continuing condition since the onset of the pandemic. In the face of this soft demand environment, we placed seven vessels in layup. During the second half of 2021, we reactivated three vessels in response to increasing charterer demand. Three tankers and one ATB remained in layup at the end of the fourth quarter of 2021. We have returned two additional vessels to service in January and February 2022. Laying up vessels in times of limited near-term employment opportunities allows us to reduce the costs associated with vessels that are without charter.
While the recovery slope of domestic marine transportation demand levels has been flatter than what had been expected earlier in the 2021 year, we believe that, as our customers’ visibility and confidence in the future returns, the market will tighten and there will be a resumption of more typical customer behavior, and time charter activity will rebound. Timing of the reactivation of vessels remaining in layup is contingent upon increased demand from our domestic customer base. We anticipate that as consumption patterns for transportation fuels globally regains traction, demand for Jones Act tanker domestically should normalize. A normalization of fuel demand patterns consistent with historical levels of consumption is expected to stimulate more marine transportation demand, which in turn should lead to a reactivation of vessels from layup to meet any such increase in demand. The pace and trajectory of demand recovery continues to be influenced by many factors, including progress in resolving the pandemic, both within and outside of the US, and near-term uncertainty will continue to define a wide spectrum of possible vessel reactivation outcomes as we move through the balance of the year.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented procedures to protect the health and safety of our employees, crew and contractors. These procedures and protocols are those mandated or recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the U.S. Coast Guard, local ports and shipyards, and country- and state-specific requirements. They include such actions as providing personal protective equipment, managing the locations where crew members board and depart from our vessels, requiring crew members to disclose symptoms and the health of those they have been in contact with, mandatory quarantine periods imposed prior to joining any vessel, sanitization of the vessels, mandating face coverings when non-crew are on board, social distancing and requiring testing in certain instances. COVID-19 has also impacted planned shipyard maintenance and vetting activities, resulting in delays, rescheduling and extensions. These additional procedures and delays have resulted in increased costs, which at this point in time, have not been material but are expected to continue and may increase.
Having our vessels committed on time charters is a fundamental objective of our chartering strategy. The majority of available vessel operating days are covered with medium-term charters or contracts of affreightment. However, medium-term charters may not always be remunerative, nor prove achievable under certain market conditions. As a result, some of our vessels may operate in the spot market, which is more volatile and less predictable. In some cases, where neither time charter nor consistent spot market business is available, layup and removal of vessels from an actively available status is deemed necessary. Because shipping revenues and voyage expenses are significantly affected by the mix between voyage charters and time charters, we manage our vessels based on TCE revenues and rates, which are non-GAAP measures.
COVID-19 induced demand destruction that started in March 2020 resulted in minimal spot market activity for most of 2021. There has been an increase of spot activity in the fourth quarter of 2021 with 30 spot fixtures versus 18 spot fixtures in the third quarter of 2021. For the 30 spot fixtures, 12 were performed by tankers and the remaining were performed by ATBs.
28 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Our vessels, excluding vessels in layup, were employed for 93% of available days during 2021, with 342 of a total 5,174 available days (available days excludes 189 days vessels were offhire due to drydock requirements) seeing vessels idle without employment. Two of our tankers, the Overseas Nikiski and the Overseas Key West, exited layup and returned to service in September 2021. Another tanker, the Overseas Anacortes, exited layup and returned to service in December 2021.
Industry-wide, there were no firm Jones Act tank vessel orders as of December 31, 2021.
Delaware Bay lightering volumes averaged 70,000 b/d in 2021 compared with 58,000 b/d in 2020. Refinery demand for crude oil has increased from the low demand levels in 2020 caused by COVID-19. We have contract minimums with our refinery customers that compensate us for barrels not lightered below specified minimum amounts.
On March 12, 2020, our subsidiaries completed the purchase of the Alaskan Explorer, Alaskan Legend and Alaskan Navigator (the “Alaskan tankers”) from BP Oil Shipping Company USA and AP AMI Leasing Inc. (“BP”) and entered into a bareboat charter with BP for a fourth vessel, the Alaskan Frontier. The Alaskan Frontier is currently in layup. In connection with these transactions, we also completed the acquisition of the other members’ interests in ATC, making ATC a wholly owned subsidiary of OSG. Operating results of these vessels are included from that date.
RESULTS FROM VESSEL OPERATIONS
During the year ended December 31, 2021, shipping revenues decreased by $59,630, or 14.2% compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily a result of (a) a 1,894-day increase in layup days due to seven vessels in layup for most of 2021, a decision taken in light of the lack of demand due to the economic impact of COVID-19, (b) one less MR tanker in our fleet, Overseas Gulf Coast, which was sold during the second quarter of 2021 and (c) two fewer ATBs, which were sold in May 2020 and August 2020. The decrease was offset by (a) a 204-day decrease in scheduled drydocking, (b) the addition to our fleet of three crude oil tankers, Alaskan tankers, which were purchased in March 2020, and two ATBs, OSG 204 and OSG 205, which were delivered at the end of May 2020 and the beginning of December 2020, respectively, (c) an increase in Delaware Bay lightering volumes and (d) five Military Sealift Command voyages, which were longer international voyages, during 2021 compared to two such voyages during 2020. Two of seven vessels came out of layup in September 2021 and operated in the spot market. One of these two vessels commenced a 26-month time charter in mid-November 2021. A third vessel came out of layup in December 2021 and operated in the spot market.
Reconciliations of TCE revenues, a non-GAAP measure, to shipping revenues as reported in the consolidated statements of operations follows:
Consistent with general practice in the shipping industry, we use TCE revenues, which represents shipping revenues less voyage expenses, as a measure to compare revenue generated from a voyage charter to revenue generated from a time charter. TCE revenues, a non-GAAP measure, provides additional meaningful information in conjunction with shipping revenues, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, because it assists management in decisions regarding the deployment and use of our vessels and in evaluating their financial performance.
29 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
The following table provides a breakdown of TCE rates achieved for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 between spot and fixed earnings and the related revenue days.
(a) Excludes one Alaska vessel currently in layup.
During 2021, TCE revenues decreased by $83,284, or 22.1%, to $292,595 from $375,879 in 2020. The decrease was primarily a result of (a) a 1,894-day increase in layup days due to seven vessels in layup for most of 2021, a decision taken in light of the lack of demand due to the economic impact of COVID-19, (b) one less MR tanker in our fleet, Overseas Gulf Coast, which was sold during the second quarter of 2021 and (c) two fewer ATBs, which were sold in May 2020 and August 2020. The decrease was offset by (a) a 204-day decrease in scheduled drydocking, (b) the addition to our fleet of three crude oil tankers, Alaskan tankers, which were purchased in March 2020, and two ATBs, OSG 204 and OSG 205, which were delivered at the end of May 2020 and the beginning of December 2020, respectively, (c) an increase in Delaware Bay lightering volumes and (d) five voyages for Military Sealift Command, which were longer international voyages, during 2021 compared to two such voyages during 2020. Two of seven vessels came out of layup in September 2021 and operated in the spot market. One of these two vessels commenced a 26-month time charter in mid-November 2021. A third vessel came out of layup in December 2021 and operated in the spot market.
Voyage expenses increased by $23,654, or 55.2%, to $66,467 in 2021 from $42,813 in 2020 primarily a result of an increase in expenses for oil pollution mitigation services for the Alaskan tankers as we acquired the vessels on March 12, 2020. These expenses are passed through to the charterer each month. Additionally, voyage expenses increased due to increases in fuel and port expenses related to more voyage charters performed by our vessels in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in freight brokerage fees due to more vessels in layup during 2021 compared to 2020.
Vessel expenses decreased by $19,053, or 11.9%, to $140,413 in 2021 from $159,466 in 2020 primarily due to a decrease in crewing costs. The decrease in crewing costs was due to seven vessels in layup for most of 2021, a decision taken in light of the lack of demand due to the economic impact of COVID-19.
Depreciation expense increased by $3,310, or 5.6%, to $61,823 in 2021 from $58,513 in 2020. The increase primarily resulted from an increase in depreciation expense due to the addition of three crude oil tankers, Alaskan tankers, to our fleet in March 2020 and the addition of our newbuild barges, OSG 204 and OSG 205, which entered service during the end of the second quarter of 2020 and fourth quarter of 2020, respectively, and an increase in amortization of drydock costs.
Two reflagged U.S. Flag Product Carriers participate in the U.S. Maritime Security Program, which is designed to ensure that privately-owned, military-useful U.S. Flag vessels are available to the U.S. Department of Defense in the event of war or national emergency. Each of the vessel-owning companies receives an annual stipend, subject in each case to annual congressional appropriations, which is intended to offset the increased cost incurred by such vessels from operating under the U.S. Flag. Such stipend was $5,250 for each vessel in 2021 and $5,058 on one vessel and $4,607 on one vessel in 2020.
Under the terms of the program, we expect to receive up to $5,300 for each vessel in 2022. We do not receive a stipend for any days for which either of the two vessels operate under a time charter to a U.S. government agency.
30 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
BAD DEBT RECOVERY
Bad debt recovery was $1,080 in 2021 compared to $0 in 2020. In June 2019, one of our lightering customers, Philadelphia Energy Solutions LLC (“PES”), suffered an explosion and fire at its refinery in the Delaware Bay. In July 2019, PES filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition. At the end of the second quarter of 2019, we established a loss provision of $4,300 related to $4,300 in outstanding receivables from PES. In May 2020, the PES bankruptcy process resulted in the sale of the refinery complex, which was permanently closed. During the fourth quarter of 2021, our recovery became determinable and we recognized a recovery of $1,080. The $1,080 payment was received by us in February 2022.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
During 2021, general and administrative expenses decreased by $2,772, or 10.3%, to $24,097 from $26,869 in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by lower compensation and benefits costs and lower consulting and accounting fees.
LOSS ON DISPOSAL OF VESSELS AND OTHER PROPERTY, INCLUDING IMPAIRMENTS, NET
Loss on disposal of vessels and other property, including impairments, net was $6,276 in 2021 compared to $982 in 2020. The increase primarily was a result of the sale of the Overseas Gulf Coast during the second quarter of 2021 for $32,128, net of broker commissions and other fees, resulting in a loss, and an impairment charge of $1,000 recorded on two of the Company’s leased vessels. During 2020, losses were recognized due to the sale of two ATBs.
GAIN ON TERMINATION OF PRE-EXISTING ARRANGEMENT
Gain on termination of pre-existing arrangement was $0 for 2021 compared to $19,172 in 2020. The decrease was due to our acquisition of ATC on March 12, 2020. Our pre-existing ATC arrangements with a minimum term through December 2023 were terminated at the time of acquisition and a non-cash gain equal to the value of the remaining arrangement of $19,172 was recognized.
LOSS ON EXTINGUISHMENT OF DEBT, NET
Loss on extinguishment of debt, net was $8,031 in 2021 compared to $793 in 2020. The increase was due to a $5,295 write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and $2,736 of prepayment fees related to the pay off of our term loans, due 2023 and 2026, a prepayment made on our Alaska tankers term loan, due 2025, during the third quarter of 2021, and a prepayment made on our OSG 204 LLC term loan, due 2025, during the fourth quarter of 2021. During 2020, losses were recognized due to a write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs related to mandatory prepayments on our term loan, due 2023, as a result of the sale of two of our ATBs.
INTEREST EXPENSE
Interest expense increased $5,158, or 21.4%, to $29,203 in 2021 from $24,045 in 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily related to the addition of the OSG 205 LLC and OSG Courageous II LLC term loan, due 2027, in the fourth quarter of 2020 and less interest capitalized during 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was offset by a decrease due to the pay off of the term loan on the Overseas Gulf Coast during the third quarter of 2020.
INCOME TAX EXPENSE
The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 28.1% and 17.1%, respectively. The tonnage tax exclusion created a change in the tax rate in 2021 over 2020 due to the change from net income in 2020 to a net loss in 2021. The effective rate also changed as a result of a smaller change in the state related uncertain tax positions.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal net operating loss carryforwards of $243,547 that are available to reduce future taxes, if any. The existing federal net operating loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2034.
31 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
LIQUIDITY AND SOURCES OF CAPITAL
Our business is capital intensive. Our ability to successfully implement our strategy is dependent on the continued availability of capital on attractive terms. In addition, our ability to successfully operate our business to meet near-term and long-term debt repayment obligations is dependent on maintaining sufficient liquidity.
Liquidity
Working capital from continuing operations at December 31, 2021 was approximately $(67,000) compared with approximately $(93,000) at December 31, 2020. Excluding the current portion of operating and finance lease liabilities, working capital was approximately $37,000 at December 31, 2021 compared to $1,700 at December 31, 2020. The increase in working capital was primarily due to (a) an increase in cash and cash equivalents from proceeds received on the term loan, due 2028, we entered into on September 29, 2021 as discussed below, (b) a decrease in current installments of long-term debt due to the replacement and pay off of our term loan, due 2023, and term loan, due 2026, with the term loan, due 2028, which reduced our principal payments and (c) an increase in receivables related to the timing of collection from our customers at December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total liquidity on a consolidated basis comprised principally of $83,172 of cash and cash equivalents. We manage our cash in accordance with our intercompany cash management system. Our cash and cash equivalents, as well as our restricted cash balances, generally exceed Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance limits. We place our cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash in what we believe to be creditworthy financial institutions. In addition, certain of our money market accounts invest in U.S. Treasury securities or other obligations issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government or its agencies. Restricted cash as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was related to requirements under the Unsecured Senior Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total debt outstanding (net of deferred financing costs) of $444,740 and a total debt to total capitalization of 56.7%, compared to $429,120 and 53.0%, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
Sources, Uses and Management of Capital
We generate significant cash flows from our complementary mix of time charters, voyage charters and contracts of affreightment. Net cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11,832. In addition to operating cash flows, our other current potential sources of funds are additional borrowings, proceeds from the opportunistic sales of our vessels and proceeds from additional issuances of equity securities. In the past, we have also obtained funds from the issuance of long-term debt securities.
We use capital to fund working capital requirements, maintain the quality of our vessels, comply with U.S. and international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations and repay or repurchase our outstanding loan facilities. We may also use cash generated by operations to finance capital expenditures to modernize and grow our fleet.
During the first quarter of 2021 we received a firm offer for the sale of the Overseas Gulf Coast. Based on the negotiated sale terms, we recorded a loss of $5,446 on the planned disposition of this tanker. In April 2021, we entered into a contract to sell the vessel for $31,850, net of broker commissions. The sale of the vessel was completed in June 2021 for $32,128, net of broker commissions and other fees, resulting in an immaterial gain recognized during the second quarter of 2021, which is included in loss on disposal of vessels and other property, including impairments, net on the consolidated statements of operations.
On September 29, 2021, certain subsidiaries (the “Borrowers”) of the Company entered into a seven-year, $325,000 term loan credit facility with Stonebriar Commercial Finance (“Stonebriar $325,000 loan”). Proceeds were used to pay off the Company’s term loan, due 2023, with The Prudential Insurance Company of America, as administrative agent, and certain other lenders, and the Company’s term loan, due 2026, with Wintrust Commercial Finance, for $237,983 and $20,298, respectively. Additionally, the Company used proceeds to make a prepayment of $16,000, to partially refinance a term loan with Banc of America Leasing & Capital, LLC, the Company’s Alaska tankers term loan, due 2025. The remaining proceeds will be used for general working capital purposes. The Company recognized an aggregate net loss of $7,961 on these transactions, which reflects a write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs and prepayment fees. The new term loan bears interest at a rate of 7.75% and matures on October 1, 2028. The performance of the Borrowers’ obligations under the term loan is guaranteed by the Company and certain other subsidiaries and are secured by the Borrowers’ assets, including five tankers, three tugs, and two barges, and by the Company’s equity interests in certain of its subsidiaries.
32 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
The Company also completed amendments to the loans on the OSG 205 and OSG Courageous, Overseas Sun Coast and the Alaskan Explorer and Alaskan Navigator conforming the covenants with the Stonebriar $325,000 loan.
In November 2020, two of the Company’s subsidiaries, OSG 205 LLC and OSG Courageous II LLC, entered into a construction loan in the original principal amount of $49,150 of which $46,711 was drawn down to finance a new 204,000-barrel U.S. Flag oil and chemical ATB barge, OSG 205, and to refinance the tug to which the barge was paired, the OSG Courageous. The Company made a prepayment of $15,811, which included accrued interest on its term loan, due 2023. On December 3, 2020, upon completion and delivery of the OSG 205, the remainder of the construction loan was drawn down and the construction loan was converted to a term loan. The term loan had a fixed rate of interest of 6.37%. In March 2021, the Company obtained an amendment for certain financial covenants of the term loan. In connection with the amendment, the interest rate was updated to a fixed interest rate of 6.87% until the end of the first quarter of 2022. Beginning in the second quarter of 2022, the interest rate returns to a fixed interest rate of 6.37%. The loan is guaranteed by the Company and has a seven-year term maturing on December 1, 2027. The lenders hold a perfected first priority security interest and preferred ship mortgage against the barge and tug.
In June 2020, one of the Company’s subsidiaries, OSG 204 LLC, entered into a loan with Wintrust Commercial Finance in the aggregate original principal amount of $32,933 to finance a new 204,000-barrel U.S. Flag oil and chemical ATB barge. The loan had a fixed interest rate of 5.00%. On November 5, 2021, the Company amended the loan to align the term loan’s financial covenants with the Company’s new term loan with Stonebriar. In connection with the amendment, the Company made a prepayment of $3,000 on the outstanding balance of the loan and the loan’s interest rate was updated to a fixed interest rate of 5.75%. The loan is guaranteed by the Company and has a five-year term maturing on June 1, 2025. The lender holds a perfected first priority security interest and preferred ship mortgage against the vessel.
On March 12, 2020, the Company entered into a loan with Banc of America Leasing & Capital, LLC and other syndicate lenders in the aggregate original principal amount of $54,000 to finance the purchase of three U.S.-flagged crude oil carrier vessels, the Alaskan tankers. The loan is secured by first preferred ship mortgages on the vessels. On September 29, 2021, the Company made a prepayment of $16,000 to release the Alaskan Legend as security. The term loan is secured by first preferred ship mortgages on the Alaskan Explorer and Alaskan Navigator. The loan bears a fixed rate of interest of 4.43% and has a maturity date of March 12, 2025.
Outlook
The Company’s revenues are sensitive to often highly cyclical patterns of supply and demand. In the core Jones Act trades within which the majority of our vessels operate, demand factors for transportation have historically been affected almost exclusively by supply and distribution of refined petroleum products in the United States. The emergence of demand for domestic crude oil and renewable fuels transportation has in recent years added a new dimension to understanding traditional Jones Act trades. Balancing time charter coverage with spot market exposure in an uncertain demand environment is a persistent challenge, and considerations about the appropriate amount of capacity to remain active in the spot market are a regular management discussion point. Over the longer term, we consider the “normalized” market in which our vessels trade to be one that should be characterized by stable, longer term chartering relationships with our customer base. Notwithstanding this belief, during periods of surplus of available capacity, as was evident in recent years, low charter rates make medium term charters unattractive or simply unavailable. In such market environments, we have considered the cost of acquiring cash flow visibility by committing vessels to charter contracts at sustained loss-making rates as being too high when measured against what we believed to be an asymmetrical upside potential of being positioned to benefit from a recovery in rates. As time charters expire, it is possible that such time charters will not renew and, even if they do, they may not renew on comparable terms. Increased exposure to spot markets has been, and in the future will likely continue to be a consequence of such thinking. Conversely, as supply and demand move more consistently into balance, and time charters become more available at remunerative rates, an increase in both the number and duration of period charters entered into with our customers can be expected.
Earnings volatility which accompanies spot market exposure has important implications for liquidity management. The retention of relatively high cash balances and efforts to reduce overall levels of debt and operating and administrative costs should be understood as a necessary response to heightened uncertainty. In recent years, we have witnessed a strong trend towards rebalance of supply, as tightening age restrictions imposed by our core customer base has progressively limited the acceptability for use in service of vessels exceeding 20 years of age. A notable decline in the number of available trading vessels has occurred. Further, we have seen demand for domestic crude oil transportation act as an important swing factor in affecting a healthy balance between available vessel supply and overall domestic transportation demand. This recent positive trend has been interrupted by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic which caused a dramatic drop in domestic and international transportation fuels demand. Changing mobility patterns arising out of stay-at-home and restricted travel policies impacted the refining and distribution industry acutely. The short-term need for marine assets to move fuels in a constrained demand environment was equally affected. These developments resulted in increased volatility and decreased forward visibility of our future earnings, given the uncertainty surrounding the timing and the extent of a future recovery of normalized demand. Notwithstanding these immediately evident uncertainties, the market transition that has seen a rebalancing of supply in the period prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic offers cause for optimism that a return to a market offering an increase in both the number and the duration of time charter contracts for our vessels is foreseeable. Further, the emergence of new demand for transporting renewable fuels, and the prospects for growth in this demand in the years ahead, has introduced a new variable into the equation for determining the balance between future supply and demand. A return to normalized levels of demand in domestic refined product trades, coupled with increased renewable fuels transport activity, should each of these occur, would largely restore the market conditions which we consider to be supportive of our long-term business objectives.
During the third quarter of 2021, we refinanced certain of our debt, including our previously outstanding term loan due in 2023, with a new term loan due in 2028. The refinancing reduced our cash debt service requirements; lengthened the maturity profile of our loans by repaying loans with maturities in 2023 and 2026; and reducing the remaining balance of the Alaska tanker loan due in 2025; and provided additional cash to the Company. Capital investment requirements of our vessels is expected to decrease by approximately $6,000 in 2022 compared to 2021 levels. We believe that these items, coupled with improving operating results, will provide adequate resources to meet our needs.
33 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company did not have, during the periods presented, and does not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Carrying Value of Vessels
We believe that the availability, quality and reliability of fair market valuations of U.S Flag vessels are limited given the fact that the U.S. Flag market is relatively small and illiquid with very limited second hand sales and purchases activity from which to benchmark vessel values. As discussed in Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value Disclosures,” to our consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” we monitor for any indicators of impairment in regards to the carrying value of our vessels.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require the Company to make estimates in the application of its accounting policies based on the best assumptions, judgments, and opinions of management. Following is a discussion of the accounting policies that involve a higher degree of judgment and the methods of their application. For a description of all of the Company’s material accounting policies, see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Revenue Recognition
The majority of revenue is generated from time charters and is accounted for as operating leases and are thus recognized ratably over the rental periods of such charters, as service is performed. The Company does not recognize time charter revenues during periods that vessels are off hire.
The Company generates a portion of its revenue from voyage charters. Within the shipping industry, there are two methods used to account for voyage charter revenue: (1) ratably over the estimated length of each voyage and (2) completed voyage. The recognition of voyage revenues ratably over the estimated length of each voyage is the most prevalent method of accounting for voyage revenues in the shipping industry and the method used by OSG. Under each method, voyages may be calculated on either a load-to-discharge or discharge-to-discharge basis.
The Company recognizes revenue from voyage charters ratably over the estimated length of each voyage, calculated on a load-to-discharge basis. Under voyage charters, expenses such as fuel, port charges, canal tolls, cargo handling operations and brokerage commissions are paid by the Company whereas, under time and bareboat charters, such voyage costs are generally paid by the Company’s customers.
The Company enters into contracts of affreightment (each a “COA”) to provide transportation services between specified points for a stated quantity of cargo over a specific time period, but without designating voyage schedules. The Company’s COAs include minimum purchase requirements from customers that are expressed in either fixed monthly barrels, annual minimum barrel volume requirements or annual minimum number of voyages to complete. The Company is required to transport and the charterer is required to provide the Company with a minimum volume requirement. These contract minimums represent fixed consideration within the contract which is recognized as the distinct services of delivering barrels or voyages are performed in the series over time. The Company adjusts estimated revenue recognized for any minimum volume unexercised right.
34 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Vessel Lives and Salvage Values
The carrying value of each of the Company’s vessels represents its original cost at the time it was delivered or purchased less depreciation calculated using an estimated useful life of 25 years (except for new ATBs for which estimated useful lives of 30 years are used) from the date such vessel was originally delivered from the shipyard or 20 years from the date the Company’s ATBs were rebuilt. A vessel’s carrying value is reduced to its new cost basis (i.e. its current fair value) if a vessel impairment charge is recorded.
If the estimated economic lives assigned to the Company’s vessels prove to be too long because of new regulations, an extended period of weak markets, the broad imposition of age restrictions by the Company’s customers, or other future events, it could result in higher depreciation expense and impairment losses in future periods related to a reduction in the useful lives of any affected vessels. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further details.
The United States has not adopted the Hong Kong International Convention for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of Ships (the “Convention”). While the Convention is not in effect in the United States, the EPA and the MARAD have, from time to time, required the owners of U.S. Flag vessels to make certifications regarding the presence of certain toxic substances onboard vessels that they are seeking to sell to parties who (a) are not citizens of the United States and (b) intend to recycle the vessels after they have been purchased (the “Recycling Purchasers”). In the event that more stringent requirements are imposed upon the owners of U.S. Flag vessels seeking to sell their vessels to the Recycling Purchasers, such requirements could (a) negatively impact the sales prices obtainable from the Recycling Purchasers or (b) require companies, including OSG, to incur additional costs in order to sell their U.S. Flag vessels to the Recycling Purchasers or to other foreign buyers intending to use such vessels for further trading.
Intangible Assets
The Company allocates the cost of acquired companies to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities acquired, with the remaining amount being classified as goodwill. The Company’s intangible assets represent long-term customer relationships acquired as part of the 2006 purchase of Maritrans, Inc. See Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value Disclosures,” for further discussion.
Drydocking
Within the shipping industry, there are two methods that are used to account for dry dockings: (1) capitalize drydocking costs as incurred (deferral method) and amortize such costs over the period to the next scheduled drydocking, and (2) expense drydocking costs as incurred. Since drydocking cycles typically extend over two and a half years or five years, management uses the deferral method because management believes it provides a better matching of revenues and expenses than the expense-as-incurred method.
Newly Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to the Company’s consolidated financial statements set forth in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Acquisition of Alaska Tanker Company, LLC and related transactions
In connection with the Company’s acquisition of three vessels and remaining equity ownership interest in ATC in 2020, the Company accounted for these transactions collectively as an asset acquisition, with substantially all the cost of the acquisition attributed to the three vessels purchased from BP. The accounting for these transactions as an asset acquisition required the Company to estimate the fair value of the acquired vessels and related long term charter arrangements for determining whether the acquired assets were concentrated in a single asset. In doing so, the Company considered various assumptions including estimated salvage value of vessels, insured values of vessels, loan-to-value ratios and gross margin assumptions compared to similar existing arrangements. The Company also considered these estimates when allocating the purchase price to the acquired assets. See Note 6, “Investment in Alaska Tanker Company, LLC,” for further discussion on the Company’s acquisition of ATC.
35 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
Income Taxes, Deferred Tax Assets and Valuation Allowance
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. We are subject to income taxes only in the U.S. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the financial reporting and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and from events that have been recognized in the financial statements and will result in taxable or deductible amounts based on provisions of the tax law in different periods. In evaluating our ability to recover our net deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction from which they arise we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. A valuation allowance is established to the extent it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future.
Pension Benefits
In connection with the acquisition of Maritrans in November 2006, the Company assumed the obligations under the noncontributory defined benefit pension plan that covered eligible employees of Maritrans (“the Maritrans Plan”). The Company froze the benefits payable under the Maritrans Plan as of December 31, 2006. The Company has recorded pension benefit costs based on assumptions and valuations developed with the support of its actuarial consultants. These valuations are based on estimates and key assumptions, including those related to the discount rates, the rates expected to be earned on investments of plan assets and the life expectancy/mortality of plan participants. OSG is required to consider market conditions in selecting a discount rate that is representative of the rates of return currently available on high-quality fixed income investments. A higher discount rate would result in a lower benefit obligation and a lower rate would result in a higher benefit obligation. The expected rate of return on plan assets is management’s best estimate of expected returns on plan assets. A decrease in the expected rate of return will increase net periodic benefit costs and an increase in the expected rate of return will decrease benefit costs. The mortality assumption is management’s best estimate of the expected duration of future benefit payments at the measurement date. The estimate is based on the specific demographics and other relevant facts and circumstances of the Maritrans Plan and considers all relevant information available at the measurement date. Longer life expectancies would result in higher benefit obligations and a decrease in life expectancies would result in lower benefit obligations.
In determining the benefit obligations at the end of the year measurement date, the Company continues to use the equivalent single weighted-average discount rate, rounded to the nearest 5 basis points, that best matches projected benefit payments. See Note 15, “Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans,” for further discussion on the Company’s pension plans.
Vessel Impairment, Including Right-of-Use Assets
The carrying values of the Company’s vessels may not represent their fair market value or the amount that could be obtained by selling the vessel at any point in time since the market prices of second-hand vessels tend to fluctuate with changes in charter rates and the cost of newbuilds. Historically, both charter rates and vessel values tend to be cyclical. Management evaluates the carrying amounts of vessels held and used by the Company for impairment only when it determines that it will sell a vessel or when events or changes in circumstances occur that cause management to believe that future cash flows for any individual vessel may be less than its carrying value. In such instances, an impairment charge would be recognized if the estimate of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the vessel and its eventual disposition is less than the vessel’s carrying amount. This assessment is made at the individual vessel level as separately identifiable cash flow information for each vessel is available.
36 Overseas Shipholding Group, Inc.
In developing estimates of future cash flows, the Company must make assumptions about future performance, with significant assumptions being related to charter rates, ship operating expenses, utilization, drydocking requirements, residual value and the estimated remaining useful lives of the vessels. These assumptions are based on historical trends as well as future expectations. Specifically, in estimating future charter rates, management takes into consideration rates currently in effect for existing time charters and estimated daily time charter equivalent rates for each vessel class for the unfixed days over the estimated remaining lives of each of the vessels. The estimated daily time charter equivalent rates used for unfixed days beyond the expiry of any current time charters are based on internally forecasted rates that take into consideration average annual rates published by a third party maritime research service and are consistent with forecasts provided to the Company’s senior management and Board of Directors. The internally forecasted rates are based on management’s evaluation of current economic data and trends in the shipping and oil and gas industries. Recognizing that the transportation of crude oil and petroleum products is cyclical and subject to significant volatility based on factors beyond the Company’s control, management believes the use of estimates based on the internally forecasted rates to be reasonable.
Estimated outflows for operating expenses and drydocking requirements are based on historical and budgeted costs and are adjusted for assumed inflation. Utilization is based on historical levels achieved and anticipated future demand. Estimates of a residual value are consistent with the pattern of recycling rates used in management’s evaluation of salvage value.
In estimating the fair value of vessels for the purposes of the impairment tests, the Company utilizes estimates of discounted future cash flows for each of the vessels (income approach) since the secondhand sale and purchase market for the type of U.S. Flag vessels owned by OSG is not considered to be robust. See Note 9, “Fair Value Measurements and Fair Value Disclosures,” for further discussion.