Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion contains forward-looking statements, including with respect to the durability of the acceleration we have experienced in the near term on consumer preferences for digital ordering, transaction volumes, and customer adoption of multi-modules, that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” We have omitted discussion of 2019 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in our final prospectus filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, on March 18, 2021, or the Prospectus, pursuant to Rule 424(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act.
Overview
We are Olo, a leading open SaaS platform for restaurants.
Our platform powers restaurant brands’ on-demand digital commerce operations, enabling digital ordering, delivery, front-of-house, or FOH, management and payments, while further strengthening and enhancing the restaurants’ direct consumer relationships. Consumers today expect more on-demand convenience and personalization from restaurants, particularly through digital channels, but many restaurants lack the in-house infrastructure and expertise to satisfy this increasing demand in a cost-effective manner. We provide restaurants with a business-to-business-to-consumer, enterprise-grade, open SaaS platform to manage their complex digital businesses and enable fast and more personalized experiences for their customers. Our platform and application programming interfaces, or APIs, seamlessly integrate with a wide range of solutions, unifying disparate technologies across the restaurant ecosystem. Restaurant brands rely on us to increase their digital omni-channel sales, maximize profitability, establish and maintain direct consumer relationships, and collect, protect, and leverage valuable consumer data. As a result of our ability to meet restaurant brands’ growing needs, gross merchandise value, or GMV, which we define as the gross value of orders processed through our platform, has increased on an annual basis, reaching more than $20 billion in GMV during the year ended December 31, 2021. Our well-established platform has led many of the major publicly traded and top 50 fastest growing private restaurant brands, measured by overall sales, in the United States to work with us and has been a factor in our high dollar-based net revenue retention. See the section titled “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance” below for additional information on how we calculate dollar-based net revenue retention. Further, industry-recognized outlets, including Restaurant Business Online, QSR Magazine, and AP News, have also deemed Olo a leading food ordering platform for the restaurant industry.
We built Olo with the goal of being the leading SaaS platform for the restaurant industry by aligning the solutions we have developed with the needs of our customers. Our platform initially focused on our Order Management solutions, a suite of fully-integrated, white-label, on-demand digital commerce and channel management solutions, enabling guests to order and pay directly from restaurants via mobile, web, kiosk, voice, and other digital channels, through our Ordering, Network, Switchboard, Kiosk, and Virtual Brands modules. We then expanded our platform by launching our Delivery Enablement solutions, including Dispatch, our delivery enablement module, and Rails, our aggregator and channel management module. In 2021 we acquired Wisely Inc, or Wisely. This acquisition added our Customer Engagement solutions, a suite of restaurant-centric marketing and sentiment solutions enabling restaurants to collect, analyze, and act on guest data to deepen relationships, boost revenue, and increase Customer Lifetime Value, or CLV, through the Marketing Automation, Sentiment, and Customer Data Platform, or CDP, modules, as well as our Front-of-House solutions, which enable restaurants to streamline the queue orders from multiple sales channels, optimize seat utilization in the dining room, and increase flow-through of reservation and waitlist parties through the Host module. The key milestones in our corporate history are the following:
•2005: Olo Founder and CEO Noah Glass accepted $0.5 million in Series A funding to start Mobo.
•2010: We renamed our company to “Olo” and shifted our focus to enterprise customers.
•2013: We surpassed $50 million in GMV and expanded our executive leadership team.
•2014: We surpassed $100 million in GMV, and restaurateur Danny Meyer joined our Board of Directors.
•2015: We launched Dispatch, our first significant product extension.
•2016: We surpassed $500 million in GMV.
•2017: We launched Rails and surpassed $1 billion in GMV.
•2018: We surpassed $2 billion in GMV.
•2019: We surpassed $5 billion in GMV.
•2020: We reached nearly $14.6 billion in GMV.
•2021: We completed our IPO, executed our first acquisition, and surpassed more than $20 billion in GMV.
Leading restaurant brands trust Olo’s enterprise-grade platform for its capabilities, reliability, security, scalability, and interoperability. Our platform currently handles, on average, more than 2 million orders per day. More than 85 million consumers have transacted on our platform over the last year. We continually invest in architectural improvements so that our system can scale in tandem with our continued growth. Additionally, both internal and external security experts frequently test our system for vulnerabilities. We have never experienced a material breach of customer or consumer data. Our open SaaS platform integrates with over 200 restaurant technology solutions including point-of-sale, or POS, systems, aggregators, delivery service providers, or DSPs, payment processors, user experience, or UX, and user interface, or UI, providers, and loyalty programs, giving our customers significant control over the configuration and features of their distinct digital offering.
We are the exclusive direct digital ordering provider for our leading brands across all service models of the restaurant industry, including quick service, fast casual, casual dining, family dining, and coffee and snack food. Our contracts typically have initial terms of three years or longer, with continuous one-year automatic renewal periods, providing visibility into our future financial performance. Our enterprise brands, meaning those brands having 50 or more locations, are also highly loyal.
We have a highly efficient go-to-market model as a result of our industry thought leadership, partnership approach with our restaurant customers, and experienced enterprise sales, customer success, and deployment teams. Unlike other enterprise software businesses, where the sales team works to add a single location or division and expand to others, we enter into relationships at the brand’s corporate level and strive to secure exclusivity across all company-owned and franchise locations. This enables us to deploy our modules across all new and existing brand locations without any additional sales and marketing costs, and upsell new offerings to the brand itself, rather than each individual location.
We refer to our business model as a transactional SaaS model, as it includes both subscription and transaction-based revenue streams, and we designed it to align with our customers’ success. Our model allows our customers to forego the cost of building, maintaining, and securing their own digital ordering and delivery platforms and to retain direct relationships with their consumers while maximizing profitability. Our hybrid-pricing model provides us with a predictable revenue stream and enables us to further grow our revenue as our customers increase their digital order volume. We generate subscription revenue from our Ordering, Switchboard, Kiosk, Virtual Brands, Marketing Automation, Sentiment, CDP, and Host modules. In addition, a growing portion of our customers purchase an allotment of monthly orders for a fixed monthly fee and pay us an additional fee for each excess order, which we also consider to be subscription revenue. Our transaction revenue includes revenue generated from our Rails, Dispatch, Virtual Brands, and Olo Pay modules. In most cases, we also charge aggregators, channel partners, and other service providers in our ecosystem on a per transaction basis for access to our Rails and Dispatch modules. We also derive transactional revenue from other products, including Network, which allows brands to take orders from non-aggregator digital channels (e.g., Google Food Ordering, which enables restaurants to fulfill orders directly through Google search results and Maps pages). These products generate fees predominantly through revenue sharing agreements with partners.
Acquisition of Wisely Inc.
On October 21, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Reorganization, or the Merger Agreement, with Sparty Merger Sub I, Inc., a Delaware corporation and our wholly owned subsidiary, Sparty Merger Sub II, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and our wholly owned subsidiary, Wisely Inc., and Fortis Advisors LLC, solely in its capacity as the representative of Wisely’s security holders. The transaction, which we refer to as the Wisely Acquisition, closed on November 4, 2021 pursuant to the terms set forth in the Merger Agreement. See “Note 5-Acquisition” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Wisely is a leading customer intelligence and engagement platform that enables restaurant brands to personalize the guest experience and maximize customer lifetime value. With a growing list of enterprise and emerging enterprise customers, Wisely’s leading software solutions include an all-in-one Customer Relationship Management system with email and SMS
marketing automation features; Host, a table management, waitlist, and reservations solution; a guest sentiment tracker with aggregated and annotated guest reviews and feedback; and a CDP purpose-built for restaurants. The Wisely Acquisition expands our platform capabilities, creating new offerings that will unlock our ability to directly serve restaurant brands’ marketing efforts, empowering restaurant brands to derive actionable insights from their data more readily in order to better understand their guests.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Add New Large Multi-Location and High-Growth Restaurant Brands
We believe there is a substantial opportunity to continue to grow our customer base across the U.S. restaurant industry, adding to our over 500 existing brands across approximately 79,000 active locations as of December 31, 2021, up from approximately 64,000 active locations as of December 31, 2020. We define an “active location” as a unique restaurant location that is utilizing one or more modules in a given quarterly period. We consider each specific restaurant brand to be a customer, even if owned by a parent organization that owns multiple restaurant brands, and define active locations as a location where at least one of our modules is deployed. We intend to continue to drive new customer growth by leveraging our brand and experience within the industry, and expanding our sales and marketing efforts. We have also historically pursued and will continue to target the most well-capitalized, fastest-growing restaurant brands in the industry. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including our ability to innovate, the effectiveness and pricing of our new and existing modules, the growth of digital ordering, and the success of our marketing efforts.
Expand Within Our Existing Customer Base
Our large base of enterprise customers and transactional SaaS revenue model represent an opportunity for further revenue expansion from the sale of additional modules, and the addition of new restaurant locations. A key factor to our success in executing our expansion strategy will be our ability to retain our existing and future restaurant customers. Our exclusive, long-term, direct digital ordering contracts with our customers provide us the opportunity to form unique, trusted partnerships with our restaurant brands, further enhancing our ability to satisfy and retain our customers. Our contracts typically have initial terms of three years or longer, with continuous one-year automatic renewal periods, providing visibility into our future performance. One indication of our ability to grow within our customer base through the development of our products that our customers value is our average revenue per unit, or ARPU. We calculate average revenue per unit by dividing the total platform revenue in a given period by the average active locations in that same period. We believe this demonstrates our ability to grow within our customer base through the development of our products that our customers value.
The following summarizes our ARPU and number of active locations for the year ended, or as of, each of the dates presented.
From 2020 to 2021, we experienced an increase in penetration of our product modules, moving to brands utilizing 2.7 modules per location on average as of December 31, 2021, as compared to 2.1 modules as of December 31, 2020. We believe this demonstrates an opportunity to further increase revenue within our existing customer base by expanding and deploying additional modules. We believe that we are well-positioned to upsell our remaining customers, as our modules provide significant value, are simple to add, and operate seamlessly together. In addition, we intend to continue to work with our existing brand customers in implementing their digital strategies, which we expect will promote continued growth. We believe this demonstrates our ability to grow within our customer base through the development of our products that our customers value.
We work to build relationships with the fastest growing restaurant brands in the industry, enabling us to grow our revenue as our customers scale their locations. As our customers expand locations, we are well positioned to expand to new locations beyond the existing 79,000 active locations that we serve. Our contracts with our customers provide that our modules may be implemented across an entire restaurant chain, growing as our customers expand locations. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our platform, competition, pricing, and the overall shift in the market to digital ordering and delivery.
A further indication of the propensity of our customers to continue to work with and expand their relationship with us over time is our dollar-based net revenue retention rate, or NRR, which compares our revenue from the same set of active customers in one period to the prior year period. We calculate dollar-based NRR as of a period-end by starting with the revenue, defined as platform revenue, from the cohort of all active customers as of 12 months prior to such period-end, or the prior period revenue. We then calculate the platform revenue from these same customers as of the current period-end, or the current period revenue. Current period revenue includes any expansion and is net of contraction or attrition over the last 12 months, but excludes platform revenue from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total current period revenue by the total prior period revenue to arrive at the point-in-time dollar-based NRR. For the three months ending December 31, 2021, we continued to maintain a NRR over 120%. While we have maintained this high NRR over the past three years, we expect this number to decrease over time as our customer base matures. We are also seeing a trend where customers are purchasing all of our products at signing, which provides us with more platform revenue from the start, but leaves less room for expansion.
Enable Higher Transaction Volume
Transaction revenue will continue to be an important source of our growth. We intend to continue to work with our existing restaurant customers to enable higher transaction volume at their locations, which may enable us to generate additional subscription and transaction revenue. As on-demand digital commerce grows to represent a larger share of total off-premise food consumption, we expect to significantly benefit from this secular trend as we capture a portion of this increased on-demand digital commerce order volume. Not only does our software create the opportunity to drive more orders for our customers, but we also expect the industry’s secular tailwinds to help increase transaction order volume as more consumers order food for off-premise consumption. As transaction volume increases, the subscription revenue we receive from certain subscription-based modules may also increase as customers subscribe for higher tier ordering packages to enable more transactions. Additionally, as we continue to expand our product offerings and improve our current software, we also believe that we may be able to increase our share of the transaction revenue that flows through our platform. Our ability to increase transaction volume is dependent on the continued shift to digital ordering for off-premise food consumption and our ability to capture a meaningful portion of that shift.
Investment in Innovation and Growth
We have invested and intend to continue to invest in expanding the functionality of our current platform and broadening our capabilities to address new market opportunities, particularly around payments, and data analytics. We also intend to continue to invest in enhancing awareness of our brand and developing more modules, features, and functionality that expand our capabilities to facilitate the extension of our platform to new use cases and industry verticals. We believe this strategy will provide new avenues for growth and allow us to continue to deliver differentiated, high-value outcomes to both our customers and stockholders. Specifically, we intend to invest in research and development to expand existing and build new modules, sales and marketing to promote our modules to new and existing customers and in existing and expanded geographies, professional services to ensure the success of our customers’ implementations of our platform, and other operational and administrative functions to support our expected growth and requirements as a public company. We expect our total operating expenses will increase over time and, in some cases, have short-term negative impacts on our operating margin. We also intend to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive product and market expansion. Our future success is dependent, in part, on our ability to successfully develop, market, and sell new and existing modules to new and existing customers.
Grow Our Ecosystem
We plan to expand our current ecosystem of third-party partners to better support our customers. Our platform is highly configurable and deeply embedded into our customers’ disparate existing infrastructures. Our platform seamlessly integrates with technology providers across the restaurant ecosystem, including most POS systems, DSPs, OSPs, aggregators, payment processors, and loyalty programs. We believe that we can leverage these unique partnerships to deliver additional value to our customers. We see opportunity to further broaden our partnership group and build upon the integrations we currently offer. We plan to continue to invest and expand our ecosystem of compatible third-party technology providers to allow us to service a broader network of restaurant brands. We believe that these technology partnerships make us a critical component for restaurant brands looking to enhance their digital ordering and delivery platforms. We intend to continue to invest in building functionality that further integrates our platform with additional third-party technology providers, which expands our capabilities and facilitates the extension of our platform to new use cases and industry verticals. Our future success is dependent on our ability to continue to integrate with third-party technology providers in the restaurant ecosystem.
Expand Our Longer-Term Market Opportunity
While we have not made any significant investments in this area to date, we believe there is an opportunity to partner with small and medium businesses to enable their on-demand digital commerce presence. Additionally, as many of our customers operate internationally, we believe there is a significant opportunity to expand the usage of our platform outside of the United States. We also believe that our platform can be applied to other commerce verticals beyond the restaurant industry that are undergoing a similar digital transformation to deliver real-time experiences and on-demand fulfillment to consumers. For example, we currently partner with a number of grocery chains who use our Ordering module to help their consumers order ready-to-eat meals and may potentially expand these or other partnerships in the future. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase as a result of these initiatives.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue primarily from platform fees and professional services.
Platform
Platform revenue primarily consists of fees that provide customers access to one or more of our modules and standard customer support. Our contracts typically have initial terms of three years or longer, with continuous one-year automatic renewal periods. We bill monthly in arrears. A majority of our platform revenue is derived from our Order Management solutions, which consist of our Ordering, Switchboard, Kiosk, Network, and Virtual Brands modules. We also generate platform revenue from our Delivery Enablement solutions, which include our Dispatch and Rails modules. We may also charge third-party aggregators and other service providers in our ecosystem a per transaction fee for access to our Dispatch and Rails modules. Subsequent to the Wisely Acquisition, we also generate revenue from our Customer Engagement and Front-of-House solutions.
With the onset of COVID-19, we saw an increase in transaction volumes as consumers turned to online ordering as compared to in-person dining. This shift began at the end of the first quarter of 2020 and has continued through the end of 2021. During this time, we experienced an increase in penetration of our product modules, with brands utilizing 2.7 modules per location on average as of December 31, 2021, compared with 2.1 modules as of December 31, 2020. The combination of increased transaction volumes and increased multi-module adoption resulted in an increase in transaction revenue as a percentage of platform revenue. While we have benefited from the acceleration of demand for off-premise dining, our business and financial results could be materially adversely affected in the future if these trends do not continue. For example, as COVID-19 restrictions ease and consumers potentially return to pre-COVID-19 digital ordering preferences and habits, the trends we experienced in 2020 and 2021 on multi-module adoption, number of active locations, and transaction volume may not continue and our revenue may fluctuate in the near term.
Professional Services and Other
Professional services and other revenue primarily consists of fees paid to us by our customers for the implementation of our platform. The majority of our professional service fees are billed on a fixed fee basis upon execution of our agreement. While we expect professional services and other revenue to increase primarily as a result of continued deployment of additional active locations, we expect that this increase will be offset as our deployment teams become more efficient and more familiar with customer systems and shorten deployment periods.
Cost of Revenue
Platform
Platform cost of revenue primarily consists of costs directly related to our platform services, including expenses for customer support and infrastructure personnel, including salaries, taxes, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation, which we refer to as personnel costs, third-party software licenses, hosting, amortization of internal-use software, and allocated overhead. We expect platform cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars in order to support additional customer and transaction volume growth on our platform.
Professional Services and Other
Professional services and other cost of revenue primarily consists of the personnel costs of our deployment team associated with delivering these services and allocated overhead.
Gross Profit
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, has been, and will continue to be, affected by various factors, including revenue fluctuations, our mix of revenue associated with various modules, the timing and amount of investments in personnel, increased hosting capacity to align with customer growth, and third-party licensing costs.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, general and administrative, and sales and marketing expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of engineering and product development personnel costs and allocated overhead costs. Research and development costs exclude capitalized software development costs, as they are capitalized as a component of property and equipment, net and amortized to platform cost of revenue over the term of their useful life. We anticipate investments in this area to increase on an absolute dollar basis and as a percentage of revenue in the short-term as we continue to invest in innovative solutions to support our customers’ rapidly evolving needs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel costs and contractor fees for finance, legal, human resources, information technology, and other administrative functions. In addition, general and administrative expenses include travel-related expenses and allocated overhead. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to grow on an absolute dollar basis while declining as a percentage of revenue as we continue to scale our operations over time. We also expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of sales, marketing, and other personnel costs, commissions, general marketing and promotional activities, and allocated overhead costs. Sales commissions earned by our sales force are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected benefit period. We plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing by expanding our go-to-market activities, hiring additional sales representatives, and sponsoring additional marketing events and trade shows. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis and as a percent of revenue in the short-term as we continue to invest in our ability to sell new products and increase the visibility of our brand to new and existing customers.
Other Expenses, Net
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest incurred on our outstanding borrowings under our outstanding debt facility. In 2021, we amended our loan agreement for our revolving line of credit. See-“Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists primarily of income earned on our money-market funds in cash and cash equivalents.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
The change in the fair value of warrant liability relates to warrants issued to purchase our redeemable convertible preferred stock that are classified as liabilities on the balance sheet. Prior to the IPO, warrants to purchase 1,682,847 shares of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock were exercised and converted into redeemable convertible preferred stock. Upon completion of the IPO, all shares of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock, inclusive of the shares
issued pursuant to these warrant exercises, converted into 100,196,780 shares of Class B common stock. As a result, after 2021, we will no longer have a change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
(Benefit) provision for income taxes primarily relates to U.S. state income taxes where we conduct business.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
(2) Includes charitable donation expense of $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following table sets forth our statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the periods presented:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Platform
Total platform revenue increased $51.7 million, or 55.7%, to $144.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $92.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of continued increases in active locations coming onto the platform, as well as increases in ARPU due to increased multi-product adoption and increased transaction volumes. Active customer locations increased to approximately 79,000 as of December 31, 2021 from approximately 64,000 as of December 31, 2020, and annual ARPU increased to approximately $2,019 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from approximately $1,740 for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, 46.4% and 48.2% of our platform revenue was subscription revenue, respectively, and 53.6% and 51.8% was transaction revenue, respectively.
Professional Services and Other
Total professional services and other revenue decreased $0.7 million, or 13.0%, to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. While we expect professional services and other revenue to increase primarily as a result of continued deployment of additional active locations, this increase will be offset as our deployment teams become more efficient and shorten deployment periods.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Platform
Total platform cost of revenue increased $11.2 million, or 78.4%, to $25.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of higher hosting costs
due to increased transaction volume as well as higher compensation costs associated with additional personnel to support growth in active locations.
Professional Services and Other
Total professional services and other cost of revenue increased $0.9 million, or 21.3%, to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of increased consulting costs and higher compensation costs to support growth in active locations.
Gross Profit
Gross profit margin decreased to 79.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 81.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Decreases in gross profit margin were driven by higher platform and professional services and other compensation costs to support rapid growth in transactions and active locations coming onto the platform.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased $26.0 million, or 79.0%, to $58.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $32.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of higher compensation costs associated with additional personnel and an increase in the use of software tools to support further investments in our platform development and continued product innovation. Additionally, we incurred a non-cash charge of $1.8 million in March 2021 related to the vesting and settlement of stock appreciation rights, or SARs, in connection with the IPO. We also incurred $0.4 million in transaction costs related to the Wisely Acquisition that closed on November 4, 2021. As a percentage of total revenue, research and development expenses increased to 39.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 33.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $47.4 million, or 213.5%, to $69.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $22.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily a result of increased compensation costs due to increased headcount to support the growth and stage of the organization, IPO related bonus awards, vesting and settlement of SARs in connection with the IPO, as well as increased insurance costs and professional fees incurred in preparation for becoming and operating as a public company. We also incurred a non-cash charge of $13.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the donation of 345,836 shares of our Class A common stock to a charitable donor-advised fund. We expect to donate additional shares in the future to this fund in conjunction with our Olo for Good initiative. Additionally, we incurred $1.9 million in transaction costs related to the Wisely Acquisition that closed on November 4, 2021. As a percentage of total revenue, general and administrative expenses increased to 46.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 22.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $9.4 million, or 110.3%, to $18.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily the result of additional compensation costs, inclusive of commission costs, due to increases in headcount, as well as increased marketing spend associated with our annual user conference, professional service fees, and various software and IPO related costs. Sales and marketing spend increases were offset by a reduction in travel and entertainment costs as of April 2020 due to travel restrictions as a result of COVID-19. Additionally, we incurred $0.4 million in transaction costs related to the Wisely Acquisition that closed on November 4, 2021. As a percentage of total revenue, sales and marketing expense increased to 12.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 8.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Expenses
Interest expense
We had no borrowings outstanding under our credit facility during the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had outstanding borrowings during the first quarter of 2020, resulting in interest expense of $0.2 million.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
The increase of $6.2 million in the fair value of warrant liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 was the result of an increase in value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability, which is directly related to an increase in the value of our stock underlying the warrants during the first quarter of 2021. Prior to our IPO, all outstanding warrants were exercised to purchase shares of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock and converted into redeemable convertible preferred stock. Upon completion of the IPO, all shares of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock, inclusive of the shares issued pursuant to these warrant exercises, converted into shares of Class B common stock.
(Benefit) Provision for Income Taxes
Benefit for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from the release of a portion of our valuation allowance for deferred tax assets following the recording of a deferred income tax liability as part of our accounting for the Wisely Acquisition. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our net federal and state deferred tax assets for both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was cash and cash equivalents totaling $514.4 million, which was held for working capital purposes, as well as the available balance of our revolving line of credit, described further below.
We have financed our operations primarily through sales of our equity securities, conversions of our redeemable preferred stock, payments received from customers, and borrowings under our credit facility.
On March 19, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 20,700,000 shares of our Class A common stock at the public offering price of $25.00 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $485.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and amounts available under our outstanding credit facility will be sufficient to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, our obligation to repay any balance under our credit facility if we were to borrow against the facility in the future, our platform revenue growth rate, receivable and payable cycles, and the timing and extent of investments in research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses.
Credit Facility
In May 2012, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Pacific Western Bank for a revolving line of credit with a maturity date of May 15, 2013. Since the original agreement, we amended and restated the agreement in February 2020, or the Loan Agreement, and have executed subsequent amendments to extend the maturity date until May 12, 2022. Advances under the Formula Line bear interest equal to the greater of (A) 0.20% above Pacific Western Bank’s prime rate then in effect; or (B) 4.50%. Advances under the Non-Formula Line bear interest equal to the greater of (A) 0.75% above Pacific Western Bank’s prime rate then in effect; or (B) 5.00%. Interest is due and payable monthly in arrears. We may prepay advances under the credit facility in whole or in part at any time without premium or penalty.
In April 2021, we amended the Loan Agreement with Pacific Western Bank, or the First Amendment, and exercised our option to increase our available line of credit from $25.0 million to $35.0 million. Additionally, we amended our minimum EBITDA and minimum net revenue covenants, which reset each annual period. In May 2021, we issued a letter of credit to DoorDash, Inc., or DoorDash, in the amount of $25.0 million in connection with our Restated Delivery Network Agreement. See “Note 14-Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
In August 2021, we amended our Loan Agreement, or the Second Amendment, to maintain minimum cash deposits with Pacific Western Bank equal to the lesser of $75.0 million or an amount equal to 50% of all of our cash deposits with any bank, and to extend certain reporting requirements from 30 to 45 days after each quarter end.
In December 2021 and in connection with the Wisely Acquisition, we further amended our Loan Agreement, or the Third Amendment and Joinder, to reflect Wisely LLC as an additional borrower. The foregoing description of the material terms of the Third Amendment and Joinder does not purport to be complete and is subject to, and is qualified in its entirety by, reference to the full terms of the Third Amendment and Joinder, which we have filed as an exhibit to this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We refer to the Loan Agreement, as amended, as the “Amended Loan Agreement.”
As of December 31, 2021, we had $8.6 million available under Amended Loan Agreement, after consideration of $25.0 million in our letter of credit to DoorDash and $1.4 million in our letter of credit on the lease of our headquarters. See “Note 14-Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on the letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the line of credit, and no amounts have been drawn against any of our letters of credit. No interest was incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the Amended Loan Agreement. The interest rate applicable on the outstanding balance as of December 31, 2020 was 5.00%. Our obligations under the Amended Loan Agreement are secured by substantially all of our assets.
The Amended Loan Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants that require Pacific Western Bank’s consent to, among other things, merge or consolidate or acquire assets, make investments, incur additional indebtedness or guarantee indebtedness of others, pay dividends or redeem or repurchase any capital stock, enter into transactions with affiliates outside the ordinary course of business, and create liens on our assets. We are also required to comply with certain minimum EBITDA and minimum revenue covenants. We were in compliance with these covenants as of December 31, 2021.
The Amended Loan Agreement also contains events of default that include, among other things, non-payment defaults, covenant defaults, insolvency defaults, cross-defaults to other indebtedness and material obligations, judgment defaults, inaccuracy of representations and warranties, and a material adverse change default. Any default that is not cured or waived could result in the acceleration of the obligations under the credit facility, an increase in the applicable interest rate under the credit facility to a per annum rate equal to 5.00% above the applicable interest rate and would permit Pacific Western Bank to exercise remedies with respect to all of the collateral that is securing the credit facility.
Pacific Western Bank has the right to terminate its obligation to make further advances to us immediately and without notice upon the occurrence and during the continuance of an event of default. We may terminate the Formula Line or the Non-Formula Line at any time prior to the maturity date, upon two business days written notice to Pacific Western Bank, at which time all then outstanding obligations arising under the Amended Loan and Security Agreement, including any unpaid interest thereon, will accelerate and become immediately due and payable.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $16.3 million, primarily due to net loss of $42.3 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $61.8 million and a net decrease in our operating assets and liabilities of $3.3 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily relate to stock-based charges of $32.7 million, inclusive of vesting of SARs of $2.8 million, the change in the fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants of $18.9 million, and a charge related to a charitable donor-advised fund of $13.1 million in conjunction with the Olo for Good initiative. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities was primarily attributable to: a net decrease in accrued expenses and accounts payable of $5.2 million related to payments to vendors and employee compensation, offset by an increase in fees owed to delivery service providers; an increase in prepaid expenses of $2.8 million due to insurance payments and software licensing fees; and increases in contract assets and deferred contracts costs of $1.1 million primarily due to the growth of our revenue. This decrease was offset by a net decrease in accounts receivable of $3.7 million due to improved collections and a net increase of $2.3 million in unearned revenue due to the overall growth of our revenue.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $20.8 million, primarily due to net income of $3.1 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $19.4 million and a net decrease in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.7 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily relate to the change in the fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants of $12.7 million, stock-based compensation of $5.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.7 million, and bad debt expense of $0.6 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable of $31.5 million and deferred contract costs of $2.0 million due to the growth in our revenue. These increases were offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $32.0 million related primarily to higher fees owed to delivery service providers and vendors of $25.4 million and $2.7 million, respectively, a result of growth in Dispatch order volumes and operations and an increase in deferred rent of $0.6 million in connection with our new corporate headquarters.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $77.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily attributable to $75.2 million of cash paid (net of cash acquired) to acquire Wisely and $1.8 million for the development of internal software and purchases of computer and office equipment to support further product development and to expand our employee base to support our operations.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to development of internal software and purchases of computer and office equipment, furniture and fixtures, and leasehold improvements to support further product development and to expand our corporate office.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $499.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting $485.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of Class A common stock in our IPO (net of underwriters’ discounts and commissions), $17.8 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan, and $0.4 million of net proceeds from the exercise of warrants. These increases were partially offset by the payment of deferred offering costs of $4.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash provided by financing activities was $45.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to $50.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of cost, and $2.6 million of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $3.5 million net repayment of proceeds borrowed in March 2020 under the Amended Loan Agreement, $2.2 million of payments for offering costs related to our IPO, and $1.4 million for payment of employee taxes related to stock option net exercise.
Certain Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. To supplement our financial statements, we provide investors with non-GAAP operating income (loss) and free cash flow, each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures, in conjunction with financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP for planning purposes, including in the preparation of our annual operating budget, as a measure of our core operating results and the effectiveness of our business strategy, and in evaluating our financial performance. These measures provide consistency and comparability with past financial performance as measured by such non-GAAP figures, facilitate period-to-period comparisons of core operating results, and assist shareholders in better evaluating us against our peer group by presenting period-over-period operating results without the effect of certain charges or benefits that may not be consistent or comparable across periods or across our peer group.
We adjust our GAAP financial measures for the following items to calculate non-GAAP operating income (loss): stock-based compensation expense (non-cash expense calculated by companies using a variety of valuation methodologies and subjective assumptions), equity expense related to charitable contributions, internally developed software amortization (non-cash expense) and transaction costs. Management believes that it is useful to exclude certain non-cash charges and non-core operational charges from non-GAAP operating income (loss) because (1) the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations; and (2) such expenses can vary significantly between periods as a result of the timing of new stock-based awards.
Free cash flow represents net cash provided by operating activities, reduced by purchases of property and equipment and capitalization of internally developed software. Free cash flow is a measure used by management to understand and evaluate our liquidity and to generate future operating plans. The reduction of capital expenditures facilitates comparisons of our liquidity on a period-to-period basis and excludes items that we do not consider to be indicative of our liquidity. In addition, we believe providing free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating the strength of our liquidity and future ability to generate cash that can be used for strategic opportunities or investing in our business from the perspective of our management and Board of Directors.
Our use of non-GAAP financial measures has limitations as an analytical tool, and these measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of financial results as reported under GAAP. Because our non-GAAP financial measures are not calculated in accordance with GAAP, they may not necessarily be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies.
Non-GAAP Operating Income (Loss)
The following table presents a reconciliation of GAAP operating (loss) income to non-GAAP operating income (loss) for the following periods:
Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Unconditional purchase obligation relates to cloud-based services to support our infrastructure.
The commitment amounts in the table above are associated with contracts that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum services to be used, fixed, minimum or variable price provisions, and the approximate timing of the actions under the contracts. The table does not include obligations under agreements that we can cancel without a significant penalty.
See “Note 14-Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding contractual obligations and commitments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, equity, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, stock-based compensation, and accounting for business combinations, including purchase price allocations and valuations of acquired intangible assets and goodwill have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which we adopted as of January 1, 2018 on a modified retrospective basis. We generate revenue from providing our customers access to our platform. We recognize revenue when we transfer promised services in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. This is determined by following a five-step process which includes (1) identifying the contract with a customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price, and (5) recognizing revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
The identification of distinct performance obligations in a contract requires judgment. Our performance obligations primarily include access to our platform and its different modules and implementation services associated with the platform. We believe that non-complex implementation services are generally distinct performance obligations while complex implementation services are generally combined with our platform services into one performance obligation.
The implementation fees in our contracts are generally variable. We estimate how many months it will take to implement the platform into the customer environment, including time to get restaurant franchise locations onboarded. This estimate is multiplied by the fixed monthly fee to determine the transaction price.
We allocate the transaction price of the contract to each distinct performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine standalone selling price based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately. If the standalone selling price is not observable through past transactions, we estimate the standalone selling price taking into account available information such as market conditions, internally approved pricing, and cost-plus expected margin guidelines related to the performance obligations.
We consider revenue recognition a critical accounting policy given focus by management and investors. However, although there are estimations required to recognize revenue, these estimates are not sensitive.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, allocation of the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. When determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets.
Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and as a result, actual results may differ materially from estimates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or
liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Determining the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired is judgmental in nature and can involve the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The significant judgments include estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on forecasts; estimation of the long-term rate of growth; estimation of the useful life over which cash flows will occur; and determination of a risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. When appropriate, our estimates of the fair values of assets and liabilities acquired include assistance from independent third-party appraisal firms. Valuation methodologies used to measure fair value include multiple-period excess earnings method under the income approach and the relief-from-royalty method of the income approach. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value assigned to the assets acquired, as well as the estimated life of the assets, can materially impact our consolidated statements of (loss) income in periods subsequent to the acquisition through amortization, and in certain instances through impairment charges, if the asset becomes impaired in the future.
Stock-Based Compensation
Accounting for stock-based compensation requires us to make a number of judgments, estimates, and assumptions. If any of our estimates prove to be inaccurate, our net (loss) income and operating results could be adversely affected.
We measure compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards, including stock options and restricted stock units, or RSUs, granted to employees, directors, and non-employees, as well as stock purchased under our 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or ESPP, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. Compensation expense is recognized ratably in earnings, generally over the period during which an employee is required to provide service. We adjust compensation expense based on actual forfeitures as necessary.
We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including (1) the expected stock price volatility, (2) the expected term of the award, (3) the risk-free interest rate, and (4) expected dividend yield. These assumptions are estimated as follows:
•Expected volatility. We estimate the volatility of our common stock on the date of grant based on the weighted-average historical stock price volatility of comparable publicly-traded companies in our industry group.
•Expected term. We estimate the expected term based on the simplified method for employees and non-employees.
•Risk-free rate. The risk-free rate is based on the United States Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant, whose term is consistent with the expected life of the stock option.
•Expected dividend yield. Expected dividend yield is zero percent, as we have not paid and do not anticipate paying dividends on our common stock.
The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following assumptions:
We continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility and expected term utilized in our stock-based compensation expense calculation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimates of expected volatility and expected term, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for all recently issued standards impacting our consolidated financial statements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and stockholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation.
The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to “opt-in” to this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards on a non-delayed basis.
As a smaller reporting company, we have been permitted to take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies for so long as (i) the market value of our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter. Beginning with our first 2022 quarterly report, we will no longer be a smaller reporting company as defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act.