ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report (“Annual Report”). Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from management’s expectations as a result of various factors. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and in the “Risk Factors” section in this Annual Report.
Company Overview
OLAPLEX is an innovative, science-enabled, technology-driven beauty company. We are founded on the principle of delivering effective, patent-protected and proven performance in the categories where we compete. We strive to empower our consumers to look as beautiful on the outside as they feel on the inside.
We believe every person deserves to have healthy, beautiful hair, whether they are visiting a salon or caring for their hair at home. Our commitment to deliver results that are visible on first use, coupled with our strong sense of community across both professional hairstylists and consumers, has driven tremendous brand loyalty. We offer our award-winning products through a global omni-channel platform serving the professional, specialty retail, and DTC channels.
OLAPLEX disrupted and revolutionized the professional haircare industry by creating the bond building category in 2014. We have grown from an initial offering of three products sold exclusively through the professional channel to a broader suite of products offered through the professional, specialty retail and DTC channels that have been strategically developed to address three key uses: treatment, maintenance and protection. Our unique bond building technology is able to repair disulfide bonds in human hair that are destroyed via chemical, thermal, mechanical, environmental and aging processes. Our current product portfolio comprises eleven unique, complementary products specifically developed to provide a holistic regimen for hair health.
We have developed a cohesive and synergistic distribution strategy that leverages the strength of each of our channels, including the specific attributes of each channel as described below, and our strong digital capabilities that we apply across our omni-channel sales platform. Our professional channel grew 66% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December, 31, 2020, representing 43% of our total net sales for the period. Our specialty retail channel grew 247% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December, 31, 2020, representing 29% of our total net sales for the period. Our DTC channel, comprised of OLAPLEX.com and sales through third-party e-commerce platforms, grew 117% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December, 31, 2020, and represented 27% of our total net sales for the period. This channel also provides us with the opportunity to engage directly with our consumers to help power feedback that drives decisions we make around new product development.
The strength of our business model and ability to scale have created a compelling financial profile characterized by revenue growth and very strong profitability. Our net sales increased from $282.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $598.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a 112% increase. Our net income increased from $39.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $220.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a 462% increase, and our adjusted net income (see “⸺Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) increased from $131.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $275.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a 110% increase. We have also experienced robust adjusted EBITDA (see “⸺Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) growth over the past year, increasing our adjusted EBITDA from $199.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $408.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a 105% increase, with a decrease in our adjusted EBITDA margins (see “⸺Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) from 70.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020, to 68.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflecting the investments necessary to scale our business.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our continued success and growth are dependent on a number of factors. These factors provide both significant areas of opportunity as well as potential challenges that we will need to address in order to sustain the growth of our business. We have outlined some of these factors below, as well as in the section “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and in the “Risk Factors” section in this Annual Report.
Ability to Grow Our Brand Awareness and Penetration
Our brand is integral to the growth of our business and is essential to our ability to engage with our community. Our performance will depend on our ability to attract new customers and encourage consumer spending across our product portfolio. Despite rapid growth in our brand awareness, we believe Olaplex still only has aided brand awareness of approximately 45% among prestige haircare consumers, which is lower than most haircare peers. We believe awareness among the broader market is lower still. We believe the core elements of continuing to grow our awareness, and thus increase our penetration, are highlighting our products’ quality, our continued ability to drive innovative new haircare solutions and our digital first marketing tactics. As we seek to enter new markets, it will be important for us to be able to expand our brand awareness and engage with new consumers across all of our channels.
Continued Execution of Omni-channel Strategy
Since our founding, the professional channel has provided our brand with credibility in the hairstylist community and with consumers, which translated into meaningful brand equity and success in the specialty retail and DTC channel, allowing us to gain deeper consumer insights. These channels broaden the scope of our brand’s awareness and customer penetration, which also serves to grow our professional channel. This synergistic omni-channel strategy has been key to our growth thus far, and we expect it will continue to serve as a valuable tool for growing our business. We intend to continue to find ways to deepen our channel integration through our digital platform, engaged social community, and relationships with salons and key retailers. Our ability to execute this strategy will depend on a number of factors, such as retailers’ and salons’ satisfaction with the sales and profitability of our products.
Supply Chain
The COVID-19 pandemic has contributed to global supply chain disruptions, due to closures, employee absences, port congestion, labor and container shortages, and shipment delays. As a result, we expect higher costs to negatively impact the cost of sales and operating expenses in the near future. We expect to mitigate some of the impact to our business and our costs through cost savings initiatives, product mix optimization, strategic pricing, timing of shipments, and minimizing the use of air freight and congested ports.
Continued Geographic Expansion Across All Channels
We believe our ability to enter new markets across all of our channels will continue to be part of our future growth. Since our founding, we have expanded into Europe, Asia, Latin America and other markets, with plans to continue to increase our presence in all of these markets. As we scale in new markets, we anticipate that we will leverage our existing relationships with partners who operate in these markets, as well as engage with new professional and retail customers. We believe our ability to continue expanding in new markets will be powered by our integrated omni-channel efforts to enable a synergistic relationship between the professional, specialty retail and DTC channels. Our ability to grow our business geographically will depend on a number of factors, including our marketing efforts and continued customer satisfaction with the quality of our products.
Continued Product Innovation
We anticipate a meaningful portion of our future growth will come from new product development and innovation. We believe our robust in-house research and development team, dedicated Olaplex laboratory, independent lab testing and real-world salon testing enables us to continue to develop meaningful new products and positions us to maintain a full new product pipeline for several years into the future. Though we have a solid pipeline of future products, we are relentlessly focused on staying at the forefront of technical developments and product innovation. Our attention in this area is a critical component of our growth plan, and thus our performance will depend, in part, on our ability to continue to deliver new high-performance products.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business beginning in March 2020. The degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our cash flow, business, financial condition, results of operations and prospects will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, many of which are outside of our control. The impact of COVID-19 on our supply chain has been discussed above. We believe the COVID-19 pandemic shifted demand from our professional channel to the specialty retail and DTC channels, as consumers were unable to treat
their hair in salons as a result of restrictions, such as mandatory lockdowns, that caused the closure of many of our professional salon partners and consumers turned to purchasing our products online for home treatment. This shift enabled us to scale our DTC capability faster than expected. Even as salons in our professional channel locations have reopened and as well as retail sales have gained momentum, we have not seen a decline in the demand for our products in our DTC channel, nor do we expect to, as COVID-19 restrictions continue to ease globally.
One impact on our business due to COVID-19 was the implementation of our Affiliate Program. We created this program during April and May of 2020 to support hairstylists during salon closures imposed by COVID-19 safety measures, allowing hairstylists to connect with their consumers and generate income by selling Olaplex products for at-home use. As we continue to monitor developments related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impacts on our customers, suppliers and consumers, we have taken and will continue to take further measures.
Components of Our Results of Operations and Trends Affecting Our Business
Net Sales
We develop, market and sell premium haircare products under our Olaplex brand through our wholly owned subsidiary, Olaplex, Inc., which is our primary operating subsidiary and conducts business under the name “Olaplex”. We operate through three customer channels: professional, specialty retail, and DTC.
Net sales are comprised of the transaction price to customers for product sales less expected allowances, discounts, and allowance for returns. Our growth in net sales is driven by a number of trends, including the levels of consumer spending, increasing awareness of and demand for our products, and the broader economic environment. Our largest channel, professional, includes sales through external distributors who sell to professional hairstylists throughout the world who use our products to treat their customers’ hair. Net sales in our professional channel also includes products sold to consumers for use at home. Net sales within this channel have continued to grow with increased awareness and distribution. Our specialty retail channel includes sales through national retail accounts, such as Sephora. Net sales in this channel have continued to grow through increased distribution across new stores within our existing customers, new customer relationships, and increasing sales within existing stores. We expect to continue to grow through increased penetration in additional stores within existing accounts as well as the addition of new retail customers and stores, both domestically and internationally. The DTC channel includes direct sales to the consumer through our website, olaplex.com, and sales through third-party e-commerce customers who resell our products solely through online platforms.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales reflects the aggregate costs to procure our products, including the amounts invoiced by our third- party contract manufacturers and suppliers for finished goods, costs related to transportation to our distribution centers, and amortization of our patented formulations. For the 2020 fiscal year, we amortized a one-time non-recurring fair value step-up adjustment to inventory as part of purchase accounting related to the Acquisition that is recorded in cost of sales.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is our net sales less cost of sales. Gross margin measures our gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
We have a network of domestic and international third-party manufacturers from whom we purchase finished goods. Over the past several years, we have worked to evolve our supply chain to increase capacity and technical capabilities while maintaining and reducing overall costs as a percentage of sales.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”), amortization of brand name and customer relationship intangible assets and purchase accounting acquisition costs.
SG&A expenses include personnel-related expenses, including salaries, success payments, fringe benefits and share-based compensation. Other significant operating expenses include sales and marketing, research and development, outbound shipping, fulfillment, information technology costs, merchant fees, professional fees for accounting, auditing, consulting and legal services, and travel and overhead expenses.
In relation to the Acquisition, and included in the operating expenses, are amortization of brand name and customer relationship intangible assets and non-recurring purchase accounting acquisition costs that consist of legal, accounting, and banking fees.
In the near term, we expect SG&A expenses to increase as we invest to support our growth initiatives, including investments in the Olaplex brand and infrastructure. Additionally, we expect our operating expenses will increase compared to prior periods due to the reporting and compliance costs associated with being a public company.
Interest (Expense)
Interest expense primarily consists of interest incurred on our outstanding indebtedness and amortization of debt issuance costs. See “Financial condition, liquidity and capital resources” below and a description of our indebtedness in Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net primarily reflects gains (losses) caused by fluctuations of foreign currency exchange rates, as well as reduction of income that results from penalty payments received from distributors for sales in violation of their distribution agreements and adjustments to the Tax Receivable Agreement liability due to changes in interest rates or blended tax rates.
Income Tax Provision
We operate as a C-Corporation. The provision for income taxes represents U.S. federal, foreign, state and local income taxes. The effective rate differs from statutory rates due to the effect of state and local income taxes, tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and certain permanent tax adjustments. The U.S. federal statutory tax rate was primarily lower due to the foreign derived intangible income (“FDII”) deduction. This deduction results in income from the Company’s sales to foreign customers being taxed at a lower effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate will change from quarter to quarter based on recurring and nonrecurring factors including, but not limited to, the geographical mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state and local income taxes, the impact of permanent tax adjustments, and the interaction of various tax strategies.
Net Income
Our net income for future periods will be affected by the various factors described above.
Segments
Operating segments are components of an enterprise for which separate financial information is available that is evaluated by the chief operating decision maker in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. Utilizing this criteria, the Company manages its business on the basis of three operating segments that are aggregated into one reportable segment given the operating segments have similar economic characteristics, classes of consumers, products, production, distribution methods, and operate in the same regulatory environments.
Results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods presented:
2021 compared to 2020:
Net Sales
We distribute products through professional salon channels, national and international retailers, as well as direct to consumers through e-commerce. As such, our three business channels consist of professional, specialty retail and DTC as follows.
Net sales increased $316.1 million, or 112.0%, to $598.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $282.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Professional net sales increased $102.8 million, or 65.8%, to $259.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $156.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Growth for professional was driven by volume growth from the increased velocity (sales per point of distribution) of existing products (including No.4 - Bond Maintenance Shampoo, No. 5 - Bond Maintenance Conditioner and No. 3 - Hair Perfector), the launch of new products ( No.8 - Bond Intense Moisture
Mask, Professional only 4-in-1 Moisture Mask, No.4P- Blonde Enhancer Toning Shampoo and including No.0 - Intensive Bond Building Hair Treatment,) and the addition of new customers (primarily in key international markets in Europe). The Company experienced significant revenue growth in the U.S., U.K. and Italy.
Specialty retail net sales increased $125.1 million, or 246.6%, to $175.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $50.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Growth for specialty retail was driven by volume growth from the increased velocity of existing products (including No. 4 - Bond Maintenance Shampoo, No. 5 - Bond Maintenance Conditioner and No. 3 - Hair Perfector), the launch of new products (No.8 - Bond Intense Moisture Mask, No.4P- Blonde Enhancer Toning Shampoo and No.0 - Intensive Bond Building Hair Treatment) and the addition of new retail customers in the U.S. Specifically, we added a new customer in the fourth quarter of 2021 which contributed $15 million in revenue growth.
DTC net sales increased $88.2 million, or 117.1%, to $163.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $75.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Growth for DTC was driven by volume growth from the addition of new e-commerce customers, increased velocity from existing products (including No. 5- Bond Maintenance Conditioner, No. 4 - Bond Maintenance Shampoo, and no 3 - Hair Perfector) and the launch of new products (including No.8 - Bond Intense Moisture Mask, No.0 - Intensive Bond Building Hair Treatment and No.4P- Blonde Enhancer Toning Shampoo). Olaplex.com also saw strong growth as a result of increased traffic of new customers and higher average order value. Holiday kits, Black Friday, expansion into new countries including United Kingdom and Australia and increased digital marketing spend also contributed to increase in sales. The Company experienced significant growth in the U.S. and U.K. for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
Our cost of sales increased $21.9 million or 21.3% to $124.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $102.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a $64.6 million increase driven by increased sales volume and a $2.0 million increase in the amortization of our acquired patented formulations, partially offset by the absence of a $44.7 million expense as a result of the one-time fair value inventory adjustment due to the Acquisition in January 2020.
Our gross profit increased $294.2 million, or 163.8%, to $473.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $179.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our gross profit margin, as a percentage of sales, increased from 63.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 79.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of the absence of the one-time fair value inventory adjustment due to the Acquisition in January 2020. Our adjusted gross profit margin (see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) decreased from 81.6% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 80.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 due primarily to higher input costs, particularly for inbound distribution. The favorable gross margin impact driven by channel mix (from the higher growth in specialty retail and DTC) was largely offset by unfavorable product mix (higher sales from lower margin products).
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses increased $46.2 million, or 49.4%, from $93.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $139.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
SG&A expenses increased by $61.7 million, or 166.0%, from $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, there were increases of $9.8 million in sales and marketing expense, $8.6 million in payroll driven by expansion of our workforce, $8.5 million in non-capitalizable IPO and strategic transition costs, $6.0 million in distribution and fulfillment costs related to the increase in product sales volume, $5.5 million in cash-settled units compensation expense (see Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements), $2.4 million in share-based compensation expense, and $6.6 million in other SG&A expenses pertaining to general business growth. Also included in SG&A costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, were costs incurred related to the LIQWD Matters of $14.3 million (see Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report). We expect sales and marketing, research and development, payroll, and other SG&A expenses to increase in the future as we continue to expand brand awareness, develop and introduce new products, build out infrastructure and implement new marketing strategies.
Amortization of intangible assets increased $1.0 million or 2.4%. Acquisition costs decreased $16.5 million due to the Acquisition (see Notes 1 and 6 to the consolidated financial statements) occurring in 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $22.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to the interest related to the Amended Original Credit Agreement (as defined herein) that the Company entered into for additional borrowings on December 18, 2020. See “Financial Liquidity and Capital Resources ⸺ Credit Facility”.
Other Income (Expense), Net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net other income increased $2.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due the Tax Receivable Agreement liability adjustment recorded during the year. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company recognized other income of $3.6 million for a reduction to the liability for the Tax Receivable Agreement resulting primarily from an update to the blended state income tax rate used to measure the obligation. This was offset by an increase in foreign currency transaction losses of $0.9 million.
Income Tax Provision
The fiscal 2021 and 2020 provisions for income taxes represent U.S. federal, foreign, state and local income taxes. The effective rates differ from statutory rates due to the effect of state and local income taxes, tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and certain permanent tax adjustments. The U.S. federal statutory tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were primarily lower due to the FDII deduction, net of the effect of state and local income taxes. The FDII deduction results in income from the Company’s sales to foreign customers being taxed at a lower effective tax rate. Our effective tax rate will change from quarter to quarter based on recurring and nonrecurring factors including, but not limited to, the geographical mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state and local income taxes, the impact of permanent tax adjustments, and the interaction
of various tax strategies. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimate-Income Taxes and Tax Receivable Agreement” pertaining to Reorganization.
The provision for income taxes increased to $54.8 million, or an effective tax rate of 19.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from a provision of $8.0 million, or an effective tax rate of 16.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the provision for income taxes from the provision for the comparative prior year period is due to the increase in the Company’s income before taxes over this period. The effective tax rates in both periods are lower than the statutory rate primarily due to the FDII, net of the effect of state and local income taxes, and the effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 is also reduced by excess tax benefits associated with share-based compensation. The FDII deduction results in income from the Company’s sales to foreign customers being taxed at a lower effective tax rate. The increase in the effective tax rate from the comparative prior year period primarily resulted from a decrease in the portion of the Company’s earnings which are attributable to sales to non-U.S. customers, and therefore are eligible for the FDII deduction.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We prepare and present our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. However, management believes that adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross profit margin, adjusted SG&A, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share, which are non-GAAP financial measures, provide investors with additional useful information in evaluating our performance.
Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross profit margin, adjusted SG&A, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share are financial measures that are not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross profit margin, adjusted SG&A, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share, when taken together with our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating performance and facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. In particular, we believe that the use of these non-GAAP measures is helpful to our investors as they are measures used by management in assessing the health of our business, determining incentive compensation and evaluating our operating performance, as well as for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
We calculate adjusted EBITDA as net income, adjusted to exclude: (1) interest expense, net; (2) income tax provision; (3) depreciation and amortization; (4) share-based compensation expense; (5) fair value inventory step-up adjustment amortization;(6) Acquisition costs and financing fees; (7) costs incurred for LIQWD Matters; (8) non-capitalizable IPO and strategic transition costs; and (9) as applicable tax receivable agreement liability adjustments. We calculate adjusted EBITDA margin by dividing adjusted EBITDA by net sales.
We calculate adjusted gross profit as gross profit, adjusted to exclude: (1) fair value inventory step-up adjustment amortization and (2) amortization of patented formulations pertaining to the Acquisition. We calculate adjusted gross profit margin by dividing adjusted gross profit by net sales.
We calculate adjusted SG&A as SG&A, adjusted to exclude: (1) share-based compensation expense; (2) costs incurred for LIQWD Matters, (3) non-capitalizable IPO and strategic transition costs and (4) Financing fees.
We calculate adjusted net income as net income, adjusted to exclude: (1) amortization of intangible assets; (2) share-based compensation expense; (3) fair value inventory step-up adjustment amortization; (4) Acquisition costs and financing fees; (5) costs incurred for LIQWD Matters; (6) non-capitalizable IPO and strategic transition costs; (7) as applicable, tax receivable agreement liability adjustments and (8) the tax effect of non-GAAP adjustments. Adjusted net income per share is defined as adjusted net income per share using the weighted average basic and diluted shares outstanding.
Adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross profit margin, adjusted SG&A, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share are presented for supplemental informational purposes only, which have limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information
presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of the limitations of these non-GAAP measures include that they (1) do not reflect capital commitments to be paid in the future, (2) do not reflect that, although amortization is a non-cash charge, the underlying assets may need to be replaced and non-GAAP measures do not reflect these capital expenditures and intangible asset amortization that contributes to revenue recognition will recur in future periods until fully amortized, (3) do not consider the impact of share-based compensation expense, (4) do not reflect other non-operating expenses, including, in the case of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin, interest expense, (5) in the case of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA margin, do not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us and (6) do not include certain non-ordinary cash expenses that we do not believe are representative of our business on a steady-state basis. In addition, our use of non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because they may not calculate adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross profit margin, adjusted SG&A, adjusted net income, and adjusted net income per share in the same manner, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider these non-GAAP measures alongside other financial measures, including our gross profit, gross profit margin, net income, net income per share and other results stated in accordance with GAAP.
The following tables present a reconciliation of net income and gross profit, as the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, adjusted gross profit, adjusted gross profit margin, adjusted SG&A, adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share for each of the periods presented.
(1)Includes acquisition costs related to the Acquisition of the Olaplex business and dividend financing costs.
(2)Includes dividend financing costs.
(3)Includes costs incurred related to the resolution of the LIQWD Matters of $14.3 million as discussed in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
(4)Includes the non-cash, non-recurring fair value inventory step-up adjustment amortization as part of the purchase accounting on the Acquisition Date, utilizing the comparative sales method in accordance with ASC 820-10-55-21.
(5)Represents non-capitalizable professional fees and executive severance incurred in connection with the IPO and the Company’s public company transition.
(6)Represents applicable tax receivable agreement liability adjustments.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary recurring source of cash is the collection of proceeds from the sale of our products to our customers, including cash periodically collected in advance of delivery or performance.
Our primary use of cash is for working capital and payment of our operating costs, which consist primarily of employee-related expenses, such as compensation and benefits, as well as general operating expenses for marketing, fulfillment costs of customer orders, overhead costs, capital expenditures, and debt servicing. We also utilize cash for strategic investments. Fluctuations in working capital are primarily caused by customer demand of our product, timing of when a retailer rearranges or restocks our products, expansion of space within our existing retailer base, expansion into new retail stores
and fluctuation in warehouse and distribution costs. Capital expenditures typically vary and are currently limited, and future capital expenditure requirements depend on strategic initiatives selected for the fiscal year, including investments in infrastructure, investments in supply chain and R&D capabilities and expansion of our customer base.
A considerable portion of our operating income is earned outside the U.S.; however, we do not have bank time deposits held outside of the U.S.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $186.4 million of cash and cash equivalents. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had borrowing capacity of $51.0 million under our 2020 Revolver, providing us with a liquidity position of $237.4 million plus $75.9 million of working capital excluding cash and cash equivalents for a combined $313.3 million liquidity position.
Although there is no current need, we primarily examine our options with respect to terms and sources of existing and future short-term and long-term capital resources to maintain financial flexibility and may from time to time elect to raise capital through the issuance of additional equity or the incurrence of additional debt.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $200.0 million. This included net income of $220.8 million, plus $48.9 million in depreciation and amortization of fixed assets, patents and other intangibles, $2.8 million in amortization of debt issuance costs, $2.5 million in deferred taxes, $3.6 million of Tax Receivable Agreement liability adjustment and $4.0 million in share-based compensation. Additionally, there was a $76.4 million increase in working capital excluding cash during the period. The increase in net working capital was largely driven by a $98.4 million increase in accounts receivable, inventory, and other current assets for customer deposits and prepaids offset partly by an increase of $22.0 million in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities caused by increased inventory and other purchases.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $129.0 million. This included net income of $39.3 million, plus $45.9 million in amortization of patents and other intangibles, $44.7 million for fair value of acquired inventory, $1.8 million in amortization of debt issuance costs, $1.5 million in share-based compensation expense offset partly by a $4.4 million increase in deferred tax assets. Additionally, there was a $0.2 million decrease in working capital excluding cash during the period. The decrease in net working capital was largely driven by a $23.7 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities caused by increased inventory and other purchases, offset partly by an increase of $14.3 million increase in inventory to support growth in the business, a $7.1 million increase in accounts receivable reflecting the overall growth in net sales and a $2.1 million increase in other current assets for customer deposits and prepaids.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activity was $6.3 million. This was due to $4.5 million in purchase of investments and $1.8 million in purchase of property and equipment and software.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 net cash used in investing activity was $1,381.6 million. This was due to the net cash outflow related to the Acquisition in January 2020.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $18.3 million. This was primarily driven by $20.1 million of principal payments on term debt, offset by $0.6 million of cash proceeds received from the issuance of common shares and $1.1 million cash proceeds received from exercise of employee stock options.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $1,264 million. This was primarily driven by $959.9 million from the issuance of common shares in connection with the Acquisition in January 2020 and additional issuance of shares in May 2020.
In connection with the Acquisition, on the Acquisition Date, we received cash proceeds of $450.0 million from the issuance by Olaplex, Inc. of term loans pursuant to the Original Credit Agreement. In addition, in December
2020, we received $350 million of proceeds from the issuance by Olaplex, Inc. of term loans pursuant to the Amendment to the Original Credit Agreement (as defined herein) and used the proceeds to fund the payment of a $470.0 million dividend to Penelope Group Holdings, which further distributed $470.0 million to holders of all of its Class A common units. Additional offsets to the issuance of the two debt instruments include payment of $15.6 million of debt issuance costs and $10.7 million in principal payments related to the Original Credit Agreement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Requirements
Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and cash generated from operations and draws on our 2020 Revolver (as defined herein) will be sufficient to meet anticipated operating costs, required payments of principal and interest, working capital needs, ordinary course capital expenditures, and other commitments for at least the next 12 months.
If necessary, we may borrow funds under our 2020 Revolver (as defined herein) to finance our liquidity requirements, subject to customary borrowing conditions. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds; however, such financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all. Our ability to meet our operating, investing and financing needs depends, to a significant extent, on our future financial performance, which will be subject in part to general economic, competitive, financial, regulatory and other factors that are beyond our control, including those described elsewhere in “Risk Factors” in the Annual Report. In addition to these general economic and industry factors, the principal factors in determining whether our cash flows will be sufficient to meet our liquidity requirements will be our ability to continue providing innovative products to our customers and consumers and manage production and our supply chain.
Credit Facility
On January 8, 2020, Olaplex, Inc. entered into a secured credit agreement (the “Original Credit Agreement”) consisting of a $450 million term loan facility (the “2020 Term Loan Facility”) and a $50 million revolving facility (the “2020 Revolver” and together with the Term Loan Facility, the “2020 Credit Facilities”), which includes a $10 million letter of credit sub-facility and a $5 million swingline loan facility. In addition, on December 18, 2020 Olaplex, Inc. entered into the Amendment to the Original Credit Agreement (the “Amendment” and together with the Original Credit Agreement, the “2020 Credit Agreement”) to increase the 2020 Term Loan Facility by $350 million and increase the Revolver capacity by $1 million to a revised $800 million Term Loan and a $51 million Revolver facility. The unused balance of the 2020 Revolver was $51 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
The 2020 Term Loan Facility maturity date was January 8, 2026 and the loans made under the 2020 Term Loan Facility were secured by substantially all of our assets. Installment payments on the 2020 Term Loan Facility were required to be made in quarterly installments of $5,028,000, with the remaining balance due upon maturity. The 2020 Term Loan Facility could be prepaid at any time subject to a 2% or 1% penalty provision (with certain exceptions) if paid prior to July 8, 2021 and July 8, 2022, respectively, and is subject to mandatory prepayments with respect to (i) excess cash flow, which was defined as adjusted EBITDA less certain customary deductions, subject to certain threshold amounts of excess cash flow during the relevant period and percentage reductions of the prepayment amount upon the attainment of certain consolidated first lien net leverage ratio levels, (ii) certain non-ordinary course asset dispositions that result in net proceeds in excess of $2.5 million during the relevant measurement period, unless reinvested in accordance with the terms of the 2020 Credit Agreement within twelve months (with an additional 180 days to reinvest, if committed within 12 months) of receipt of such proceeds, or (iii) issuance of additional non permitted debt or certain refinancing debt.
Both the 2020 Revolver and the 2020 Term Loan Facility beared interest, at Olaplex, Inc.’s option, at either a rate per annum equal to (i) an adjusted LIBOR determined by reference to the cost of funds for U.S. dollar deposits (or any other applicable currency available under the 2020 Credit Agreement), as adjusted for statutory reserve requirements for the applicable interest period (with a 1.00% floor), plus an applicable margin ranging from 6.25% to 6.50% based on our consolidated first lien net leverage ratio or (ii) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (x) the federal funds effective rate plus 0.5%, (y) the one-month LIBO rate plus 1.0% and (z) the prime rate, plus an applicable margin ranging from 5.25% to 5.50% based on our consolidated first lien net leverage ratio. The interest rate on both outstanding amounts under the 2020 Revolver and the outstanding 2020 Term Loan Facility was 7.5% per annum as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The 2020 Revolver had a maturity date of January 8, 2025.
We incurred costs directly related to the 2020 Credit Facilities of $15.6 million, consisting primarily of lender fees of $13.5 million and third-party fees of $2.1 million during 2020. These fees, which were allocated between the 2020 Revolver and the 2020 Term Loan Facility and are recorded as a reduction of the carrying amount of non-current debt.
The 2020 Credit Facilities contained a number of covenants that, among other things, restricted our ability to (subject to certain exceptions) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase our capital stock, incur additional indebtedness, create liens on assets, engage in mergers or consolidations and sell or otherwise dispose of assets. The 2020 Credit Facilities also included reporting, financial and maintenance covenants that required us to, among other things, comply with certain consolidated secured net leverage ratios. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we were in compliance with our financial maintenance covenant.
Refinancing of the 2020 credit agreement
On February 23, 2022, Olaplex, Inc. refinanced the 2020 Credit Agreement with a seven-year $675 million senior-secured term loan facility (the “2022 Term Loan Facility”) and a five-year $150 million senior-secured revolving credit facility (the “2022 Revolver” and together with the 2022 Term Loan Facility, the “2022 Credit Facilities”), which includes a $25 million letter of credit sub-facility and a $25 million swingline loan sub-facility (collectively, the “2022 Credit Agreement”).The 2022 Credit Agreement replaced the Company’s Credit Agreement. Using proceeds from the Term Loans, Olaplex, Inc. repaid the outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement.
The 2022 Term Loan Facility maturity date is February 23, 2029 and the 2022 Revolver maturity date is February 23, 2027. Installment payments on the Term Loan are required to be made in quarterly installments of $1,687,500, with the remaining balance due upon maturity. The 2022 Term Loan Facility can be prepaid at any time subject to a 1% penalty provision (with certain exceptions) if paid prior to August 23, 2022, and is subject to mandatory prepayments with respect to (i) excess cash flow, which is defined as adjusted EBITDA less certain customary deductions, subject to a certain threshold amount of excess cash flow during the relevant period and percentage reductions of the prepayment amount upon the attainment of certain consolidated first lien net leverage ratio levels, (ii) certain non-ordinary course asset dispositions that result in net proceeds in excess of a certain threshold amount during the relevant measurement period, unless reinvested in accordance with the terms of the 2022 Credit Agreement within twelve months (with an additional 180 days to reinvest, if committed within 12 months) of receipt of such proceeds, or (iii) issuance of additional non permitted debt or certain refinancing debt.
Both the 2022 Revolver and the 2022 Term Loan Facility bear interest at rates based on the ratio of (i) Olaplex, Inc., and its subsidiaries’ consolidated first lien net indebtedness to (ii) Olaplex, Inc., and its subsidiaries’ consolidated adjusted EBITDA for applicable periods specified in the 2022 Credit Agreement (the “First Lien Leverage Ratio”). The interest rate per annum applicable to the loans under the 2022 Term Loan Facility and 2022 Revolver will be based on a fluctuating rate of interest equal to the sum of an applicable rate and, at the election of Olaplex, Inc. from time to time, (1) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (a) the rate of interest publicly announced by Goldman Sachs Bank USA (in its capacity as administrative agent under the 2022 Credit Agreement, the “Administrative Agent”) as its “prime rate” in effect at its principal office in New York City (or if the Administrative Agent has no “prime rate,” the rate last quoted by the Wall Street Journal as the “prime rate” or, if the Wall Street Journal ceases to quote such rate, the highest per annum interest rate published by the federal reserve board in federal reserve statistical release H.15 (519) as the “bank prime loan” rate or, if such rate is no longer quoted therein, any similar rate quoted therein or any similar release by the federal reserve board), (b) the greater of the (x) federal funds effective rate and (y) overnight bank funding rate, plus 0.50% and (c) one-month adjusted secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”) plus 1.00%, (2) an adjusted SOFR determined by reference to the higher of (a) a rate equal to the SOFR in the form of a term rate published by the CME Term SOFR administrator (or any successor thereof) for an interest period of one, three or six months (or if such term rate is unavailable, a daily simple rate for an interest payment period of one, three or six months published by the federal reserve board of New York) two U.S. government securities business days prior to the commencement of such tenor (plus, solely with respect to the Term B
Loans, a credit spread adjustment of 0.10% for all such interest periods) and (b) 0.00%, with respect to the 2022 Revolver and, 0.50%, with respect to the 2022 Term Loan Facility, and (3) with respect to a borrowing in Euros under the 2022 Revolver, a euro interbank offered rate (“EURIBOR”) determined by reference to the higher of (a) the Euro interbank offered rate administered by the European Money Markets Institute (or any successor thereof) for a period equal to one, three, six, or, if available to all relevant affected Lenders, twelve months or a shorter period (as selected by Olaplex, Inc.) appearing on Reuters Screen EURIBOR01 Page (or otherwise on the Reuters screen) two target days prior to the commencement of the applicable interest period and (b) 0.00%. The 2022 Revolver and swingline loans (which must be in base rate) have applicable rates equal to (x) 2.75%, in the case of base rate loans, 3.75%, in the case of adjusted SOFR loans and 3.75%, in the case of EURIBOR loans, if the First Lien Leverage Ratio is greater than 1.20:1.00, and (y) 2.50%, in the case of base rate loans, 3.50%, in the case of adjusted SOFR loans and 3.50%, in the case of EURIBOR loans, if the First Lien Leverage Ratio is less than or equal to 1.20:1.00. Loans under the 2022 Term Loan Facility have applicable rates equal to (x) 2.75%, in the case of base rate loans, and 3.75%, in the case of adjusted SOFR loans, if the First Lien Leverage Ratio is greater than 1.20:1.00, and (y) 2.50%, in the case of base rate loans, and 3.50%, in the case of adjusted SOFR loans, if the First Lien Leverage Ratio is less than or equal to 1.20:1.00.
The 2022 Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict Olaplex, Inc.’s ability to (subject to certain exceptions) (i) pay dividends and distributions or repurchase its capital stock, (ii) prepay, redeem, or repurchase certain indebtedness, (iii) incur additional indebtedness and guarantee indebtedness, (iv) create or incur liens, (v) engage in mergers, consolidations, liquidations or dissolutions, (vi) sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of assets, (vii) make investments, acquisitions, loans or advances and (viii) enter into certain transactions with affiliates. The 2022 Credit Agreement also includes, among other things, customary affirmative covenants (including reporting covenants) and events of default (including a change of control) for facilities of this type. In addition, the 2022 Credit Agreement includes a springing first lien leverage ratio financial covenant, which is applicable only to the lenders under the 2022 Revolver. Such affirmative and negative covenants and events of default are substantially similar to those contained in the refinanced Credit Agreement, subject to certain exceptions and thresholds set forth in the 2022 Credit Agreement. The 2022 Term Loan Facility and 2022 Revolver are secured by substantially all of the assets of Olaplex, Inc. and the other guarantors, subject to certain exceptions and thresholds, which is substantially the same as the collateral that secured the obligations under the refinanced Credit Agreement.
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the Pre-IPO Reorganization, we entered into the Tax Receivable Agreement that provides the Pre-IPO Stockholders the right to receive future payments from us equal to 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state or local income tax that we or our subsidiaries realize (or are deemed to realize in certain circumstances) as a result of the utilization of certain tax attributes existing prior to the IPO, including tax basis in intangible assets and capitalized transaction costs relating to taxable years ending on or before the date of this offering (calculated by assuming the taxable year of the relevant entity closes on the date of the IPO), that are amortizable over a fixed period of time (including in tax periods beginning after this offering) and which are available to us and our wholly-owned subsidiaries (collectively, the “Pre-IPO Tax Assets”) and the making of payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement. These payment obligations are our obligations and not obligations of any of our subsidiaries and are not conditioned upon the Pre-IPO Stockholders maintaining a continued direct or indirect ownership interest in us.
We expect that we will be able to utilize the Pre-IPO Tax Assets to reduce the amount of tax that we and our subsidiaries would otherwise be required to pay in the future; however, the Tax Receivable Agreement will require us to pay the Pre-IPO Stockholders 85% of the resulting cash savings. If we did not enter into the Tax Receivable Agreement, we would be entitled to realize the full economic benefit of the Pre-IPO Tax Assets.
Although the actual amount and timing of any payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement will vary depending upon a number of factors including the amount, character and timing of the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ taxable income in the future and the tax rates then applicable to us and our subsidiaries, we expect the payments that will be required to be made under the Tax Receivable Agreement will be substantial and to be funded out of working capital. See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement may be significantly greater than the benefits we realize in respect of the Pre-IPO Tax Assets. Based on current tax laws and assuming that we and our subsidiaries earn sufficient taxable income to realize the full tax benefits subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement, (i) we expect that future payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement relating to the Pre-IPO Tax Assets could aggregate to $229.3 million over the 14-year period under the Tax Receivable Agreement and (ii) we expect payments to occur begin in 2022. Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement are not conditioned upon the parties’ continued ownership of the Company. The Tax Receivable Agreement provides that interest, at a rate equal to LIBOR (or if LIBOR ceases to be published, a replacement rate with similar characteristics) plus 3%, accrues from the due
date (without extensions) of the tax return to which the applicable tax benefits relate to the date of payment specified by the Tax Receivable Agreement.
In connection with the Reorganization Transactions, on September 29, 2021, we have recognized a liability of $232.9 million for the payments to be made under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which is accounted for as a reduction of additional paid-in capital on our consolidated balance sheet. Changes in the utilization of the Pre-IPO Tax Assets will impact the amount of the liability that will be paid pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement. Changes in the utilization of these Pre-IPO Tax Assets are recorded in income tax expense (benefit) and any changes in the obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreement is recorded in other income (expense). During the fourth quarter of 2021, we recognized other income of $3.6 million for a reduction to the liability for the Tax Receivable Agreement resulting primarily from an update to the blended state income tax rate used to measure the obligation. The adjusted liability as of December 31, 2021 is $229.3 million, of which $225.1 was recorded in long term liabilities and $4.2 million was recorded in current liabilities.
For purposes of the Tax Receivable Agreement, the amount of cash savings in U.S. federal, state or local income tax that we or our subsidiaries realize (or are deemed to realize in certain circumstances) as a result of the utilization of the Pre-IPO Tax Assets will be computed by comparing our actual U.S. federal, state and local income tax liability with our hypothetical liability had we not been able to utilize the Pre-IPO Tax Assets, taking into account several assumptions and adjustments. Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement are expected to give rise to certain additional tax benefits. Any such tax benefits that we are deemed to realize under the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement are covered by the Tax Receivable Agreement and will increase the amounts due thereunder.
The aggregate amount payable pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement is dependent in large part on the reduction in taxes that we would have been required to pay absent the existence of the Pre-IPO Tax Assets. As a result, changes in tax law, and in particular the tax rate applicable to U.S. corporations and the tax rules on the amortization and depreciation of assets, may materially impact the timing and amounts of payments by us to the Pre-IPO Stockholders pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreement. Congress is considering a significant number of changes to U.S. tax laws, including an increase in the maximum tax rate applicable to U.S. corporations, which may materially increase our payment obligations to Pre-IPO Stockholders under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Different timing rules apply to payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement to be made to holders that, prior to the completion of the IPO, held stock option (collectively, the “Award Holders”). Such payments will generally be deemed invested in a notional account rather than made on the scheduled payment dates, and the account will be distributed on the fifth anniversary of the IPO, together with an amount equal to the net present value of such Award Holder’s future expected payments, if any, under the Tax Receivable Agreement. Moreover, payments to holders of stock options that were unvested prior to the completion of the IPO are subject to vesting on the same schedule as such holder’s unvested stock options.
If we fail to make payment by the date specified by the Tax Receivable Agreement, the Tax Receivable Agreement generally provides for interest to accrue on the unpaid amount from the date so specified until the date of actual payment, at a rate equal to LIBOR (or if LIBOR ceases to be published, a replacement rate with similar characteristics) plus 5%, except under certain circumstances specified in the Tax Receivable Agreement where we are unable to make payment by such date, in which case interest would accrue at a rate equal to LIBOR (or if LIBOR ceases to be published, a replacement rate with similar characteristics) plus 3%.
Further, the Tax Receivable Agreement provides that (i) upon certain mergers, stock and asset sales, other forms of business combinations, (ii) upon certain sales or other divestitures, (iii) upon certain proceedings seeking liquidation, reorganization or other relief under bankruptcy, insolvency or similar law, event of default under certain of our indebtedness for borrowed money, or other Credit Event (as defined therein), (iv) upon a breach of any of our material obligations (that is not timely cured) under the Tax Receivable Agreement, or (v) or other Changes of Control (as defined therein) or if, at any time, we elect an early termination of the Tax Receivable Agreement, our payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement will accelerate and may significantly exceed the actual benefits we realize in respect of the tax attributes subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement. We will be required to make a payment intended to be equal to the present value of future payments (calculated using a discount rate equal to LIBOR (or if LIBOR ceases to be published, a replacement rate with similar characteristics) plus 1%, which may differ from our, or a potential acquirer’s, then-current cost of capital) under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which payment would be based on certain assumptions, including the assumption that we and our subsidiaries have sufficient taxable income and tax liabilities to fully utilize anticipated future tax benefits. In these situations, our, or a potential acquirer’s, obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement could have a substantial negative impact on our, or a potential acquirer’s, liquidity and could have the effect of delaying, deferring, modifying or preventing certain mergers, asset sales, other forms of business combinations or other Changes of Control.
These provisions of the Tax Receivable Agreement may result in situations where the Pre-IPO Stockholders have interests that differ from or are in addition to those of our other stockholders.
In addition, certain transactions by us could cause us to recognize taxable income (possibly material amounts of income) without a current receipt of cash. Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement with respect to such taxable income would cause a net reduction in our available cash. For example, internal restructurings or reorganizations involving the intercompany sale or license of intellectual property rights, transactions giving rise to cancellation of debt income, the accrual of income from original issue discount or deferred payments, a “triggering event” requiring the recapture of dual consolidated losses, or “Subpart F” income would each produce income with no corresponding increase in cash. In these cases, we may use some of the Pre-IPO Tax Assets to offset income from these transactions and, under the Tax Receivable Agreement, would be required to make a payment to our Pre-IPO Stockholders even though we receive no cash corresponding to such income.
Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement will be based in part on our reporting positions. The Pre-IPO Stockholders (or their transferees or assignees) will not reimburse us for any payments previously made under the Tax Receivable Agreement if such tax benefits are subsequently disallowed, although future payments would be adjusted to the extent possible to reflect the result of such disallowance and any excess payments made to any Pre-IPO Stockholder (or such Pre-IPO Stockholder’s transferees or assignees) will be netted against future payments that would otherwise be made under the Tax Receivable Agreement, if any, after our determination of such excess. As a result, in certain circumstances, the payments we are required to make under the Tax Receivable Agreement could exceed the cash tax savings we actually realize in respect of the attributes in respect of which the Tax Receivable Agreement required us to make payment.
Because we are a holding company with no operations of our own, our ability to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement is dependent on the ability of our subsidiaries to make distributions to us. To the extent that we are unable to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for specified reasons, such payments will be deferred and will accrue interest at a rate equal to LIBOR (or if LIBOR ceases to be published, a replacement rate with similar characteristics) plus 3% at a rate equal to LIBOR (or if LIBOR ceases to be published, a replacement rate with similar characteristics) plus 3%, which could negatively impact our results of operations and could also affect our liquidity in periods in which such payments are made.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Long-term debt payments include scheduled principal payments only.
(2)The 2020 Term Loan Facility was subject to variable interest rates. The weighted average interest rate of borrowings under the 2020 Term Loan Facility was 7.5% during the year ended December 31, 2021. Assumes annual interest rate of 7.5% on the 2020 Term Loan Facility over the term of the loan.
(3)Represents 85% of the estimated cash savings in U.S. federal, state or local that the Company realizes in its taxable income as a result of certain existing tax attributes as per the tax receivable agreement. The Company has not considered financing costs that may be incurred with respect to when tax receivable payments are due from the Company’s tax filing dates (with no extensions) to the actual filing of tax returns under extension. See Note 10 to the consolidated interim financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
(4)Does not reflect any borrowings under the 2020 Revolver. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the 2020 Revolver. We were required to pay a commitment fee of 0.50% per annum on unused commitments under the Revolver.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or for other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate our accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
We evaluated the development and selection of our critical accounting policies and estimates and believe that the following involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity and are most significant to reporting our results of operations and financial position, and are therefore discussed as critical. The following critical accounting policies reflect the significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. With respect to critical accounting policies, even a relatively minor variance between actual and expected experience can potentially have a materially favorable or unfavorable impact on subsequent results of operations. More information on all of our significant accounting policies can be found in the footnotes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when control of promised goods are transferred to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods. Control of the products that we sell are transferred at a point in time. Factors that determine the specific point in time a customer obtains control, and a performance obligation is satisfied, are when we have a present right to payment for the goods, whether the customer has physical possession and title to the goods, and whether significant risks and rewards of ownership have transferred. Delivery is typically considered to have occurred at the time the title and risk of loss passes to the customer. Revenue from transactions is generally recognized at a point in time based on the contractual terms with the customer.
In the normal course of business, we offer various incentives to customers such as sales discounts and other incentives and allowances, which give rise to variable consideration. The amount of variable consideration is estimated at the time of sale based on either the expected value method or the most likely amount, depending on the nature of the variability. We regularly review and revise, when deemed necessary, our estimates of variable consideration based on both customer-specific expectations as well as historical rates of realization.
Our terms of sale provide limited return rights, discounts and allowances. We record estimated sales returns, discounts, and miscellaneous customer claims as reductions to net sales at the time revenues are recorded. We base our estimates upon historical experience and trends, and upon approval of specific returns or discounts. Actual returns and discounts in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus may differ from our estimates. If actual or expected future returns and discounts were significantly greater or lower than the reserves we had established, we would record a reduction or increase to net sales in the period in which we made such determination.
Revenue from the sale of gift cards is initially deferred and recognized as a contract liability until the gift card is redeemed by the customer.
We have elected to account for shipping and handling as fulfillment activities and not as separate performance obligations. Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included in net sales. All fulfillment activity costs are recognized as SG&A expenses at the time the related revenue is recognized. Sales taxes collected from customers and remitted directly to government authorities are excluded from net sales and cost of goods sold.
Inventory
Inventory is comprised primarily of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost (average cost method) or estimated net realizable value. Cost is computed based on average historical costs. We allocate the amortization of our patented formulations to the carrying value of our finished goods. The carrying value of inventories is reduced for any excess and obsolete inventory. Excess and obsolete inventory reductions are determined based on assumptions about future demand and sales prices, estimates of the impact of competition, and the age of inventory. If actual conditions are less favorable than those previously estimated by management, additional inventory write-downs could be required. We realized a fair value step up adjustment of $44.7 million to finished goods inventory with respect to the Acquisition of the Olaplex business. We fair valued the inventory utilizing the comparative sales method applying historical selling prices reduced for remaining costs to sell and estimated profit on costs to complete and dispose of finished goods inventory.
Business Combinations
The purchase price of a business acquisition is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their estimated fair values at the business combination date. The excess of purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired, and liabilities assumed as of the date of acquisition are recorded at the acquisition date fair value. Determining fair value of identifiable assets, particularly intangibles, and liabilities acquired requires us to make estimates, which are based on all available information and in some cases assumptions with respect to the timing and amount of future revenues and expenses associated with an asset.
The estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to revision as additional information is obtained during the measurement period for an acquisition, which may last up to one year from the acquisition date. During the measurement period, we may record adjustments to the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill. After the conclusion of the measurement period or the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Valuation of Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired in an acquisition. We test for impairment of goodwill at our one reporting unit level annually at the beginning of the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may be impaired. The goodwill impairment test consists of a comparison of the reporting unit’s fair value to its carrying value. In conducting our annual impairment test, we first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the asset, or reporting unit, is less than its carrying amount. If upon performing a qualitative assessment it indicates that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative assessment.
If a quantitative assessment is performed, we utilize a combination of income and market approaches to estimate the fair value of our reporting unit. The income approach utilizes estimates of discounted cash flows of the reporting units, which requires assumptions for, the reporting units’ revenue growth rates, operating margins terminal growth rates, and discount rates, all of which require significant management judgment. These assumptions are based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy (described in “Fair Value Measurements in Note 1, Organization and Significant Accounting Policies”). The market approach applies market multiples derived from the historical earnings data of selected guideline publicly traded companies to our reporting units’ businesses to yield a second assumed value of each reporting unit, which requires significant management judgement. We base our fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. A change in these underlying assumptions would cause a change in the results of the tests and, as such, could cause fair value to be less than the carrying amounts and result in an impairment of goodwill in the future. Additionally, if actual results are not consistent with the estimates and assumptions or if there are significant changes to our planned strategy, it may cause fair value to be less than the carrying amounts and result in an impairment of goodwill in the future.
Based on our qualitative assessment performed for our one reporting unit, we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value is higher than its carrying value; therefore, the quantitative impairment test was not required and as such we did not record a goodwill impairment charge for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company grants share-based options under the 2021 Plan which provides for the grant of incentive stock options, non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock, unrestricted stock, stock units, including restricted stock units, performance awards, and other stock-based awards to employees, directors and consultants of the Company and its subsidiaries. All outstanding options have been in the form of options to purchase common stock of Olaplex Holdings with vesting based on time-based service conditions. The time-based service options are eligible to vest over the requisite service period, subject to the option holder’s continued service through the applicable vesting date.
The Company previously granted share-based options under the 2020 Plan to employees and non-employees. As a result of the Pre-IPO Reorganization, all outstanding options to purchase shares of common stock of Penelope Holdings Corp. were converted into options to purchase shares of common stock of Olaplex Holdings, in each case with a corresponding adjustment to the exercise price that preserved the options’ spread value. The original time-based options that were converted are eligible to vest in five equal installments on the first five anniversaries from the vesting start date, subject to the option holder’s continued service through the applicable vesting date and are ratably expensed over a five-year service period from the original grant date. The performance-based options that were converted to time-based options to purchase common stock of Olaplex Holdings are eligible to vest in three equal installments on the first three anniversaries of the consummation of the IPO, subject to the option holder’s continued service through the applicable vesting date and are ratably expensed over a three-year service period.
The Company recognizes share-based compensation expense for employees and non-employees based on the grant-date fair value of share-based awards over the requisite service period. For awards that vest based on continued time-based service, share-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the awards. The grant date fair value of share- based awards that contain time-based service conditions is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For awards with performance vesting conditions, the fair value is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model, which incorporates the likelihood of achieving the performance condition with compensation expense recognized over the requisite service period, which is the derived service period as determined by an independent valuator. Determining the fair value of share-based awards requires judgment. The assumptions used in these option-pricing models requires the input of subjective assumptions and are as follows:
•Fair value-For options granted prior to the IPO, the fair value of our underlying common stock was determined by our compensation committee based upon a number of objective factors that include comparable publicly traded peer groups plus comparable transactions. For options granted after the IPO, the fair value of the awards granted are determined using the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the grant date.
•Expected volatility-For options granted prior to the IPO, the expected volatility is based on historical volatilities of a publicly traded peer group based on daily price observations over a period equivalent to the expected term of the share-based option grants. For options granted after the IPO, the Company intends to continue to consistently apply the process using same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of its own share price becomes available.
•Expected term-For share-based options with only time-based service vesting conditions the expected term is determined using the simplified method, as discussed in SAB 104, which estimates the expected term using the contractual life of the option and the vesting period. For share-based options with performance conditions, the term is estimated in consideration of the time period expected to achieve the performance condition, the contractual term of the award, and estimates of future exercise behavior.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Department of the Treasury yield of treasury bonds with a maturity that approximates the expected term of the options.
•Expected dividend yield-The dividend yield is based on our current expectations of dividend payouts. Except for the 2020 Dividend, we have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
The determination of share-based compensation cost is inherently uncertain and subjective and involves the application of valuation models and assumptions requiring the use of judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, share-based compensation expense could be significantly different.
Cash Settled Units
As a result of the Pre-IPO Reorganization, all cash-settled units of Penelope Holdings Corp. were converted into cash-settled units of the Company, in each case with a corresponding adjustment to the base price per unit that preserved the units’ spread value as follows:
•outstanding time-based cash-settled units of Penelope Holdings Corp. were converted into time-based cash-settled units of Olaplex Holdings, with a corresponding adjustment to the base price per unit that preserves the units’ spread value and the same time-based vesting schedule of five years that applied to the unit prior to the conversion; and
•outstanding performance-based cash-settled units of Penelope Holdings Corp. were converted into (i) time-based cash-settled units of Olaplex Holdings, with a corresponding adjustment to the base price per unit that preserves the units’ spread value, that are eligible to vest in equal installments on each of the first three anniversaries of the IPO, subject to (A) the unit holder’s continued service through the applicable vesting date and (B) the weighted average closing price per share of Olaplex Holdings’ common stock over the thirty (30) consecutive trading days ending on the day immediately prior to the applicable vesting date equaling or exceeding the IPO price of $21 per share on each applicable vesting date, and (ii) vested cash-settled units of Olaplex Holdings with a corresponding adjustment to the base price per unit that preserves the units’ spread value.
The cash-settled awards are liability awards and are fair valued at each reporting period. The determination of the fair value of cash settled units on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes formula and Monte Carlo simulation approach for the time and performance-based vesting options, respectively, is affected by the fair value of the underlying common stock. It is also affected by assumptions regarding a number of variables that are complex and generally require significant judgment. See Note 11 of the consolidated financial statements, respectively elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Income Taxes and Tax Receivable Agreement
The Company uses the asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes. The provision for income taxes includes Federal, and state income taxes currently payable or receivable and those deferred because of temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and
liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets to the extent it believes the assets are more likely than not to be realized. Valuation allowances are established when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. In making such a determination, the Company considers all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and the results of recent operations. The Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties, if any, associated with tax matters (including UTPs) as part of the income tax provision and includes accrued interest and penalties with the related tax liability in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet.
In the normal course of business, Olaplex and its subsidiaries are subject to examination by various taxing authorities, including the Internal Revenue Service in the U.S. We regularly assess the likelihood of assessments by tax authorities and provide for these matters as appropriate. Audits by tax authorities typically involve examination of the deductibility of certain permanent items, intercompany arrangements and related transfer pricing, and tax credits among other items. Although we believe our tax estimates are appropriate, the final determination of tax audits and any related litigation could result in material changes in our estimates.
Tax Receivable Agreement
Based on current tax laws and assuming that we and our subsidiaries earn sufficient taxable income to realize the full tax benefits subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement, (i) we expect that future payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement relating to the Pre-IPO Tax Assets could aggregate to $229.3 million over the 14-year period under the Tax Receivable Agreement and (ii) we expect material payments to occur beginning in 2023. Payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement are not conditioned upon the parties’ continued ownership of the company. See “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions-Tax Receivable Agreement.”
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for information regarding new accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards and to adopt certain of the reduced disclosure requirements available to emerging growth companies. As a result of the accounting standards election, we will not be subject to the same implementation timing for new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies which may make comparison of our financials to those of other public companies more difficult.