Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations is expected to better allow investors to view the Company from management’s perspective and should be read together with our audited financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our current plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
We have elected to omit discussion of the earliest of the three years covered by the audited financial statements presented. Refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, located in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 22, 2021, for reference to discussion of the year ended December 31, 2019, the earliest of the three fiscal years presented.
Overview
Our technology is designed to elevate the dialysis experience for patients and help providers overcome traditional care delivery challenges. Requiring only an electrical outlet and tap water to operate, the Tablo® Hemodialysis System frees patients and providers from the burdensome infrastructure required to operate traditional dialysis machines. The integration of water purification and on-demand dialysate production in a single 35-inch compact console enables Tablo to serve as a dialysis clinic on wheels. With a simple-to-use touchscreen interface, two-way wireless data transmission and a proprietary data analytics platform, Tablo is a new holistic approach to dialysis care. Unlike existing hemodialysis machines, which have limited clinical versatility across care settings, Tablo can be used seamlessly across multiple care settings and a wide range of clinical applications.
Tablo leverages cloud technology, making it possible for providers to monitor devices and treatments remotely, perform patient and population analytics, and automate clinical recordkeeping, while also enabling us to release features and enhancements through OTA updates. Tablo’s connectedness also allows it to continually stream more than 500,000 device performance data points after every treatment. We use this data, in conjunction with our diagnostic and predictive algorithms, to determine failure types and, in some instances, predict failures before they occur. In effect, this contributes to a reduction in service hours and an increase in device uptime.
We have generated meaningful evidence to demonstrate that providers can realize significant operational efficiencies, including reducing the cost of their dialysis programs by up to 80% in the intensive care unit. In addition, Tablo has been shown to deliver robust clinical care. In studies we have conducted, patients have reported experiencing fewer symptoms and better quality sleep while on Tablo. We believe Tablo empowers patients, who have traditionally been passive recipients of care, to regain agency and ownership of their treatment. Tablo is cleared by the FDA for use in the hospital, clinic, or home setting.
Driving adoption of Tablo in the acute care setting has been our primary focus to date. We have invested in growing our economic and clinical evidence, built a veteran sales and clinical support team with significant expertise, and implemented a comprehensive training and customer experience program. Our experience in the acute market has demonstrated Tablo’s clinical flexibility and operational versatility, while also delivering meaningful cost savings to the providers. We plan to continue leveraging our commercial infrastructure to broaden our installed base in the acute care market as well as driving utilization and fleet expansion with our existing customers. While the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has presented opportunities to demonstrate the real-world benefits of Tablo over traditional machines, we believe these benefits, in addition to the other advantages of Tablo, are continuing to drive customer purchasing decisions.
Tablo is also well suited for home-based dialysis. Our ability to reduce training time, patient dropout, and the supplies and infrastructure required to deliver dialysis in the home can drive efficiency and economic improvements to the home care model. In our home IDE trial, patients reported specific quality of life improvements compared to their experience on the incumbent home dialysis machine. To penetrate this market successfully, we are focused on refining our home distribution, logistics and support systems to help ensure they are ready for rapid scale. We are also working with providers, patients, and payors to increase awareness and adoption of TCUs as a bridge to home-based therapy. To demonstrate the cost advantages of Tablo in the home setting, we are continuing to collect additional patient clinical experience and outcomes data.
We sell our solution through our direct sales organization, which covers most major metropolitan markets in the United States. As of December 31, 2021, our sales organization is comprised of 36 capital sales team members, responsible for generating new customer demand for Tablo, and 82 clinical sales team members, responsible for driving utilization and fleet expansion of Tablo consoles at existing customer sites. In addition, our field service team, comprised of 93 members, provides maintenance services and
product support to Tablo customers. The same sales organization and field service team drive Tablo penetration in both the acute and home markets. We believe the ability to leverage one team to serve both markets will result in significant productivity and cost optimization as we continue to scale our business.
We generate revenue primarily from the initial sale of Tablo consoles, and recurring sales of per-treatment consumables, including the Tablo cartridge, which generates significant total revenue over the life of the console. We generate additional revenue via annual service contracts and shipping and handling charged to customers. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, sales of our consoles accounted for 63%, 66% and 81% of our revenue, respectively, sales of our consumables accounted for 19%, 13% and 10% of our revenue, respectively, and sales of services and other accounted for 18%, 21% and 9% of our revenue, respectively.
Historically, we have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock, revenue from sales, and debt financing. On September 17, 2020, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 10,293,777 shares of common stock (which included 1,342,666 shares that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the IPO underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares in connection with the IPO) at a price to the public of $27.00 per share. Including the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, we received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $254.8 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $23.1 million. Upon the closing of the IPO, all of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock automatically converted into shares of common stock.
On April 13, 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering and sold 2,945,864 shares of our common stock (which included 445,864 shares that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a price to the public of $53.50 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $149.1 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of $8.5 million.
Since our inception, we have incurred net losses in each year. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we incurred net losses of $131.9 million, $121.5 million and $68.3 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $626.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future and to incur operating losses in the near term.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our financial performance has been and in the foreseeable future will continue to be primarily driven by the following factors. While we believe each of these factors presents significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address the factors below is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Market Acceptance of Tablo in Acute Setting
We plan to further broaden our installed base by continuing to target national and regional IDNs and health systems, and sub-acute LTACH and SNF providers. In addition, we focus on driving utilization and fleet expansion with existing customers by providing an exceptional user experience delivered through our commercial team and a steady release of software enhancements that amplify Tablo’s operational reliability and clinical versatility. Our ability to successfully execute on this strategy, and thereby increase our revenue, will in part drive our results of operations and the growth of our business.
Expansion of Tablo within the Home Setting
We believe a significant growth opportunity exists within the home hemodialysis market. We are partnering with innovative dialysis clinic providers and health systems who are motivated to grow their home hemodialysis population, and who share our vision of creating a seamless and supported transition to the home. We are also investing in market development over the longer term to expand the home hemodialysis market itself. The expansion of the home hemodialysis market and our ability to penetrate this market will be an important factor in driving the future growth of our business.
Gross Margin
We are continuing to execute a well-defined strategy designed to expand gross margins. First, in the first quarter of 2021, we successfully began production at our own console manufacturing facility in Tijuana, Mexico which we operate in collaboration with our outsourced business administration service provider, TACNA. Second, following our receipt of 510(k) clearance from the FDA
for the new cartridge sterilization method in the fourth quarter of 2021, we have qualified a second source to increase Tablo cartridge production through a new manufacturing partner in Mexico, which we anticipate will result in cost reductions, including lower freight costs. Third, we will continue to drive scale across our console platform to leverage our supply base and help improve our manufacturing efficiency. Fourth, we will continue to utilize our cloud-based data system, as well as enhanced product performance, to help drive down the cost of service. Our ability to grow our business will depend in part on these and other measures to control the costs of our products being successful. Likewise, it will be important that we effectively manage the costs of generating our service revenue.
Impacts of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We believe that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the limitations of traditional machines and the benefits of Tablo, which drove an increase in demand for Tablo during 2020. We also believe the advantages of Tablo highlighted by the pandemic are now embedded as one of the many factors driving our customers’ purchasing decisions. We did not experience significant demand driven by COVID-19 during 2021 and do not expect to in future periods.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we made modifications to our normal operations, employing precautionary measures designed to help protect our employees while providing ongoing support for our customers and their patients. Among other measures, we restricted non-essential travel of our employees and asked the majority of our employees to work from home. When COVID-19 testing became available, we implemented onsite testing in our facilities. We also provided vaccination clinics at each of our facilities to make it convenient for our workforce to receive COVID-19 vaccinations once available. During the third quarter of 2021, we defined a policy requiring our customer-facing and on-site employees to be fully vaccinated by October 2021, subject to medical and religious exemptions. With nearly all our employees now vaccinated, we have begun to move toward more normal business operations in accordance with local guidelines, including resuming more on-site activity to increase productive collaboration while continuing to prioritize employee safety. For employees working on-site, we continue to follow masking protocols consistent with evolving health and safety guidelines, facilitate social distancing, and practice increased sanitizing standards. Lastly, we have created a business continuity plan and incident management team to respond quickly and effectively to changes in order to offer customers uninterrupted products, services and support while safeguarding the best interest of employees, suppliers and stockholders.
Our business may be impacted by an escalation or a continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic. While the operations at our contract manufacturing partners’ facilities and our outsourced business administration service provider, TACNA, for our facility in Tijuana, Mexico, have not yet experienced significant disruption as a result of the pandemic, the possibility that such disruption may occur remains. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted the operations of certain of our third-party suppliers, resulting in increased lead-times, higher component costs, and lower allocations for our purchase of some components (including certain critical components) and, in certain cases, requiring us to procure materials from alternative sources or incur higher logistical expenses. We have worked closely with our manufacturing partners and suppliers to enable us to source key components and maintain appropriate inventory levels to meet customer demand, and have not experienced material disruptions in our supply chain to date.
Additionally, surges and shifts in consumer demand as the economy reopens, further exacerbated by COVID-19 outbreaks and protocols, have strained the global freight network and placed significant stress on air, ocean, and ground freight carriers. This has resulted in labor shortages, container and chassis shortages, reduced carrier capacity, carrier delays and longer lead times, shipment receiving and unloading backlogs at many U.S. ports, and escalating freight costs. During the fourth quarter of 2021, these supply chain disruptions escalated, and we are facing increased supply chain constraints, notably with the transportation of Tablo cartridges from our contract manufacturing partner in Southeast Asia. As a result, we have faced, and may continue to face, increased transportation and related costs associated with delivering adequate supply of Tablo treatments to our customers. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we have qualified a second source to increase Tablo cartridge production through a new manufacturing partner in Mexico. While we anticipate that this second source will help mitigate supply chain challenges and reduce the need for costly and capacity-constrained air freight delivery of the cartridges, there is no assurance that we will not continue to face supply chain constraints. Continued escalation of these supply chain disruptions and a sustained rise in freight costs could negatively impact our ability to meet customer demand on a timely basis, result in customer dissatisfaction and adversely impact our operating margins and results of operations.
Moreover, healthcare providers (including our existing and prospective customers) are facing a nationwide shortage of qualified nurses and other clinical personnel due to long-term trends that have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. As competition for these healthcare professionals has intensified, and providers are facing increased difficulties attracting and retaining skilled clinical personnel, resulting in increased costs, staffing shortages and other disruptions. These challenging labor market conditions in the healthcare industry have been heightened by the increased demand for, and demand upon, nurses and other staff resulting from the ongoing pandemic. We believe Tablo offers automation and ease-of-use benefits over traditional machines that can enhance our existing and potential customers’ ability to support their patient populations despite staffing shortages. However, there is also a risk that the increased costs and other disruptions caused by the shortage of dialysis nurses, technicians and other staff could
cause existing or prospective customers delay continued investment in or adoption of new technologies and postpone purchasing decisions. If our customers continue to face prolonged volatility, uncertainty, and staffing shortages, whether due to the pandemic or otherwise, it could ultimately adversely impact our ability to expand existing customer relationships or attract new customers of Tablo, and have a material adverse effect on our revenues, results of operations, and future growth.
How long the pandemic, and measures intended to contain the spread of COVID-19, will continue remains uncertain and depends on ongoing developments, including but not limited to any resurgences of the virus including emerging variant strains such as the Delta and Omicron variants, federal, state, and local government actions taken in response, and continued availability, effectiveness and public acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines. Additionally, the duration and severity of disruptions in the global supply chain, largely driven by high demand as the economy reopens and the ongoing impact of the pandemic, also remain uncertain and depend on various factors, including the effectiveness of recent government actions intended to mitigate these disruptions. As a result, we cannot predict what effect COVID-19, the associated containment measures, and the related supply chain disruptions will ultimately have on our business and results of operations, on our customers, or on our suppliers and vendors, in particular for any of our suppliers and vendors that may not qualify as essential businesses and suffer more significant or lengthier disruptions to their business operations. There is no assurance that we will not experience more significant disruptions in our supply chain in the future, particularly if the operations of our contract manufacturing partners, our critical single-source component providers, or the facility we operate in Tijuana, Mexico in collaboration with TACNA, are more severely impacted by the pandemic and associated containment measures.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
We generate our revenue primarily from the sale of products and services. In addition, we enter into console operating lease arrangements that contain lease and non-lease components. Revenue related to lease arrangements is allocated to the lease and non-lease elements based on their relative standalone selling price, with the lease component recorded in product revenue and the non-lease component recorded in service and other revenue. Our product and services revenue are generated primarily through direct sales to customers in the United States.
Product Revenue
We generate product revenue from the sale, and to a lesser extent, leasing of our Tablo consoles and the sale of related consumables, including the Tablo cartridges. Our Tablo consoles and consumables are generally sold without the right of return. Revenue is recognized when control of our Tablo consoles is transferred, generally upon shipment, and excludes the value of the initial service agreement, which is recognized as service and other revenue over the term of the initial service agreement. Revenue is recognized net of any sales incentive, rebates and any taxes collected from customers. Leases of Tablo consoles are considered operating leases and recognized as revenue over their lease term. Consumables, including the Tablo cartridges, are recognized primarily upon shipment.
Service and Other Revenue
We generate service revenue primarily from service agreements for our Tablo consoles and other revenue from shipping and handling charged to customers. Under the service agreements, we provide maintenance, repair and training services, connectivity to our cloud infrastructure, including TabloHub, as well as software updates, when and if available, for Tablo consoles. The service agreements are typically entered into for a one-year term. Revenue from the sale of service agreements, including the revenue associated with the first-year service, is recognized ratably over the service period.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of finished goods, inbound freight costs, and manufacturing costs incurred in the production process including personnel and related costs, costs of component materials, manufacturing overhead, and allocated costs including facilities and information technology. We plan to grow our manufacturing workforce as well as expand our manufacturing capabilities to support our growth. In addition, cost of product revenue includes warranty costs and provisions for excess and obsolete inventory. Cost of product revenue in absolute dollars will increase as our sales volume increases.
Cost of Service and Other Revenue
Cost of service and other revenue primarily consists of personnel and related costs and component costs incurred in connection with our obligations under our service agreements. We plan to invest in personnel to support the expansion of our Tablo fleet while also utilizing our cloud-based data system, as well as enhanced product performance, to lower the cost of service as a percentage of revenue. Cost of service and other revenue in absolute dollars will increase as our sales volume increases.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
We calculate gross margin as gross profit divided by total revenue. Our gross profit has been and will continue to be, affected by a variety of factors, including market conditions that may impact our pricing; sales mix changes among Tablo consoles, consumables and services; excess and obsolete inventories; our cost structure for manufacturing operations relative to volume; inbound freight costs, and product warranty obligations. We expect our margin to increase over the long term to the extent we are successful in our ability to lower the costs associated with the production of the Tablo console and consumables. We continue to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which, if successful, we believe will lower production costs and enable us to increase our gross margin. While we expect gross margin to increase over the long term, we also anticipate it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of compensation and personnel costs, consulting services, laboratory supplies and materials expenses, and allocated costs including facilities and information technology.
We plan to continue to invest in our research and development efforts, including hiring additional employees, to enhance existing products and develop new products. As a percentage of revenue, we expect research and development expenses to vary over time, depending on the level and timing of the enhancement of the existing products and new product development initiatives.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of compensation and personnel costs, marketing and promotional activities, government affairs, costs of outside consultants, travel and customer services costs, and allocated costs including facilities and information technology. Shipping and handling costs, as well as the associated personnel expenses, are included in sales and marketing expenses.
As we continue to drive the expansion of Tablo, we expect to continue to invest in our sales and support teams, marketing, and shipping and handling costs. As a result, we expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods. As a percentage of revenue, however, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to decrease over the long-term primarily as and to the extent our revenue grows.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation and personnel costs, accounting and legal expenses, regulatory fees, general corporate expenses and allocated costs including facilities and information technology.
We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses due to increased costs for accounting, human resources, legal, insurance and investor relations. We expect to continue our hiring in all these areas in line with the continued growth of our business. We also expect allocated facilities costs to increase in future periods as a result of higher costs associated with the expansion of our operations. As a result of these and other initiatives, we expect general and administrative expenses to vary from period to period and increase in absolute dollars in future periods. However, as a percentage of revenue, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease over the long-term primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows.
We expect our stock-based compensation expense allocated to cost of revenue, research and development expenses, sales and marketing expenses, and general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars due primarily to potential increases in the value of our common stock and as we issue additional stock-based awards under our equity incentive plan and employee stock purchase plan to attract and retain employees.
Interest Income and Other Income, Net
Interest income and other income, net, primarily consists of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our debt and amortization of associated debt discount. See Note 7 to the financial statements for further details.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
In connection with our prior credit agreements and the Perceptive Term Loan Agreement, we issued warrants to purchase shares of our Series A, Series B and Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock to the respective lenders. We classified these warrants as a liability on our balance sheets that were remeasured to fair value at each reporting date with the corresponding change in fair value recognized in our statements of operations. Upon the completion of our IPO in 2020, the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Loss on Extinguishment of Term Loan
Loss on extinguishment of term loan is related to the repayment of the Perceptive Term Loan in July 2020, which included early prepayment and exit fees.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes primarily consists of foreign taxes in Mexico and state taxes in the United States. We have a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits related primarily to research and development.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth, for the years indicated, our results of operations (in thousands):
Revenue
Product revenue increased by $44.7 million, or 113%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a $32.3 million increase in console revenue and a $12.4 million increase in consumables revenue. The increase in consoles revenue was driven by new customer adoption, fleet expansion across existing customer sites, a higher average selling price, and an increase in console leasing revenue. The increase in consumables revenue was driven by the growth in our Tablo installed base.
Service and other revenue increased by $8.0 million, or 77%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to services associated with our larger Tablo installed base, including leased consoles.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The total cost of revenue increased by $32.0 million, or 51%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to growth in sales volume. Gross profit increased by $20.6 million, or 158%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The gross margin percentage improved by 33.5 percentage points for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. This improvement in gross profit and gross margin was primarily driven by the impact of our cost reduction activities and higher average selling prices.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, supply chain disruptions driven primarily by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic escalated, and we are facing increased supply chain constraints, most notably with the transportation of the Tablo cartridges from our contract manufacturing partner in Southeast Asia. As a result, we have faced, and may continue to face, increased transportation and related costs associated with delivering adequate supply of Tablo treatments to our customers. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we have qualified a second source to increase Tablo cartridge production through a new manufacturing partner in Mexico. While we anticipate that this second source will help mitigate supply chain challenges and reduce the need for costly and capacity-constrained air freight delivery of the cartridges, there is no assurance that we will not continue to face supply chain constraints. Continued escalation of these supply chain disruptions and a sustained rise in freight costs could negatively impact our gross margin in future periods.
Operating Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $7.9 million, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a $4.5 million increase in consulting services, a $3.4 million net increase in compensation and personnel costs as a result of increased headcount, which includes a $4.2 million increase in compensation offset by a $0.8 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense due to the one-time cumulative expense related to stock options with performance and market-based vesting conditions in 2020, and a $0.4 million increase in travel expenses. The increases were partially offset by a $0.4 million decrease in supplies and materials.
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $20.0 million, or 44% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a $13.3 million increase in compensation and personnel costs as a result of increased headcount, which includes a $1.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, a $2.2 million increase in clinical sales consultant and professional services, a $2.1 million increase in allocated costs for facilities and information technology to support the general expansion of our operations, a $1.7 million increase in travel expenses, and a $0.7 million increase in distribution expenses related to increased sales volume and freight costs.
General and administrative expenses increased by $5.8 million, or 19%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to a $2.5 million increase in insurance costs, a $1.7 million net increase in compensation and personnel costs as a result of increased headcount, which includes a $6.4 million increase in compensation offset by a $4.7 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense due to the one-time cumulative expense related to stock options with performance and market-based vesting conditions in 2020, a $0.7 million increase in professional and consulting services and a $0.8 million increase in allocated costs for facilities and information technology to support the general expansion of our operations.
Other Income (Expenses), Net
Interest income and other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was relatively consistent with the prior year amount.
Interest expense decreased by $1.2 million, or 41%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven primarily by a lower interest rate under the SVB Term Loan as compared to the rate under the Perceptive Term Loan, which we voluntarily repaid in the prior year.
The change in the fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was driven by the changes in assumptions used to value the warrant liability. Upon the closing of our IPO in the third quarter of 2020, all shares of our outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants were either exercised into common stock or automatically converted into warrants to purchase common stock. Accordingly, we have ceased to incur the change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability as the entire redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
The loss on extinguishment of term loan of $1.6 million was recognized for the repayment of the Perceptive Term Loan in the prior year, which included early prepayment and exit fees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $339.5 million, which are available to fund future operations, and restricted cash of $33.3 million.
Since our inception, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations. To date, we have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock, revenue from sales, debt financings, and proceeds from stock option exercises and employee stock purchases. In September 2020, we completed our IPO for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $254.8 million (inclusive of the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares), net of offering costs, underwriter discounts and commissions of approximately $23.1 million. In April 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $149.1 million, after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of $8.5 million.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future and to incur operating losses in the near term while we make investments to support our anticipated growth. We may raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity financing, debt financings, including through refinancing our existing debt, or other sources. If this financing is not available to us at adequate levels or on acceptable terms, we may need to reevaluate our operating plans. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, and cash generated from sales of our products and services, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated needs for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report.
Cash Flows Summary
The following table summarizes the cash flows for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $130.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to a net loss of $131.9 million and a net cash outflow from the change in our operating assets and liabilities of $25.6 million, partially offset by the primary non-cash adjustments for stock-based compensation expense of $17.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $5.2 million, accretion of discount on investments of $2.0 million, non-cash lease expense of $1.0 million, provision for inventories of $1.0 million, and non-cash interest expense of $0.6 million. The net cash outflow from operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in inventories due to the timing of inventory purchases including advance purchases of inventory to meet anticipated demand and to mitigate supply chain disruptions, an increase in accounts receivable due to timing of collections, a decrease in accounts payable due to timing of vendor payments and a decrease in operating lease liabilities. The net cash outflow from operating assets and liabilities was partially offset by an increase in accrued payroll and related benefits due to an increase in headcount, an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, an increase in deferred revenue due to the growth of our business, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets and an increase in accrued warranty liability.
The net cash used in operating activities of $99.0 million for the year ended December 30, 2020 was due to a net loss of $121.5 million and a net cash outflow from the change in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.8 million, which were partially offset by the primary non-cash adjustments for stock-based compensation expense of $21.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $3.2 million, loss on extinguishment of term loan of $1.6 million, non-cash interest expense of $0.6 million, and non-cash lease expense of $0.6 million, provision for inventories of $0.5 million, and loss on disposal of property and equipment of $0.2 million. The net cash outflow from operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in inventories due to the timing of inventory purchases including advance purchases of inventory to meet anticipated demand, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, an increase in accounts receivable due to timing of collections and a decrease in accrued interest. The net cash outflow from operating assets and liabilities was partially offset by an increase in accrued payroll and related benefits due to an increase in headcount, an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities due to the growth of our business, an increase in deferred revenue, an increase in accrued warranty liability, and an increase in accounts payable due to timing of vendor payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $142.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due primarily to purchases of investment securities of $178.4 million and purchases of property and equipment of $3.1 million, partially offset by the sales and maturities of investment securities of $39.0 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to the sales and maturities of short-term investments of $45.9 million, partially offset by the purchases of investment securities of $32.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $9.1 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $160.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due primarily to the net proceeds of $149.1 million from the issuance of our common stock in our follow-on offering and the proceeds of $11.1 million from employee exercises of stock options and employee stock purchase plan purchases.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $385.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due primarily to the net proceeds of $254.8 million from the issuance of our common stock in our IPO, net of issuance costs, the net proceeds of $126.8 million from the issuance of our Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock, the net proceeds of $29.6 million from borrowings on the SVB Loan and Security Agreement, proceeds of $4.3 million from the exercise of the Series C redeemable convertible
preferred stock warrants, and proceeds of $1.2 million from the issuance of common stock from exercises of stock options, partially offset by the cash outflow of $31.0 million in repayment of the Perceptive Term Loan which included early prepayment and exit fees.
Debt Obligations
We entered into the SVB Loan and Security Agreement with SVB in July 2020, which provides for a $30.0 million term loan (the SVB Term Loan). We used the SVB Term Loan proceeds to repay in full all amounts due under the Perceptive Term Loan and cash on hand to pay $1.2 million in early prepayment, accrued interest and exit fees.
The SVB Term Loan matures on November 1, 2025. Payments under the SVB Term Loan are for interest only through May 2023, and then 30 monthly principal and interest payments from June 2023 until maturity. The SVB Term Loan bears interest at a rate per annum equal to the greater of (A) 0.50% above the Prime Rate as reported in the Wall Street Journal then in effect (which shall not be less than zero) and (B) 3.75%.
There is also a final payment equal to 6.75% of the original principal amount of the SVB Term Loan, or approximately $2.0 million, due at maturity (or any earlier date of optional pre-payment or acceleration of principal due to an event of default). We may, at our option, prepay the SVB Term Loan in full, subject to an additional prepayment fee ranging between 1% and 3% of the outstanding principal amount of the SVB Term Loan. The prepayment fee would also be due and payable in the event of an acceleration of the principal amount of the supplemental term loan due to an event of default. The SVB Term Loan is secured by substantially all of our assets, including all of the capital stock held by us, if any (subject to a 65% limitation on pledges of capital stock of foreign subsidiaries), subject to certain exceptions.
In the event of default or change in control, all unpaid principal and all accrued and unpaid interest amounts (if any) become immediately due and payable including the prepayment fee. Events of default include, but are not limited to, a payment default, a material adverse change, and insolvency. The SVB Loan and Security Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, affirmative covenants and also contains certain restrictive covenants, including, among others, limitations on: the incurrence of additional debt, liens on property, acquisitions and investments, loans and guarantees, mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions, asset sales, dividends and other payments in respect of our capital stock, prepayments of certain debt, transactions with affiliates and changes to our type of business, management of the business, control of the business or business locations. We are also obligated to maintain a restricted cash balance greater or equal to the outstanding principal balance of $30.0 million of the SVB Term Loan.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. The estimates are based on historical experience and on various other factors that are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While the significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We generate our revenue primarily from contracts with customers for the sale of products and services. Each customer contract defines our distinct performance obligations. Revenue is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied. Revenue from product sales is recognized at a point in time when management has determined that control has transferred to the customer, which is generally when legal title has transferred to the customer. Certain contracts include variable consideration such as rebates, revenue for such contracts is recognized only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. Revenue from service contracts is recognized over time as the service is performed, typically evenly over the contract term. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Our contracts with customers often include multiple performance obligations. For such contracts, we allocate the contracted transaction price to each performance obligation based upon the relative standalone sale prices (SSP). We determine the SSP based
upon the facts and circumstances of each performance obligation (product or services), which often requires management's judgement. We use an observable price to estimate SSP for items that are sold separately, including customer service agreements. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the product or service separately, we determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. We may offer additional goods or services to customers at the inception of customer contracts at prices not at SSP. If such contracts result in a material right, we allocate part of the transaction price to that right and recognize the associated revenue when those future goods and services are transferred to the customer. SSP is assigned based on the estimated value of the material right.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Our stock-based compensation expense relates to stock options with a service-based vesting condition, stock options with performance and market-based vesting conditions, stock purchase rights under our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP), restricted stock units (RSUs) and performance stock units (PSUs). Stock-based compensation expense for our stock-based awards is based on their grant date fair value. We estimate the fair value of stock options with a service condition and stock purchase rights under our ESPP on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of these awards is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period in which the awards are expected to vest and forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
The Black-Scholes model considers several variables and assumptions in estimating the fair value of service-based stock options and stock purchase rights under our ESPP. These variables include the per share fair value of the underlying common stock, exercise price, expected term, risk-free interest rate, expected annual dividend yield and expected stock price volatility over the expected term. For all stock options granted, we calculate the expected term using the simplified method for “plain vanilla” stock option awards. We had no publicly available stock price information prior to our IPO and limited available stock price information subsequent to our IPO; therefore, we have used the historical volatility of the stock price of similar publicly traded peer companies. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues similar in duration to the expected term of the equity-settled award.
For stock options with performance- and market-based vesting conditions, stock-based compensation expense begins to be recognized over the remaining service period when it is considered probable that the performance vesting condition will be satisfied. Prior to our IPO in September 2020, we had not recognized any stock-based compensation expense as the satisfaction of the performance condition was not considered probable. Upon the closing of our IPO, we recorded a cumulative stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method as the performance condition was satisfied. Stock-based compensation expense related to these options is not reversed if the achievement of the market-based vesting condition does not occur. The fair value of these stock options is estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model.
The fair value of RSUs and PSUs with service- or performance-based vesting conditions is based on the market price of our common stock on the date of grant. The determination of the stock-based compensation expense related to PSUs with performance-based vesting conditions to be recognized requires the use of certain estimates and assumptions. At each reporting period, we reassess the probability of the achievement of corporate performance goals to estimate the number of shares to be released. Any increase or decrease in stock-based compensation expense resulting from an adjustment in the estimated shares to be released is treated as accumulative catch-up in the period of adjustment. If any of the assumptions or estimates used change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially from what we have recorded in the current period. The fair value of PSUs with market-based vesting conditions is estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model. Stock-based compensation expense related to these PSUs is recognized using the accelerated attribution method and not reversed if the achievement of the market conditions does not occur.
Inventories
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with approximate costs determined on a first-in, first-out basis. Inventory costs include direct materials, direct labor, and normal manufacturing overhead. The carrying value of inventories is reduced for any products that are considered excessive or obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. Any write-down of its inventory to net realizable value establishes a new cost basis and will be maintained even if certain circumstances suggest that the inventory is recoverable in subsequent periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our audited financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements that may impact us.