Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Omega Alpha SPAC,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Omega Alpha SPAC. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations, assumptions and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us. No assurance can be given that future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements will be achieved, and actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intends,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 26, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. While we may pursue an acquisition opportunity in any business or industry, we are focusing on the healthcare or healthcare-related industries to capitalize on the expertise and capabilities of our management team in order to create long-term shareholder value. In particular, we are targeting North American or European companies in the biotechnology sector where our management has extensive investment experience. Our sponsor is Omega Alpha Management, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “Sponsor”).
The registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering“) was declared effective on January 6, 2021. On January 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 13,800,000 Class A ordinary shares at $10.00 per share, generating gross proceeds of $138.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $8.1 million, inclusive of approximately $4.8 million in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (the “Private Placement”) of 501,000 Class A ordinary shares (the “Private Placement Shares”) at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Share to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $5.01 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, $138.0 million ($10.00 per share) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in the trust account (the “Trust Account”), located in the United States at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will only be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by us meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the assets held in the Trust Account. Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied toward consummating a business combination. As of December 31, 2021, the balance of the Trust Account was approximately $138.0 million.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or January 11, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Class A ordinary shares sold in our Initial Public Offering (the “Public Shares”), at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay for our income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish the rights of the holders of our Public Shares, including our Sponsor and management team to the extent they purchase Public Shares (the “Public Shareholders”) as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, proceed to commence a voluntary liquidation and thereby a formal dissolution of our company, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the Initial Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, we had approximately $517,000 held outside the Trust Account that is available to us to fund our working capital requirements and approximately $138.0 million held inside the Trust Account. We cannot assure you that our plan to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from our inception on October 26, 2020 until December 31, 2021 was in preparation for and for the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. Since the closing of our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to evaluating and searching for business combination candidates. As of December 31, 2021, we had not identified any business combination target. We generate small amounts of non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account. Interest income is not expected to be significant in view of currently low interest rates on risk-free investments (treasury securities). We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal fees; financial reporting; accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $832,000, which consisted of approximately $845,000 in general and administrative costs, partly offset by approximately $13,000 investment income from our Trust Account.
For the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 we had net loss of approximately $32,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $517,000 in our operating bank account, working capital of approximately $858,000, and approximately $13,000 of investment income available in the Trust Account for our tax obligations, to the extent any exist.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for our issuance of certain Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Founder Shares”), a loan of approximately $98,000 through December 31, 2020 and approximately $145,000 in total of loans prior to the Initial Public Offering from our Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”), and since the Initial Public Offering, the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on January 13, 2021. No future borrowings are permitted under this Note. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no working capital loans outstanding.
We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, including the funds held in the Trust Account (including interest accrued thereon), in connection with our business combination and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including a deferred underwriting commission payable to the underwriters from our Initial Public Offering upon consummation of our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account, as well as any other net proceeds not expended, will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we may incur prior to the completion of our initial business combination, if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account are insufficient to cover such expenses.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers and directors, to meet our needs through the consummation of a business combination. However, in connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after January 11, 2023. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
If our estimates of the costs of undertaking the aforementioned activities are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to consummate our initial business combination or because we become obligated to convert a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only consummate such financing simultaneously with the consummation of our initial business combination. Following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any lease obligations or purchase obligations.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Shares and the Private Placement Shares that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans were and will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon consummation of our Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of the business combination. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period, which occurs (i) in the case of the Founder Shares, in accordance with the letter agreement our initial shareholders entered into and (ii) in the case of the Private Placement Shares, 30 days after the completion of our business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to our Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 1,800,000 additional Public Shares to cover over-allotments, if any, at our Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option on January 7, 2021.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Public Share, or approximately $2.8 million, paid upon the closing of our Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per Public Share, or approximately $4.8 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions upon the completion of our business combination. The deferred fee is a liability that is considered not current for accounting purposes, as we have not yet identified any target for a business combination,
and such deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, current and anticipated military conflict, sanctions, inflation, and other geopolitical events on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that such factors could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as provided for in Item 303(b) of Regulation S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income from investments held in Trust Account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information. Additionally, investments held in the Trust Account are classified as assets that are not current, as such funds are restricted from use until a business combination, which we have until January 11, 2023 to complete.
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Public Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 13,800,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets. There were no Class A ordinary shares outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Under ASC 480-10S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we
recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We comply with the accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of ordinary shares: Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of ordinary shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could potentially be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We “early adopted” ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (the “PCAOB”) regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.