Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Please also see the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Omega Therapeutics is pioneering a systematic approach to use mRNA therapeutics as programmable epigenetic medicines by leveraging our OMEGA Epigenomic Programming platform (“OMEGA platform”). mRNA refers to Messenger RNA, a single-stranded RNA (ribonucleic acid that carries instructions for the synthesis of proteins) corresponding to the sequence of a gene. Our OMEGA platform harnesses the power of epigenetics, the mechanism that controls gene expression and every aspect of an organism's life from cell genesis, growth and differentiation to cell death. We have deciphered the three-dimensional architecture of the human genome. Genes and their accompanying regulators are organized into distinct and evolutionarily conserved structures called Insulated Genomic Domains, or IGDs. IGDs are the fundamental structural and functional units of gene control and cell differentiation and act as the “control room” of biology. Most diseases are caused by aberrant gene expression rooted in alterations in IGDs. The OMEGA platform has enabled us to systematically identify and validate thousands of novel DNA-sequence-based epigenomic “zip codes” associated with individual regulatory elements within IGDs. We call these epigenomic targets EpiZips. We rationally design and engineer our mRNA therapeutics, which are programmable and modular epigenetic medicines, called Omega Epigenomic Controllers, or OECs, to target EpiZips for Precision Genomic Control. This enables us to precisely tune genes to a desired level of expression and to control the duration of expression. Through this approach, we believe that the OMEGA platform has broad potential applicability across a range of diseases and conditions. Our pipeline currently consists of early-stage, preclinical programs that span oncology, multigenic diseases including immunology, regenerative medicine, and select monogenic diseases. We have conducted in vivo preclinical studies of our OECs in multiple disease models for various indications, including hepatocellular carcinoma, or HCC, non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, and acute respiratory distress syndrome, or ARDS, and we expect to conduct in vivo preclinical studies for multiple additional programs. We initiated investigational new drug application (“IND”) enabling studies for multiple programs in 2021, and we are aiming to submit an IND for our OEC candidate for the treatment of HCC and declare two OEC development candidates in the first half of 2022. We are also planning to submit an IND for another OEC candidate in the second half of 2022 or early 2023.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have not commercialized any products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. We have devoted almost all of our financial resources to research and development, including our preclinical development activities and preparing for clinical trials of our product candidates. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of equity securities and borrowings under our loan and security agreement.
As of December 31, 2021 we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $225.3 million. In August 2021, we completed our initial public offering (“IPO”) pursuant to which we issued and sold 8,300,976 shares of our common stock, including 900,976 shares pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $141.1 million. We received approximately $128.1 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us.
Our ability to generate product revenue will depend on the successful development, regulatory approval, and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through equity offerings, debt financings, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements, or other sources. Additional sources of financing might not be available to us on favorable terms, if at all. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be
required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
We expect to continue to incur significant additional operating losses for the foreseeable future as we seek to advance product candidates through clinical development, continue preclinical development, expand our research and development activities, develop new product candidates, complete preclinical studies and clinical trials, seek regulatory approval and, if we receive regulatory approval, commercialize our products. Our expenses will also increase substantially if or as we:
•continue our research and development efforts and submit INDs for our product candidates;
•initiate and conduct clinical trials of our product candidates;
•continue to engineer and develop additional product candidates;
•continue to develop the OMEGA platform;
•seek regulatory and marketing approvals for product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, if any;
•establish manufacturing and supply chain capacity sufficient to provide clinical and, if applicable, commercial quantities of product candidates, including building our own manufacturing facility;
•establish a sales, marketing, internal systems and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval, if any, in geographies in which we plan to commercialize our products ourselves;
•maintain, expand, protect and enforce our intellectual property estate;
•hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, technical, regulatory, operational, financial, commercial, and support personnel, to execute our business plan and support our product development and potential future commercialization efforts;
•enter into collaborations or licenses for new technologies;
•make royalty, milestone, or other payments under our current and any future in-license agreements;
•incur additional legal, accounting, and other expenses in operating our business; and
•continue to operate as a public company.
Impact of COVID-19 on our business
The worldwide COVID-19 pandemic, including the identification of new variants of the virus, may affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, delay the initiation of our future clinical trials, or have other adverse effects on our business, results of operations, financial condition, and prospects. In addition, the pandemic has caused substantial disruption in the financial markets and may adversely impact economies worldwide, both of which could adversely affect our business, operations and ability to raise funds to support our operations.
To date, we have not experienced material business disruptions as a result of the pandemic. We are following, and plan to continue to follow, recommendations from federal, state and local governments regarding workplace policies, practices and procedures. To provide a safe work environment for our employees, we have implemented various measures to promote for social distancing, encourage employees to work remotely when possible, increase sanitization of our facilities and provide personal protective equipment for our employees. In addition, the third-party contract research organizations, or CROs, and contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CDMOs, that we engage have faced in the past and may face in the future disruptions that could affect our ability to initiate and complete preclinical studies, including disruptions in procuring items that are essential for our research and development activities, such as, for example, raw materials used in the manufacture of our product candidates and laboratory supplies for our preclinical studies, for which there may be shortages because of ongoing efforts to address the COVID-19 pandemic.
We cannot be certain what the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, or the variants of the virus, will be on our business, and the pandemic has the potential to adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, and prospects.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales, and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for the foreseeable future. Our revenue to date has been generated through our collaboration agreement with PM (CF) Explorations, Inc., or PMCo, an affiliate of Flagship Pioneering (“Flagship”), in which we are entitled to receive reimbursement for the costs associated with our research activities performed.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred in performing research and development activities, which include:
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and preclinical development of our research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors, CROs and CDMOs that manufacture material for use in our discovery and preclinical development;
•laboratory supplies and research materials;
•costs of licensing technology; and
•facilities, depreciation, and other expenses which include direct and allocated expenses.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Costs for research and development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expenses. Nonrefundable advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
We do not track the research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis for our product candidates, and we do not allocate costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific programs because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and the OMEGA platform. We use internal resources primarily to conduct our research and discovery activities as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. These employees work across multiple programs and our technology platform and, therefore, we do not track these costs by program.
We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase as we continue our current discovery and research programs, initiate new research programs, continue preclinical development of our product candidates and conduct future clinical trials for any of our product candidates.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs such as bonuses and benefits, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, legal, human resources, corporate business development, and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, patent, accounting, information technology, auditing, tax, consulting
services, insurance, and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. We also expect to continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, and tax compliance services, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Related party expense, net
Related party expense, net consists primarily of fees paid to Flagship for their management services provided to us, as well as reimbursements for certain expenses, including insurance and benefits, partner and related fees, and software licenses incurred on our behalf. Additionally, our principal office and laboratory space is leased with an affiliate of Flagship, and we also sublease our other office and laboratory space to two other parties which are affiliates of Flagship. The rent expense and costs related to our principal office and laboratory space, including real estate taxes, insurance, and normal maintenance costs, are considered as related party expenses. Such related party expenses are offset with sublease income received from our related parties, which is comprised of base rent and costs related to the subleased premises such as real estate taxes, cost of operations, maintenance, repair, replacement, and property management.
Other expense, net
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net primarily consists of interest payments as well as the amortization of the debt discount related to our loan and security agreement.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net primarily consists of the remeasurement gains or losses associated with changes in the fair value of the warrant liability and the success fee obligation related to our loan and security agreement, as amended. Until settlement, fluctuations in the fair value of our warrant liability and success fee obligation are based on the remeasurement at each reporting period.
Results of operations
Comparison for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in those items in thousands of dollars and as a percentage.
NM - Not meaningful
Revenue
Revenue was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which represented the reimbursement received for the costs of our research activities performed, in connection with the collaboration agreement with PMCo. There was no revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses were $47.9 million and $21.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by nature (in thousands).
Research and development expenses increased by $26.8 million to $47.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $21.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the following:
•Increase of $4.1 million in personnel-related expenses due to an increase in the number of employees in the research and development functions to support business growth.
•Increase of $17.7 million in discovery and preclinical development costs and $2.2 million in laboratory materials and supplies attributable to the increasing external manufacturing and research efforts to support the advancement of our pipeline and discovery portfolio, including the initiation of IND-enabling studies.
•Increase of $1.1 million in costs of licensing technology primarily due to the option exercise fee incurred upon the execution of the first non-exclusive license agreement with Acuitas.
•Increase of $1.6 million in facilities and overhead expenses due to higher overhead expenses allocated to the research and development functions as a result of an increase in headcount.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $10.4 million to $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $10.4 million increase was primarily driven by an increase of $6.9 million in personnel-related expenses, including recruiting fees and the related stock-based compensation to support business growth. The remaining $3.5 million increase is primarily attributable to higher legal, audit and consulting services and an increase in directors’ and officers’ liability insurance cost as a result of our IPO.
Related party expense, net
Related party expense, net was $1.7 million and $1.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $0.4 million was primarily driven by the higher lease expense and related costs incurred for our principal office and laboratory space compared to the prior year period, in addition to certain fees payable to our non-employee directors after we became a public company.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net was $0.9 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $0.1 million was primarily attributed to the write-off of the unamortized debt discount attributed to the success fee obligation which we paid upon the closing of the IPO.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a $1.3 million expense related to the change in fair value of warrant liability as compared to an immaterial amount of expense recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the increase in the fair value of our common stock compared to the fair value of our preferred stock underlying the outstanding warrants. Upon the closing of the IPO, the warrants for the purchase of preferred stock automatically became warrants for the purchase of common stock and we reclassified the carrying value of the warrants from liability to additional paid-in capital in our balance sheet. In August 2021, the holders of such warrants completed a cashless exercise of the warrants, and we issued 82,193 shares of our common stock.
Other expense, net
Other expense, net was not significant for both of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of liquidity
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we support our continued research activities and development of our programs and platform. We have not yet commercialized any products, and we do not expect to generate product revenue for several years, if at all. To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of equity securities, including our IPO, and borrowings under our loan and security agreement, as amended.
In August 2021, we completed our IPO pursuant to which we issued and sold 8,300,976 shares of our common stock, including 900,976 shares pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $17.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $141.1 million. We received approximately $128.1 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $57.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $26.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $31.5 million increase in operating cash outflows was primarily attributable to $38.8 million higher net loss recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, offset by the change in operating assets and liabilities and non-cash charges, consisting primarily of change in fair value of warrant liability and stock-based compensation expense.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $40.4 million and $1.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily attributable to the purchases of marketable securities beginning in December 2021.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of the proceeds from our IPO of $128.1 million, net of underwriting discounts and payments for offering costs, and net proceeds from the issuance of Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock of $125.4 million in March 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of the net proceeds from the issuance of Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock of $48.5 million during the period.
Loan and security agreement
In March 2018, we entered into the loan and security agreement, or Loan Agreement, with Pacific Western Bank, or PWB, under which we borrowed $8.0 million. In September 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Loan Agreement, or First Amendment, in which PWB made an additional term loan to us in an aggregate principal amount of $12.0 million. The Loan Agreement was further amended in December 2020 to extend the principal repayment date.
In December 2021, we entered into an amendment to the Loan Agreement, or Fourth Amendment, in which PWB made an additional term loan to us in an aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million. The proceeds of the Fourth Amendment were first applied to the repayment in full of all outstanding principal and accrued interest on the then outstanding term loan of $12.0 million, and the remaining cash proceeds of $8.0 million were used for general working capital and for capital expenditures purposes. The maturity date of the additional term loan will be on September 30, 2025, and it will be repaid beginning on September 30, 2023 in twenty-four equal monthly installments, including interest at a floating annual rate equal to the greater of (i) 0.50% above the prime rate then in effect and (ii) 5.50%, due monthly starting the first month after December 20, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate applicable to the term loan was 5.50% and the interest payment on the outstanding term loan was less than $0.1 million per month.
Borrowings under the Loan Agreement, as amended, are collateralized by substantially all of our personal property, other than our intellectual property. There are no financial covenants associated with the Loan Agreement, as amended; however, we are subject to certain affirmative and negative covenants to which we will remain subject to until maturity.
Funding requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $225.3 million. We expect that our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance preclinical activities and into clinical trials for our product candidates in development. In addition, we will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating and capital expenditures will depend largely on:
•the scope, progress, results, and costs of our preclinical studies and any future clinical trials;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining marketing approvals for our current and future product candidates in regions where we choose to commercialize any products;
•the number of future product candidates and potential additional indications that we may pursue and their development requirements;
•the stability, scale, yield, and cost of our manufacturing process as we scale-up production and formulation of our product candidates for clinical trials, in preparation for regulatory approval and in preparation for commercialization, including our ability to build our own manufacturing facility;
•the costs of pre- and post-commercialization activities for any approved product, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution, and manufacturing capabilities;
•revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our products, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
•the costs and timing of changes in pharmaceutical pricing and reimbursement infrastructure;
•the costs and timing of changes in the regulatory environment and enforcement rules;
•our ability to compete with other therapeutics in the indications we target;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments;
•the extent to which we enter into collaborations or licenses for products, product candidates, or technologies;
•our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development capabilities and establish a commercial infrastructure;
•the costs of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights, including enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the costs of operating as a public company; and
•the severity, duration, and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may adversely impact our business.
We believe that the net proceeds from our IPO, together with our existing cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months from the filing date of the Annual Report. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through equity offerings, debt financings, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements, or other sources.
Contractual obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, CDMOs, and other third parties for preclinical research studies and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts typically do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are generally cancelable by us upon written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation and in the case of certain arrangements with CROs and
CDMOs may include non-cancelable fees. The amount and timing of cancellation payments are not known until such time a contract is canceled.
We have also entered into license agreements with Flagship Pioneering Innovations V, Inc., Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, and Acuitas, under which we are obligated to make potential milestone payments, royalty payments, or both. Such payments are dependent upon the development of products using the intellectual property licensed under the agreements and are contingent upon the occurrence of future events; as such, the timing and likelihood of such potential obligations are not known with certainty.
As described previously, we borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million under the Loan Agreement, as amended. Pursuant to the terms of the Loan Agreement, as amended, interest payment on the outstanding term loan is less than $0.1 million per month, and we are obligated to repay $0.8 million of principal payment per month, beginning on September 30, 2023 until the maturity date of September 30, 2025.
In July 2020, we entered into a Shared Space Agreement with an affiliate of Flagship for our principal office and laboratory space. The Shared Space Arrangement commenced on August 1, 2020 and continues through July 31, 2022 with two options to extend the term for a period of 24 months each. Our lease payments for the remainder of the lease term will be approximately $0.2 million per month. In January 2022, we entered into an amendment to modify certain terms of the Shared Space Agreement and exercise the option to renew the lease term for another 12 months. The lease term will now expire in July 2023. In connection with the modifications in the amendment, we have agreed to pay an upfront payment of $2.9 million in the first quarter of 2022, which will cover the rent payment for the extended lease term.
We also have another office and laboratory space which was under a noncancelable lease agreement entered in 2017 and will expire in September 2024. Our lease payments for the remainder of the lease term will be approximately $0.1 million per month. In September 2020, the space has been fully subleased to two other parties, which are affiliates of Flagship. The sublease agreements expire between 2021 and 2024.
In November 2021, we entered into a lease with ARE-MA Region No. 94, LLC to lease an aggregate of approximately 89,246 rentable square feet of office and laboratory space located at One Charles Park, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 02142. The term of the Lease is estimated to begin on December 15, 2022 and end on January 1, 2037, subject to certain extension rights. The base rent for the leased space will be $115.00 per square foot, subject to an annual upward adjustment of 3% of the then current rental rate, starting on the first anniversary of the first payment of rent under the lease, and other potential adjustments based on our utilization of certain tenant improvement allowances. We intend to sublease a portion of this facility to supplement our growth plan.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and experiences may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase
orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to vendors in connection with preclinical development activities, CROs in connection with research activities, and CDMOs in connection with the production of research materials.
We estimate accrued research and development expenses based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with third-party service providers, including CROs and CDMOs that supply, conduct and manage preclinical studies our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense, in which it will be evaluated for current or long-term classification based on when it is expected to be realized. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in changes in estimates that increase or decrease amounts recognized in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize all stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award, based on their fair values. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. For stock option awards, the Company estimates the fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the following inputs: (1) fair value of our common stock, (2) assumptions we make for the expected volatility of our common stock, (3) the expected term of our stock option awards, (4) the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock option awards, and (5) our expected dividend yield, if any. Prior to our IPO in August 2021, there was no public market for our common stock. As a result, prior to our IPO, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believes are relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. Following our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock. Additionally, due to the continued lack of sufficient company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our computation of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a representative group of public companies with similar characteristics to us, including stage of product development and life science industry focus.
The assumptions included in the Black-Scholes option pricing model significantly affect our stock option valuations, and future changes in these assumptions could significantly change valuations of future stock option grants and, thus, affect future stock-based compensation expense. In addition, if circumstances were to change such that we determined stock options values were better represented by an alternative valuation method, such change could also significantly affect future stock-based compensation expense. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates included in the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report.
Emerging growth company and smaller reporting company status
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. As a result, we may take advantage of specified reduced disclosure and other reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. In particular, the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have elected not to “opt out” of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we may adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard and may do so until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an emerging growth company.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined under the Securities Act and Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company so long as either (i) the market value of shares of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of shares of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company, we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and, similar to emerging growth companies, if we are a smaller reporting company under the requirements of (ii) above, we would not be required to obtain an attestation report on internal control over financial reporting issued by our independent registered public accounting firm.