Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to assist the reader in the understanding and assessment of significant changes and trends related to our results of operations. The discussion and analysis presented below refers to, and should be read in conjunction with, the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Owens & Minor, Inc., along with its subsidiaries, (we, us, our or the Company) is a global healthcare solutions company that incorporates product manufacturing, distribution support and innovative technology services to deliver significant and sustained value across the breadth of the industry - from acute care to patients in their home.
On June 18, 2020 (the Divestiture Date), we completed the divestiture of our European logistics business, Movianto (the Divestiture), as well as certain support functions in our Dublin, Ireland office, to Walden Group SAS (the Buyer) and EHDH (as Buyer’s guarantor) for cash consideration of $133 million. The Divestiture provides us with a greater ability to focus on and invest in our differentiated products, services and U.S. distribution businesses. The net proceeds were used to repurchase our 2021 Notes (see Note 10, “Debt”). We recorded a loss of $65.5 million in connection with the Divestiture for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the Divestiture, the results of operations from our Movianto business are reported as “Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax” through the Divestiture Date. See Note 3, “Discontinued Operations,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. Unless otherwise indicated, the following information relates to continuing operations.
On January 7, 2022, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger to acquire Apria, Inc. (Apria) for $37.50 in cash per share of common stock, representing an equity value of approximately $1.45 billion, as well as the assumption of debt and cash for a total transaction value of approximately $1.6 billion. Apria is a provider of integrated home healthcare equipment and related services in the United States. The Agreement and Plan of Merger contains certain termination rights for the Company and Apria. In the event that Apria terminates the contract for a superior proposal, Apria will be required to pay the Company a termination fee of $42.0 million. The transaction, which has been approved by the board of directors of both companies, is subject to customary closing conditions, including the Hart Scott Rodino Act and other regulatory approvals and the approval of Apria’s stockholders, and is expected to close during the first half of 2022.
Income from continuing operations per diluted share was $2.94 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.55 compared to 2020. Global Solutions segment operating income was $66.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $30.9 million for 2020. The increase was a result of strong revenue growth, leveraging our fixed costs, and operating efficiencies, partially offset by inflationary pressures later in the year. Global Products segment operating income was $372 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $260 million for 2020. The increase was a result of higher personal protective equipment (PPE) sales, favorable timing of cost pass-through on gloves, productivity initiatives, favorable product mix, and improved fixed cost leverage, partially offset by higher commodity prices and rising transportation costs, compared to the prior year.
COVID-19 Update
We are closely monitoring the impact of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19), including the related Delta and Omicron variants, on all aspects of our business, including how it impacts our customers, teammates, suppliers, vendors and distribution channels. We have taken actions to protect our teammates while maintaining business continuity as we respond to the needs from this global pandemic. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our teammates, customers, suppliers and shareholders.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $9.8 billion continues to be impacted by COVID-19 and includes the effective response to the ongoing recovery of elective procedures, higher sales of PPE, and pass-through of elevated glove costs. Operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021 also benefited from improved productivity and increased manufacturing output related to PPE, favorable product mix and operating efficiencies. In 2020, we expanded our PPE production operations and have taken measures to increase and improve our production such as retooling existing equipment, installing and optimizing new production lines and ramping up our new non-woven fabric machinery. We expect that we will continue servicing our customers' needs related to the heightened demand for our PPE as a result of various factors, including the implementation of new regulations and healthcare protocols calling for increased use of PPE, healthcare professional preference for medical grade PPE, stockpile PPE demand and the creation of new channels for PPE demand in healthcare, non-healthcare and international markets.
In March 2020, under the Defense Production Act (DPA), we were awarded a contract with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to produce N-95 respirator masks in an effort to replenish the Strategic National Stockpile. In April 2020, also under the DPA, the U.S. Department of Defense initiated a technology investment agreement with us involving up to
$30.0 million of anticipated funding of assets to expand capacity to supply N-95 respirator masks. Through December 31, 2021, substantially all of the anticipated funding had been expended and reimbursed in accordance with this arrangement.
We are unable to predict the timing of the pandemic and the full impact that COVID-19 will have on our future operating results, financial position and cash flows due to numerous variables and continued uncertainties. Travel, transportation, and business operation restrictions arising from virus containment efforts of governments around the world have continued to impact our operations in certain locations, including within Asia. Essential activity exceptions from these restrictions have allowed us to continue to operate but virus containment efforts have resulted in additional direct costs from supply chain challenges. Although we have experienced growth in sales volumes for certain of our products (such as PPE) during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as improved productivity and manufacturing output, there can be no assurance that such growth rates, increased sales volumes or other improvements will be maintained during or following the COVID-19 pandemic.
Supplemental Financial Information
(in thousands, except ratios and per share data)(1) Based on year end accounts receivable and net revenue for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
(2) Based on year end merchandise inventories and cost of goods sold for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations within this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, but can be found in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
2021 compared to 2020
The change in net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected our market share gains, the effective response to the ongoing recovery of elective procedures, higher sales of surgical & infection prevention (S&IP) products, pass-through of elevated glove costs, as well as continued strong performance in our Patient Direct business. Foreign currency translation had a favorable impact on net revenue of $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
Cost of goods sold includes the cost of the product (net of supplier incentives and cash discounts) and all costs incurred for shipments of products from manufacturers to our distribution centers for all customer arrangements where we are the primary obligor and bear risk of general and physical inventory loss. These are sometimes referred to as distribution contracts. Cost of goods sold also includes direct and certain indirect labor, material and overhead costs associated with our Global Products business. There is no cost of goods sold associated with our fee-for-service arrangements. Cost of goods sold compared to prior year reflects changes in sales activity, including sales mix, and accelerating inflationary pressures.
Gross margin increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by revenue growth, market dynamics including timing of glove price and cost changes, an overall improved sales mix and operating efficiencies, partially offset by accelerating inflationary pressures. Foreign currency translation had an unfavorable impact on gross margin of $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
We value distribution inventory held in the United States under the LIFO method. Had inventory been valued under the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, gross margin as a percentage of net revenue would have been 56 basis points higher in 2021 and 19 basis points higher in 2020.
Distribution, selling and administrative (DS&A) expenses include labor and warehousing costs associated with our distribution and outsourced logistics services and all costs associated with our fee-for-service arrangements. Shipping and handling costs are primarily included in DS&A expenses and include costs to store, move, and prepare products for shipment, as well as costs to deliver products to customers. Overall DS&A expenses increased year over year primarily due to revenue growth, changes in salaries and incentive compensation, accelerating inflationary pressures, and charitable contributions, which were partially offset by operational efficiencies for the year ended December 31, 2021. DS&A expenses also included an unfavorable impact for foreign currency translation of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Acquisition-related charges were $3.0 million and $11.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Amounts in 2021 consisted primarily of costs related to the pending Apria transaction. Amounts in 2020 consisted primarily of transition costs for the Halyard acquisition. Exit and realignment charges were $31.1 million and $25.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Amounts in 2021 consisted of wind-down costs related to Fusion5, IT restructuring charges, costs associated with our strategic organizational realignment, and other items. Amounts in 2020 were associated with severance from reduction in workforce, IT restructuring charges, post closing costs associated with the Movianto divestiture, costs associated with the sale of certain assets of Fusion5 and other costs related to the reorganization of the U.S. commercial, operations and executive teams.
The change in other operating (income) expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes the impact of higher foreign currency transaction gains as compared to the prior year.
Interest expense decreased year over year primarily due to a reduction in debt and lower interest rates, including the affect of our debt refinancing in March 2021. See Note 10 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021 included the write-off of deferred financing costs and third party fees associated with the debt financing in March 2021 of $15.3 million and amounts reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive loss as a result of the termination of our interest rate swaps of $25.1 million. Loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 primarily included a make-whole premium related to the extinguishment of our 2021 Notes, the write-off of deferred financing costs and third party fees, partially offset by the gain on extinguishment of debt related to the partial repurchase of our 2021 and 2024 Notes.
Other expense (income), net.
Other expense (income), net in 2021 and 2020 represented interest cost and net actuarial losses related to our retirement plans. Other expense (income), net in 2020 also includes a gain from the surrender of company-owned life insurance policies.
The effective tax rates in 2021 and 2020 reflect an income tax benefit recorded in the first quarter of 2020 associated with the CARES Act and income tax benefits recorded in the third and fourth quarters of 2021 for Foreign Derived Intangible Income (FDII), the mixture of income and losses in jurisdictions in which we operate, and the incremental income tax benefit associated with the vesting of restricted stock.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financial condition. We monitor operating working capital through days sales outstanding (DSO) and merchandise inventory days. We estimate a hypothetical increase (decrease) in DSO of one day would result in a decrease (increase) in our cash balances, an increase (decrease) in borrowings against our revolving credit facility or Receivables Securitization Program, or a combination thereof of approximately $27 million.
The majority of our cash and cash equivalents are held in cash depository accounts with major banks in the United States, Europe, and Asia. Changes in our working capital can vary in the normal course of business based upon the timing of inventory purchases, collection of accounts receivable, and payments to suppliers. The increase in merchandise inventories is associated with inventories to support revenue growth and the increased cost of gloves.
(1) Based on year end accounts receivable and net revenue for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
(2) Based on year end merchandise inventories and cost of goods sold for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Liquidity and capital expenditures. The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash flows relate to continuing operations and discontinued operations.
Cash provided by operating activities in 2021 and 2020 reflected cash generated by net income along with changes in working capital.
Cash used for investing activities in 2021 and 2020 included capital expenditures of $49.7 million and $59.2 million for our strategic and operational efficiency initiatives associated with property and equipment, investments for increased manufacturing capacity in the Americas and Thailand, as well as capitalized software. Cash provided by investing activities in 2020 also included cash consideration received of $133 million from the sale of Movianto and proceeds of $6.0 million from the surrender of company-owned life insurance policies.
Cash used for financing activities in 2021 included dividend payments of $0.7 million and net repayments of $103.2 million under our revolving credit facility, compared to $0.6 million and $74.7 million for the same period of 2020. We also had proceeds from borrowings of $575 million related to the 2029 Unsecured Notes and Accounts Receivable Securitization Program in 2021, compared to $155 million related to the Accounts Receivable Securitization Program in 2020. In 2020, we also had proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $190 million related to our follow-on equity offering. Financing activities also included repayments of $553 million in 2021 on our term loans, 2021 and 2024 Notes, and Accounts Receivable Securitization Program, compared to $617 million in the same period of 2020 on our term loans and 2021 and 2024 Notes. We used $269 million of cash to repurchase $267 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 and 2024 Notes, which included a $5.0 million make-whole premium paid to fully retire the 2021 Notes in November 2020. We also paid $13.9 million in financing costs in 2021, as compared to $10.4 million in financing costs for the same period of 2020. In addition, we paid $15.4 million to terminate the remaining $300 million in notional value of interest rate swaps during 2021. Payments for taxes related to the vesting of restricted stock awards were $20.2 million and $4.3 million in 2021 and 2020, which are included in Other, net.
Capital resources. Our sources of liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, a revolving credit facility under our Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A, as an administrative agent and collateral agent, and a syndicate of financial institutions, as lenders (the Credit Agreement), and the Receivables Securitization Program. The Credit Agreement provides a revolving borrowing capacity of $300 million. The interest rate on our revolving credit facility is based on a spread over a benchmark rate (as described in the Credit Agreement). The Credit Agreement matures in March 2026.
At December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings and letters of credit of $9.4 million outstanding under our revolving credit facilities. At December 31, 2020, we had borrowings of $103 million and letters of credit of $13.9 million outstanding under our revolving credit facilities. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $291 million and $283 million, available for borrowing. We also had letters of credit and bank guarantees outstanding for $2.2 million and $1.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, which supports certain leased facilities as well as other normal business activities in the United States and Europe. These letters of credit and guarantees were issued outside of the revolving credit facility.
We entered into a Security and Pledge Agreement (the Security Agreement), dated March 10, 2021, pursuant to which we granted collateral on behalf of the holders of the 2024 Notes, and the parties secured under the Credit Agreement (the Secured Parties) including first priority liens and security interests in (a) all present and future shares of capital stock owned by the Credit Parties (as defined) in the Credit Parties’ present and future subsidiaries, subject to certain customary exceptions, and (b) all present and future personal property and assets of the Credit Parties, subject to certain exceptions.
On March 10, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our accounts receivable securitization program (the Receivables Securitization Program). Pursuant to the amended Receivables Securitization Program, the aggregate principal amount of the loans made by the Lenders (as defined) will not exceed $450 million outstanding at any time. The interest rate under the Receivables Securitization Program is based on a spread over a benchmark rate (as described in the Third Amendment to the Receivables Financing Agreement). Under the Receivables Securitization Program, certain of our subsidiaries sell substantially all of their accounts receivable balances to our wholly owned special purpose entity, O&M Funding LLC. The Receivables Securitization Program matures in March 2024.
The Credit Agreement, Receivables Securitization Program, 2024 Notes and 2029 Unsecured Notes contain cross-default provisions which could result in the acceleration of payments due in the event of default of any of the related agreements. The terms of the Credit Agreement also require us to maintain ratios for leverage and interest coverage, including on a pro forma basis in the event of an acquisition or divestiture. We were in compliance with our debt covenants at December 31, 2021.
In May 2020, we entered into an equity distribution agreement, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. We intend to use the net proceeds from the sale of our securities offered by this program for the repayment of indebtedness and/or for general corporate and working capital purposes. As of December 31, 2021 no shares were issued and $50.0 million of common stock remained available under the at-the-market equity financing program.
On October 6, 2020, we completed a follow-on equity offering wherein we sold an aggregate of 8,475,000 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $20.50, resulting in net proceeds to us of approximately $165 million, after deducting expenses relating to the follow-on equity offering, including the underwriters’ discounts and commissions. Pursuant to the underwriting agreement, we granted the underwriters an option to purchase up to an additional 1,271,250 shares of our common stock, which the underwriters exercised in full. Inclusive of this exercised option, net proceeds to us were approximately $190 million, after deducting expenses relating to the follow-on equity offering, including the underwriters’ discounts and commissions.
We used the proceeds from the follow-on equity offering completed on October 6, 2020 to repay the remaining $109 million outstanding balance of Term Loan A-1 at par on October 8, 2020, to repay $51.7 million of our Term Loan A-2 at par on October 15, 2020, and to repay $30.0 million of borrowings under the revolving credit facility.
On November 30, 2020 (Redemption Date), we elected to redeem all of our outstanding 2021 Notes. As required by the Fourth Supplemental Indenture, the redemption price included accrued and unpaid interest to, but not including, the Redemption Date, and a redemption premium of $5.0 million, which reflected the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest thereon (exclusive of interest accrued to the Redemption Date) discounted to the Redemption Date on a semi-annual basis (assuming a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months) at the Treasury Rate plus 25 basis points. Including the tender offer, we used $269 million of cash to repurchase $267 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes and 2024 Notes during 2020.
We regularly evaluate market conditions, our liquidity profile and various financing alternatives to enhance our capital structure. From time to time, we may enter into transactions to repay, repurchase or redeem our outstanding indebtedness (including by means of open market purchases, privately negotiated repurchases, tender or exchange offers and/or repayments or redemptions pursuant to the debt’s terms). Our ability to consummate any such transaction will depend on prevailing market
conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. We cannot provide any assurance as to if or when we will consummate any such transactions or the terms of any such transaction.
We paid cash dividends on our outstanding common stock at the rate of $0.0025 per common share for each of the four quarters of 2021 and 2020. The payment of future dividends remains within the discretion of the Board of Directors and will depend upon our results of operations, financial condition, capital requirements, current and future limitations under our Credit Agreement (as amended) and other factors.
We believe available financing sources, including cash generated by operating activities and borrowings under the Credit Agreement and Receivables Securitization Program, will be sufficient to fund our working capital needs, capital expenditures, long-term strategic growth, payments under long-term debt and lease arrangements, future payments of quarterly cash dividends, debt repurchases and other cash requirements. While we believe that we will have the ability to meet our financing needs in the foreseeable future, changes in economic conditions may impact (i) the ability of financial institutions to meet their contractual commitments to us, (ii) the ability of our customers and suppliers to meet their obligations to us or (iii) our cost of borrowing.
We earn a portion of our operating income in foreign jurisdictions outside the United States. Our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries totaled $26.9 million and $72.0 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020. We continue to remain permanently reinvested in our foreign subsidiaries, with the exception of a subsidiary in Thailand. We have no specific plans to indefinitely reinvest the unremitted earnings of our foreign subsidiary located in Thailand as of December 31, 2021. As such, we have recorded withholding tax liabilities that would be incurred upon future distribution to the U.S. There are no unrecognized deferred taxes as there is no outside basis difference unrelated to unremitted earnings for Thailand. We will continue to evaluate our foreign earnings repatriation policy in 2022 for all our foreign subsidiaries.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, material cash requirements, including known contractual and other obligations, in the next twelve months primarily comprise of $58.5 million in operating leases, $35.9 million in purchase obligations related to outsourced information technology operations and management of our U.S. private fleet transportation, $21.4 million in unrecognized tax benefits, $3.6 million in retirement plan benefits, and $2.7 million in finance leases. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, material cash requirements, including known contractual and other obligations, due beyond the next twelve months primarily comprise of $946 million in principal debt payments, $195 million in operating leases, $85.0 million in purchase obligations related to outsourced information technology operations and management of our U.S. private fleet transportation, $26.4 million in retirement plan benefits, and $15.7 million in finance leases. We cannot reasonably estimate the timing of cash settlement for the $21.4 million liability associated with unrecognized tax benefits. See Note 8, “Leases,”, Note 10, "Debt", Note 12 "Retirement Plans", Note 14 "Income Taxes", and Note 18 "Commitments and Contingencies" of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
On January 7, 2022, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger to acquire Apria, Inc. for $37.50 in cash per share of common stock, representing an equity value of approximately $1.45 billion, as well as the assumption of debt and cash for a total transaction value of approximately $1.6 billion. See Note 21, "Subsequent Events" for additional information.
Impact of Inflation
The cost to manufacture and distribute our products is influenced by the cost of raw materials, finished goods, labor, and transportation. We have recently experienced higher costs as a result of the increasing cost of raw materials, finished goods, labor, and transportation. The increase in cost of raw materials and finished goods are due in part to a shortage in the availability of certain products, the higher cost of shipping, and inflation. Additionally, there is uncertainty that we will be able to pass elevated costs onto customers in an effort to offset inflationary pressures.
Guarantor and Collateral Group Summarized Financial Information
We are providing the following information in compliance with Rule 13-01, “Financial Disclosures about Guarantors and Issuers of Guaranteed Securities” and Rule 13-02 of Regulation S-X, of with respect to our 2024 Notes. See Note 10 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the terms of the 2024 Notes.
The following tables present summarized financial information for Owens & Minor, Inc. and the guarantors of Owens & Minor, Inc.’s 2024 Notes (together, "the Guarantor Group"), on a combined basis with intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Guarantor Group eliminated. The guarantor subsidiaries are 100% owned by Owens & Minor, Inc. Separate financial statements of the guarantor subsidiaries are not presented because the guarantees by our guarantor subsidiaries are full and unconditional, as well as joint and several.
Summarized financial information of the Guarantor Group is as follows:
(1)Includes $386 million in sales to non-guarantor subsidiaries for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following tables present summarized financial information for Owens & Minor, Inc. and the subsidiaries of Owens & Minor, Inc.’s 2024 Notes pledged that constitute a substantial portion of collateral (together, "the Collateral Group"), on a combined basis with intercompany balances and transactions between entities in the Collateral Group eliminated. The pledged subsidiaries are 100% owned by Owens & Minor, Inc. No trading market for the subsidiaries included in the Collateral Group exists.
Summarized financial information of the Collateral Group is as follows:
The results of operations of the Collateral Group are not materially different from the corresponding amounts presented in our consolidated statements of operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, which we believe could have a material impact on financial condition or liquidity.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and related disclosures. We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used to prepare the consolidated financial statements.
Critical accounting estimates are defined as those estimates that require us to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made and could have a material impact on our results due to changes in the estimate or the use of different assumptions that could reasonably have been used. Our estimates are generally based on historical experience and various other assumptions that are judged to be reasonable in light of the relevant facts and circumstances. Because of the uncertainty inherent in such estimates, actual results may differ. We believe our critical accounting estimates include accounting for goodwill.
Goodwill. Goodwill represents the excess of consideration paid over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually, as of October 1, and whenever events occur or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying amount of goodwill may not be recoverable. Qualitative factors may first be assessed to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value does not exceed the carrying amount, then a quantitative test is performed. The quantitative test, when performed, uses valuation techniques to determine fair value, including comparable multiples of reporting unit's earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) and discounted cash flows. The EBITDA multiples are based on an analysis of current enterprise valuations and recent acquisition prices of similar companies, if available. Goodwill totaled $390 million at December 31, 2021.
The quantitative impairment review of goodwill requires the extensive use of accounting estimates and assumptions. The application of alternative assumptions or inability to meet certain financial projections, could produce materially different results.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.