Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes to those statements included in Item 8 of this report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those discussed under the section titled “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this report. See the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a life science technology company that is leveraging novel, next-generation sequencing (“NGS”) and multiomics technologies to empower researchers and clinicians. We developed a unique and proprietary NGS technology, which we refer to as our Sequencing Engine. The Sequencing Engine is the foundational platform technology that forms the basis of our products in development as well as our core product tenets: power, speed, flexibility and accuracy. We are currently developing two products that are purpose-built to target applications in which these core product tenets matter most. Our first product, the G4, targets the NGS market. The G4 is a benchtop next-generation sequencer designed to produce fast and accurate genetic sequencing results. The integrated purpose-built kits that run on the G4 address specific applications in fast-growing markets including oncology and immune profiling. Our second product in development, the PX, combines single-cell analysis, spatial analysis, genomics and proteomics in one integrated instrument to offer a versatile multiomics solution.
We completed our beta pilot program, have substantially completed our early access program, and have commercially launched the G4. We expect shipments to begin in the second quarter of 2022. We are currently in an advanced prototype development stage for the PX. We anticipate initiating a technology access program in the second half of 2022, which will be similar to our early access program, but we intend to initially bring samples and collaborators in-house. We anticipate commercially launching the PX in 2023.
Corporate and Financial Overview
Since we were incorporated in 2016, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and product development activities, initiating our commercialization plans, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital, building our commercial infrastructure and providing general and administrative support for these activities. Since our incorporation, we have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $98.8 million and used $51.7 million of cash in our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $151.9 million. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing losses and do not expect positive cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future, and our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period depending on the timing of and expenditures on our planned commercialization and research and development activities.
On June 1, 2021, we closed our initial public offering (“IPO”) in which we sold 11,730,000 shares of our common stock (which includes 1,530,000 shares that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a public offering price of $22.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $237.2 million after deducting offering costs, underwriting discounts and commissions of $20.9 million.
From the date of our incorporation through December 31, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of convertible preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and the net proceeds from our IPO. We have raised aggregate net proceeds of approximately $447.4 million, net of issuance costs, including the $130.5 million we raised through the issuance of convertible promissory notes in February 2021 (the “2021 Convertible Notes”), and including $10.5 million of advances on our loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Loan Agreement”). As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $339.2 million.
We expect our expenses to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities as we:
•commercialize and continue to enhance the G4;
•continue to develop our planned PX;
•attract, hire and retain qualified personnel;
•expand our sales, marketing, service, support and distribution infrastructure to support our commercialization plans and engage in commercialization activities;
•build-out and expand our in-house manufacturing capabilities and engage in larger scale manufacturing activities;
•continue to engage in research and development of other products and enhancements;
•implement operational, financial and management information systems;
•obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•operate as a public company.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our financial performance will be driven primarily by the factors below. While each of these factors presents significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to grow our business and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address the factors below is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described under the section titled “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this report.
Commercial adoption of the G4 and planned PX
Our financial performance will be driven by, and a key factor to our future success will be, the rate of commercial adoption of the G4 and planned PX. We recently commercially launched the G4 through a direct sales and marketing organization in the United States and are accepting orders. In the future, we plan sell and support our products in the European Union, United Kingdom, Asia Pacific and Japan, either through direct sales or through established distribution networks. Throughout our commercial rollout, we aim to grow our sales and marketing team to foster deep customer relationships and to establish and grow distribution networks capable of deploying our products in select areas of the world. We also expect to offer different access options, including lease options, for our products to meet each customer’s needs. As a result, we will aim to increase the installed base of the G4 and our planned PX.
Utilization by our customers of the G4 and planned PX
The utilization of our products and the corresponding purchases of consumables and other products and services will represent a source of potential recurring revenue from our customers. We plan to drive utilization of the G4 and planned PX by engaging with customers to help them advance through the adoption cycle from early stage validation to the plug-and-play integration of our products with their existing NGS workflows.
Expansion of the G4 and PX beyond initial applications
The rate of growth of our revenue will rely in part on our ability to expand our market opportunity. We aim to continually innovate and develop new products, applications, workflows and analysis tools that may potentially lead to new end markets, applications and business models. We believe that the capabilities offered by our products and future products may potentially lead to additional or complementary addressable markets and may expand our market opportunity.
Revenue mix between our instruments and consumables, and gross margin
Any revenue we generate will be derived from sales of our instruments, consumables and services. As our customers begin adopting the G4, we expect our revenue will be derived principally from sales of such instruments. As we drive utilization of the G4, and customers begin utilizing more of our consumables, we estimate that the portion of our revenue from sales of our consumables will grow over time. We expect the revenue contribution from our consumables to vary on a quarterly basis due to several factors, including the timing and number of publications of scientific papers demonstrating the value of our consumables, the availability of grants to fund research, budgetary timing and our introduction of new product features and new consumables offerings. Additionally, we expect the mix and variance of sales between our instruments and consumables to cause our gross margin to vary on a quarterly basis.
Rate of investment in our growth
As we commercialize the G4 and, once developed and commercially launched, the PX, we expect to continue investing in our manufacturing capabilities and commercial infrastructure. Additionally, we plan to further invest in research and development as we hire employees with the necessary scientific and technical backgrounds to enhance and expand our existing products and help us bring new products to market, and we expect to incur additional research and development expenses as a result. We also plan to invest in sales and marketing activities and expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as we support our growth and our operations as a publicly traded company.
Expansion of our geographic presence
We are initially building our commercial infrastructure to sell and support our products directly in the United States and Canada. We also have plans to sell and support our products in the European Union, United Kingdom, Asia Pacific and Japan, either through direct sales or through well established distribution networks. We expect to incur expenses as we expand our geographic presence and generate revenue either through direct sales or through distribution networks. Our expenses and revenue will fluctuate depending on the extent to which we pursue direct sales or distribution arrangements outside the United States and Canada.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We are continuing to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our current and future business and operations, as well as on our industry and the healthcare system. The COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to reduce its spread have adversely impacted and may materially and adversely impact our business and operations in the future. For instance, there were previously standing “stay-at-home” orders in California, and specifically in San Diego County, where our headquarters is located. We have continued to operate within the rules applicable to our business; however, while some of these mandates have begun to expire, an extended implementation of these governmental mandates or institution of other mandates could further impact our ability to operate effectively and conduct ongoing research and development or other activities. Additionally, we have experienced longer lead times from our suppliers of components used in our product development and manufacturing operations, including due to supply chain challenges currently being experienced generally in the economy. Pandemic precautions and preventative measures may also impact our commercialization plans due to restrictions on our customers’ ability to access laboratories, causing delays in the delivery and installation of our products, training such customers on our products and their ability to conduct research. The ongoing build-out of our new headquarters and manufacturing facilities may also be delayed by COVID-19 related restrictions. The COVID-19 pandemic has also had an adverse effect on our ability to attract, recruit, interview and hire at the pace we would typically expect to support our rapidly expanding operations. To the extent that any governmental authority imposes additional regulatory requirements, or continues to maintain regulatory requirements or changes existing laws, regulations and policies that apply to our business and operations, such as additional workplace safety measures, our product development plans may be delayed, and we may incur further costs in bringing our business and operations into compliance with new laws, regulations and policies.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales to date and may not do so in the future.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of: salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel engaged in research and development activities; fees paid to consultants; license fees paid to third parties for use of their intellectual property; laboratory supplies and development compound materials; and allocated facilities and depreciation costs. All research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred.
We plan to continue to increase our investment in our research and development efforts related to our product development pipeline and our proprietary technology, including related to the G4 and planned PX. Therefore, we expect our research and development expenses will increase as we incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel, purchasing supplies and materials and the allocation of facility expense associated with the ongoing build-out of our expansion facilities to support our research and development efforts.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of: salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits and stock-based compensation for personnel in our executive management, finance, administration and human resources functions; professional service fees, including for legal, accounting, patent, auditing and other services; allocated facilities and depreciation costs; and other costs to support our operations.
We plan to continue to increase our investment in our personnel as we grow. We also have incurred and expect to incur additional costs as a result of operating as a public company, including costs of legal, audit, accounting, regulatory and tax compliance services, director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs. As a result, we expect our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in future periods.
Other Income and Expenses
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments primarily from holdings in corporate notes and government notes.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest related to our Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, including amortization of the debt issuance cost.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Promissory Notes
Prior to the IPO, we accounted for the convertible promissory notes (the “2021 Convertible Notes") in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASU”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity and ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. We adjusted the carrying value of the liability for the 2021 Convertible Notes to its estimated fair value at the end of each reporting period through conversion, with increases in fair value recorded as other income or expense in the statements of operations.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liability
Prior to the IPO, we accounted for the warrant for preferred stock (the “SVB Warrant”, see Note 3 to our financial statements included in Item 8) in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, which requires that warrants for the purchase of shares in contingently redeemable instruments be accounted for as liabilities. We adjusted the carrying value of such warrant liability to its estimated fair value at the end of each reporting period through conversion, with increases or decreases in fair value recorded as other income or expense in the statements of operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Twelve Months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Research and Development Expense
The following table summarizes our research and development expense for the periods indicated:
Research and development expense increased by $11.4 million, or 54%, in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $7.6 million in employee compensation costs, including $2.3 million of stock-based compensation, to support the development efforts of the G4 and our beta development for the PX. Other increases include $1.8 million in laboratory materials, supplies and reagents used for in-house research, $0.9 million related to the expansion of our facilities and $0.3 million for consulting fees for research and development activities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
The following table summarizes our selling, general and administrative expense for the periods indicated:
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $22.3 million, or 355%, in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $13.9 million increase in employee compensation costs, including $5.9 million of stock-based compensation costs, as a result of hiring personnel to support our growth and commercialization. Other increases include $6.0 million in professional and consulting fees related to insurance, legal, audit, marketing services, and other costs associated with becoming a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table summarizes our other income (expense) for the periods indicated:
Other expense increased by $37.1 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to the increase in the fair value of our convertible promissory notes of $35.2 million and the increase in the fair value of the warrant liability by $2.0 million, each prior to their conversion that occurred in connection with the IPO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since we were incorporated in 2016, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to research and product development activities, initiating our commercialization plans, establishing and maintaining our intellectual property portfolio, hiring personnel, raising capital, building our commercial infrastructure and providing general and administrative support for these activities. Since our incorporation, we have not generated any revenues from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. From incorporation in June 2016 through December 31, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of convertible preferred stock and convertible promissory notes and the net proceeds from our IPO. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing losses and do not expect positive cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future, and our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period depending on the timing of and expenditures on our commercialization and research and development activities. In particular, we expect to incur increasing costs in the near term in connection with the commercialization of the G4, which includes, among others, increasing our sales and marketing and other commercialization efforts to drive market adoption and scaling our manufacturing and customer support capabilities. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $98.8 million and used $51.7 million of cash in operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $151.9 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $339.2 million.
Our capital obligations include minimum lease payments and minimum payments under our Loan Agreement with Silicon Valley Bank totaling $5.1 million in 2022 and $7.3 million in 2023. Our capital obligations also include payments under our License Agreement with Columbia. Under the License Agreement, we will pay a low six-digit annual license fee for so long as the License Agreement remains in force. For any products within the scope of the License Agreement that we commercialize, we are required to pay royalties ranging from low to mid-single digits on net sales of Patent Products and low single digit royalty rates on net sales of Other Products, as such terms are defined in the License Agreement. We can credit our yearly annual license fee against any yearly royalty fees payable to Columbia. Additionally, if we receive any income in connection with any sublicenses, we must pay Columbia a high single-digit percentage of that income. Finally, the License Agreement provides for payments to Columbia based on our achievement of certain development and commercialization milestones, which could total up to $3.9 million over the life of the License Agreement. Our leases and the License Agreement are further described in Note 8 to the audited financial statements contained elsewhere in this report. The Loan Agreement is further described in Note 7 to the audited financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including executing on our commercialization plans, continuing to invest into our research and development projects and other factors described in the section titled “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this report. Based on our current operating plan, we believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will enable us to fund our planned operations for at least 12 months from the issuance date this report. We have based our estimate of capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and, as we continue to face challenges and uncertainties, our available capital resources may be consumed more rapidly than currently expected due to a variety of factors, including those factors described in the section titled “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this report.
We may need to seek additional financing in the future to support our operations, research and development activities and commercialization plans. If we are not able to generate sufficient revenue to finance our cash requirements, if the maximum availability of $35.5 million under our Loan Agreement is not sufficient to finance our cash requirements, or if we are not able to raise additional capital or enter into financing agreements or arrangements when required on favorable terms, or at all, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of, or discontinue one or more development programs, delay potential commercialization or reduce the scope of sales or marketing activities and pursue other cost cutting measures, including the reduction of headcount, scope of operations and planned capital expenditures, which may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, financial condition or ability to fund our scheduled obligations on a timely basis or continue as a going concern. We cannot assure you that we will ever be profitable or generate positive cash flow from operating activities or that, if we achieve profitability, we will be able to sustain it.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below:
Operating Activities
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $51.7 million attributable to a net loss of $98.8 million and a net change in our working capital of $2.9 million, offset by non-cash charges of $50.0 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of a $35.2 million change in the fair value of the 2021 Convertible Notes, a $2.2 million change in the fair value of warrants and $9.2 million of stock-based compensation expense.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $24.9 million attributable to a net loss of $27.9 million, offset by non-cash charges of $2.2 million and by a net change in our working capital of $0.9 million. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $1.1 million and depreciation expense of $0.6 million.
Investing Activities
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $130.9 million, which related to purchases of available-for-sale securities of $195.7 million, net of proceeds from maturities and sales of available-for-sale securities of $69.7 million, in addition to $4.9 million in payments related to purchases of property and equipment.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by investing activities was $24.0 million, which related to maturities and sales of available-for-sale securities of $31.5 million, net of purchases of $6.1 million, in addition to $1.4 million in payments related to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $372.1 million, which was primarily related to the net proceeds from our IPO of $237.2 million, proceeds from the issuance of the 2021 Convertible Notes of $130.5 million and cash received related to exercise of stock options of $3.7 million.
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $7.5 million, which was primarily related to proceeds from our long-term debt issuance.
Indebtedness
In November 2019, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Silicon Valley Bank pursuant to which Silicon Valley Bank agreed to lend us up to $15.0 million in a series of term loans (the “2019 SVB Loan”). Contemporaneously, we borrowed $2.5 million in the first of three draw-downs available under the 2019 SVB Loan. In March 2020, we borrowed an additional $7.5 million as a second draw. The 2019 SVB Loan was to mature on September 1, 2023 and bore interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of (a) 0.65% above the prime rate or (b) 5.90%. Payment on the 2019 SVB Loan was for interest only through September 30, 2021. In addition, a final payment equal to the original principal amount of each advance multiplied by 5.50% was to be due on the maturity date.
On September 30, 2021, we refinanced our 2019 SVB Loan. In connection with the refinancing, we entered into the Loan Agreement (together with the 2019 SVB Loan, the “SVB Loans”) with Silicon Valley Bank. The Loan Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $35.5 million to be delivered in three tranches. The tranches consist of: (i) a term loan advance to us in an aggregate principal amount of $10.5 million on the loan closing date (the “First Tranche”); (ii) an additional term loan advance available to us through September 30, 2022 in an aggregate principal amount of $15.0 million; and (iii) subject to Silicon Valley Bank’s approval, our right to request that Silicon Valley Bank make an additional term loan advance in an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million. The proceeds from the First Tranche were used to repay in full the existing indebtedness under the 2019 SVB Loan. The Loan Agreement matures on September 1, 2026 and bears interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of (a) 0.75% plus the prime rate as reported in The Wall Street Journal and (b) 4.00%. The Loan Agreement has an initial interest-only period of 36 months. In addition, a final payment (“Final Payment Fee”) equal to the original principal amount of each advance multiplied by 4.00% will be due on the maturity date.
We are subject to customary affirmative and restrictive covenants under the Loan Agreement. Our obligations under the Loan Agreement are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of our current and future assets, other than intellectual property. We have agreed not to encumber our intellectual property assets, except as permitted by the Loan Agreement. The Loan Agreement provides for events of default customary for term loan facilities of this type, including but not limited to: non-payment; breaches or defaults in the performance of covenants or representations and warranties; bankruptcy and other insolvency events; and the occurrence of a material adverse change as defined in the Amended Agreement. After the occurrence of an event of default, Silicon Valley Bank may, among other remedies, accelerate payment of all obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates we make.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation by measuring and recognizing compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees and non-employees based on estimated grant-date fair values. We use the straight-line method to recognize compensation cost over the required service period of the award, which is generally the vesting period of the award. We recognize actual forfeitures by reducing the stock-based compensation in the same period that the forfeitures occur. We estimate the fair value of stock-based option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the fair value of common stock, expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield, which are described in greater detail below.
Inputs to the Black-Scholes option pricing model are subjective and generally require the use of judgment. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect how much stock-based compensation is recognized. These inputs are as follows:
•Fair value of common stock-For awards granted prior to the IPO, when there was no public market for our common stock, the grant date fair value of our common stock was determined by the our board of directors based in part on valuations of our common stock prepared by a third-party valuation specialist. In connection with the preparation of the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, we performed a retrospective review of the fair value of its common stock based on information then available. For awards granted after the IPO, the fair value of common stock is the closing price per share of our common stock on the grant date as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
•Expected term-The expected term represents the average period that options granted are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the weighted-average vesting period and the end of the contractual term). We use the simplified method because we have concluded that our historical option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis to estimate expected term.
•Expected volatility-We had no publicly available stock price information prior to our IPO and limited publicly available stock price information after our IPO; therefore, we used the historical volatility of the stock price of similar publicly traded companies. The historical volatility is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term.
•Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term.
•Expected dividend yield-We have never paid dividends and do not intend to pay dividends in the foreseeable future. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our equity-based compensation could be materially different.
We expect to continue to grant stock options and may grant other stock-based awards in the future, and to the extent that we do, our stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will increase.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Historically, for all periods prior to our initial public offering, the fair values of the shares of our common stock underlying our stock-based awards were determined by our board of directors with input from management and the assistance of an independent third-party valuation specialist. Given the previous absence of a public trading market of our common stock and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the “Practice Aid”), in addition to the third-party valuations referenced above, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our Common stock, including:
•our stage of development and material risks related to our business;
•our operating results and financial performance, including our levels of available capital resources;
•the progress of our research and development efforts and business strategy;
•the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the prices at which we sold shares of our convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock as a private company;
•external market conditions affecting the life sciences technology industry and trends within the industry;
•equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; and
•general U.S. market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, the fair value of our business, or enterprise value, was determined using various valuation methods, including combinations of income, market and asset approaches with input from management. The income approach determines value by using one or more methods that convert anticipated economic benefits into a present single amount. The application of the income approach establishes value by methods that discount or capitalize earnings or cash flow, by a discount or capitalization rate that reflects investors’ rate of return expectations, market conditions and the relative risk of the subject investment. The market approach involves identifying and evaluating comparable public companies and acquisition targets that operate in the same industry or which have similar operating characteristics as the subject company. From the comparable companies, publicly available information is used to extrapolate market-based valuation multiples that are applied to historical or prospective financial information in order to derive an indication of value. The asset approach determines the value of the underlying assets and liabilities of a business as a means of determining the value of the business in aggregate. This approach can include the value of both tangible and intangible assets.
The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating enterprise value across classes and series of capital stock to determine the estimated fair value of common stock at each valuation date. In accordance with the Practice Aid, we considered the following methods:
•Option Pricing Method (“OPM”): Under the OPM, shares are valued by creating a series of call options with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences and conversion terms of each equity class. The estimated fair values of the convertible preferred stock and common stock are inferred by analyzing these options. This method is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is difficult to predict and thus creates highly speculative forecasts.
•Probability-Weighted Expected Return Method (“PWERM”): The PWERM is a scenario-based analysis that estimates value per share based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns, considering each of the possible outcomes available to us, as well as the economic and control rights of each share class. This method is generally most appropriate to use when the time to a liquidity event is short, making the range of possible future outcomes relatively easy to predict.
Based on our early stage of development and other relevant factors, we determined that an OPM was the most appropriate method for allocating our enterprise value to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock for valuations during 2019 and most of 2020.
Starting in December 2020 and through March 31, 2021, we used a hybrid method to determine the estimated fair value of our common stock, which included both the OPM and PWERM models.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions, or the relationships between those assumptions, impact our valuations as of each valuation date prior to the IPO. The assumptions underlying these valuations represent our management’s best estimate, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment.
Following the IPO, the fair market value of our common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
2021 Convertible Notes
In February 2021, the Company sold and issued approximately $130.5 million aggregate principal of 2021 Convertible Notes in a private placement transaction. The 2021 Convertible Notes accrued 6% interest per annum. The Company elected as of the issuance date to account for the 2021 Convertible Notes at fair value. Management believes that the fair value option better reflected the underlying economics of the 2021 Convertible Notes, which contained multiple embedded derivatives. Under the fair value election, changes in fair value are reported as “Change in fair value of convertible promissory notes” in the statements of operations in each reporting period after the issuance through the conversion of the 2021 Convertible Notes. The Company measured the fair value of the 2021 Convertible Notes using the probability weighted “as-converted” plus Black-Scholes option pricing model based on inputs such as the probability of IPO vs. non-IPO scenarios, fair value of the common stock price, discount yield, risk-free rate, equity volatility, expected term, number of converted shares and price negotiation adjustment for the calibration. In connection with the IPO, the 2021 Convertible Notes converted into 7,531,777 shares of the Company’s common stock. Based on the terms of the agreement, the 2021 Convertible Notes converted at a 20% discount to the public offering price in the IPO. At the time of the conversion, the Company recorded a final fair value adjustment of the 2021 Convertible Notes using the Company’s common stock price at the IPO.
There are significant judgments, assumptions and estimates inherent in the determination of the fair value of the SVB Warrant liability and the 2021 Convertible Notes. These include the determination of a valuation method and selection of the possible outcomes available to the Company, including the determination of timing and expected future investment returns for each such scenario. The Company considered the equity value of an initial public offering using market transactions and had determined the expected value of a stay-private scenario using the income approach, which is based on assumptions regarding the Company’s future operating performance. The related judgments, assumptions and estimates are highly interrelated and changes in any one assumption could necessitate changes in another. In particular, any changes to the probability of a particular outcome would require a related change to the probability of another outcome. The fair value of the 2021 Convertible Notes is derived using assumptions that are consistent with the assumptions used to value the Company’s common stock and the SVB Warrant.
As of December 31, 2021, the 2021 Convertible Notes no longer exist as they converted into common stock in connection with the IPO.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recent accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as such term is defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
JOBS Act
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, as amended (the “JOBS Act”). We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual gross revenue; (ii) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, with at least $700 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (iii) the issuance, in any three-year period, by us of more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities; or (iv) December 31, 2026. As a result of this status, we have taken advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements in this report that are applicable to other publicly traded entities that are not emerging growth companies and may elect to take advantage of other exemptions from reporting requirements in our future filings with the SEC. In particular, in this report, these exemptions include:
•the option to present only two years of audited financial statements and only two years of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations;
•not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended;
•not being required to submit certain executive compensation matters to stockholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay,” “say-on-frequency,” and “say-on-golden parachutes;” and
•not being required to disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
As a result, we do not know if some investors will find our common stock less attractive. The result may be a less active trading market for our common stock, and the price of our common stock may become more volatile.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards, delaying the adoption of these accounting standards until they would apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for private companies. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies.