ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act relating to future events or our future performance. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that relate to future events or our future performance. Although management believes that the assumptions made and expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot assure that the underlying assumptions will, in fact, prove to be correct or that actual results will not be different from expectations expressed in this report.
Results of Operations
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues were $1,097,467 for 2021 compared with $875,997 in 2020, an increase of $221,470, or 25%. The increase in revenues is primarily attributable to an increase in international sales.
Total cost of goods sold increased to $621,659 in 2021 from $588,944 in 2020, which included a non-cash inventory adjustment of $47,959 in 2021 and 69,417 in 2020, for an increase of $32,715. Gross margin, including the impact of the non-cash inventory reserve adjustment was $475,808 compared with $287,053 in 2020. Gross margin as a percentage of sales for 2021 was 43 percent compared with 33 percent in 2020. Excluding the non-cash inventory reserve adjustment of $47,959 in 2021 and $69,417 in 2020, gross margin as a percentage of net sales was 47 percent and 41 percent, respectively.
Our operating expenses for 2021 were $665,300 compared with $754,267 in 2020, a decrease of $88,967, or 12%. General and administrative expense for 2021 was $600,169 compared with $671,672 in 2020. The decrease was due primarily to rent expense of $98,106 in 2021 compared with $137,616 in 2020. Major components of general and administrative expenses in 2021 were insurance expense of $58,816, rent expense of $98,106 and salary and wages of $213,316. This compares with insurance expense of $97,080, rent expense of $137,616, and salary and wages of $225,485 during 2020. Research and development outlays were $63,829 in 2021 compared with $82,052 in 2020.
Our net income in 2021 was $17,409, or $0.00 per share, compared with a net loss of $489,712, or $(0.02) per share, in 2020. Net income in 2021 was primarily due to the extinguishment of liability income realized in 2021 under the SBA’s Payroll Protection Program. Additionally, operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was
$189,492 compared with $467,214 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decreased operating loss in 2021 was primarily due to increased revenues in 2021.
Results for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflect non-cash expenses, including the value of options and warrants granted in the amount of $19,112, depreciation and amortization of $1,302, the inventory reserve adjustment of $53,453, the forgiveness of debt by the SBA of $200,321 and amortization of ROU assets in the amount of $58,653. For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-cash expenses included the value of options and warrants granted of $15,456, depreciation and amortization of $543 and the inventory reserve adjustment of $69,417.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash provided by financing activities and available working capital. Additionally, from time to time we may raise funds from the equity capital markets to fund our research and development programs, expansion of our business and general operations.
At December 31, 2021, our current liabilities totaled $1,516,537 and our current assets totaled $803,724, resulting in negative working capital of $712,813.
We have no firm commitments or obligations for capital expenditures. Substantial discretionary expenditures may be required to enable us to conduct product research, development, manufacturing, marketing and distribution activities. We may need to raise additional capital to facilitate growth and support our long-term product development, manufacturing, and marketing programs. The Company has no established bank-financing arrangements, and it is not anticipated that we will secure any bank financing in the near future. Therefore, it is likely that we may need to seek additional financing through subsequent future public or private sales of our securities, including equity securities. We may also seek funding for the development, manufacturing, and marketing of our products through strategic partnerships and other arrangements with corporate partners. There can be no assurance, however, that such collaborative arrangements or additional funds will be available when needed, or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to curtail one or more of our research and development programs.
We have historically incurred significant losses, which have resulted in a total accumulated deficit of $21,448,232 at December 31, 2021, of which $5,604,135 is a direct result of derivative expense and change in fair value of derivative liability and is unrelated to, and has had no effect on, our operations or cash flow. The derivative expense and change in fair value of derivative liability was a one-time charge reflected on the Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2013.
Operating Activities
We realized negative cash flow from operations of $130,146 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with negative cash flow of $247,507 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Included in the net income of $17,409 for the year ended December 31, 2021 are non-cash expenses, which are not a drain on our capital resources. During 2021, these non-cash expenses include the value of options and warrants granted in the amount of $19,112, depreciation and amortization of $1,302, the inventory reserve adjustment of $53,453, the forgiveness of debt by the SBA of $200,321 and amortization of ROU assets in the amount of $58,653.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Accounting Method and Use of Estimates
Omnitek’s financial statements are prepared using the accrual method of accounting. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Areas where significant estimates are required include the following:
Accounts Receivable
Trade receivables are carried at original invoice amount less an estimate made for doubtful receivables based on a review of all outstanding amounts on a monthly basis. Management determines the allowance for doubtful accounts by identifying troubled accounts and by using historical experience applied to an aging of accounts. Trade receivables are written off when deemed uncollectible. Recoveries of trade receivables previously written off are recorded when received.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market, cost determined on an average cost basis. Market value for raw materials is based on replacement costs. Inventory costs include material, labor and manufacturing overhead. The Company reviews inventories on hand at least annually and records provisions for estimated excess, slow moving and obsolete inventory, as well as inventory with a carrying value in excess of net realizable value. The regular and systematic inventory valuation reviews include a current assessment of future product demand, historical experience and product expiration.
Long-lived assets
Omnitek assesses the recoverability of its long-lived assets annually and whether circumstances would indicate that there may be an impairment. Omnitek compares the estimated undiscounted future cash flows to the carrying value of the long-lived assets to determine if an impairment has occurred. In the event that an impairment has occurred, Omnitek recognizes the impairment immediately.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation and amortization are calculated on the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful lives of the assets ranging from three to five years.
Contract assets and liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable and costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts (contract assets) on the balance sheet. For Omnitek’s long-term contracts, amounts are generally billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Generally, billing occurs subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. However, Omnitek sometimes receives advances or deposits from its customers, before revenue is recognized, resulting in billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts (contract liabilities).
Income Taxes
Omnitek accounts for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 740, which requires the recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets at currently enacted tax rates for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. A valuation allowance is recognized to reduce the net deferred tax asset to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. Omnitek uses historical experience to determine the likelihood of realization of deferred tax liabilities and assets.
Stock-based Compensation
ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation,” prescribes accounting and reporting standards for all stock-based payment transactions in which employee services, and, since February 1, 2019, non-employee services, are acquired. Transactions include incurring liabilities, or issuing or offering to issue shares, options and other equity instruments such as employee stock ownership plans and stock appreciation rights. Stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, are recognized as compensation expense in the financial statements based on their fair values. That expense is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide services in exchange for the award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period).
Liquidity & Going Concerns Policy
Historically, the Company has incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations. Management believes that based on its operating plan, the projected sales for 2022, combined with funds available from its working capital will be sufficient to fund operations for the next twelve months from the date these financial statements were issued. However, there can be no assurance that operations and operating cash flows will continue at the current levels or improve in the near future. From time to time the Company has raised additional capital through the sale of equity and financing activities to support its operations, and should the need arise will attempt to do so in the future, however, it is uncertain whether the Company will be successful in its efforts to raise additional capital in the future, if necessary.
Revenue Recognition
In general, revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the goods or services. In order to achieve that core principle, a five-step approach is applied: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue allocated to each performance obligation when we satisfy the performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account for revenue recognition.
We recognize revenue on various products and services as follows:
Contract Balances - The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections results in billed accounts receivable and costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts (contract assets) on the balance sheet. For Omnitek’s long-term contracts, amounts are generally billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals or upon achievement of contractual milestones. Generally, billing occurs subsequent to revenue recognition, resulting in contract assets. However, Omnitek sometimes receives advances or deposits from its customers, before revenue is recognized, resulting in billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts (contract liabilities).
Products - The Company recognizes revenue from the sale of products (e.g., filters and engine components) as performance obligations are satisfied. This type of revenue is primarily generated from the sale of finished product to customers. Those sales predominantly contain a single delivery element and revenue is recognized at a single point in time when ownership, risks and rewards transfer (i.e., the performance obligation has been satisfied). Control passes FOB shipping point.
Contracts - Revenues are recognized as performance obligations are satisfied over time (also known as percentage-of-completion method), measured by either achievement of milestones or the ratio of costs incurred up to a given date to estimated total costs for each contract. Contract costs include all direct material, labor, subcontract and other costs. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined. Changes in job performance, job conditions, estimated profitability and associated change orders and claims, including those changes arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to costs and income and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined.
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to a customer and is the unit of account in the new revenue standard. The contract transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance
obligation and recognized as revenue when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied. The majority of Omnitek’s contracts have a single performance obligation as the promise to transfer the individual goods or services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct.
Performance Obligations Satisfied Over Time
Revenues for Omnitek’s long-term contracts that satisfy the criteria for over time recognition (formerly known as percentage-of-completion method) is recognized as the work progresses. The majority of the revenue is derived from long-term engine development agreements that typically span between 12 to 24 months. Omnitek’s long-term contracts will continue to be recognized over time because our typical contract is for a customized asset with no alternative use and generally the Company has a right to payment for work completed to date. Under the new revenue standard, the cost-to-cost measure of progress continues to best depict the transfer of control of assets to the customer, which occurs as the Company incurs costs. Contract costs include labor and material. Revenue from products and services transferred to customers over time accounted for 1% and 0% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Performance Obligations Satisfied at a Point in Time
Revenue from product sales is recognized at a point in time. These sales predominantly contain a single delivery element and revenue is recognized at a single point in time when ownership, risk and rewards transfer Upon fulfilment of the performance obligation, the customer is provided an invoice demonstrating transfer of control to the customer. Revenue from goods and services transferred to customers at a point in time accounted for 99% and 100% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Assurance-type warranties are the only warranties provided by the Company and, as such, Omnitek does not recognize revenue on warranty-related work. Omnitek generally provides a one-year warranty for products that it sells. Warranty claims historically have been insignificant.
Pre-contract costs are generally not incurred by the Company.
Contract Estimates
Accounting for long-term contracts involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. For long-term contracts, Omnitek estimates the profit on a contract as the difference between the total estimated revenue and expected costs to complete a contract and recognizes that profit over the life of the contract.
Variable Consideration
The transaction price for contracts may include variable consideration, which includes increases to transaction price for approved and unapproved change orders, claims and incentives, and reductions to transaction price for liquidated damages. Variable consideration historically has been insignificant.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company has evaluated recent accounting pronouncements and their adoption has not had or is expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, or statements.