ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless the context indicates otherwise, all references to “OncoSec,” “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K refer to OncoSec Medical Incorporated and its consolidated subsidiary.
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is not a complete description of our business or the risks associated with an investment in our common stock. As a result, this discussion and analysis should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report, as well as the other disclosures in this report and in the other documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC.
This discussion and analysis and the other disclosures in this report contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements relate to future events or circumstances or our future performance and are based on our current assumptions, expectations and beliefs about future developments and their potential effect on our business. All statements in this Annual Report that are not statements of historical fact could be forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements in this discussion and analysis and elsewhere in this Annual Report include statements about, among other things, the status, progress and results of our clinical programs and our expectations regarding our liquidity and performance, including our expense levels, and the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Forward-looking statements are only predictions and are not guarantees of future performance, and they are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, including the risks described under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item IA of this Annual Report and similar discussions contained in the other documents we file from time to time with the SEC. In light of these risks, uncertainties and other factors, the forward-looking events and circumstances described in this Annual Report may not occur and our results, levels of activity, performance or achievements could differ materially from those expressed in or implied by any forward-looking statements we make. As a result, you should not place undue reliance on any of our forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and unless required to by law, we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement for any reason, including to reflect new information, future developments, actual results or changes in our expectations.
Overview
We are a late-stage immuno-oncology company focused on designing, developing and commercializing innovative, proprietary, intra-tumoral DNA-based therapeutics to stimulate and to augment anti-tumor immune responses for the treatment of cancers. Our core technology platform ImmunoPulse® is a drug-device therapeutic modality platform comprised of proprietary intratumoral electroporation (“EP”) delivery devices (the “OMS EP Device”) and a proprietary DNA plasmid delivery and application method that triggers transient expression of target protein in cells. The OMS EP Device is designed to deliver plasmid DNA-encoded drugs directly into a solid tumor and promote an immunological response against the cancer. The OMS EP Device can be adapted to treat different tumor types, and consists of an electrical pulse generator paired with disposable applicators. Our lead product candidate is a DNA-encoded interleukin-12 (“IL-12”) called tavokinogene telseplasmid (“TAVO™”). The OMS EP Device is used to deliver TAVO™ intratumorally, with the aim of reversing the immunosuppressive microenvironment in the treated tumor. The activation of the appropriate inflammatory response can drive a systemic anti-tumor response against untreated tumors in other parts of the body. In 2017, we received Fast Track Designation and Orphan Drug Designation from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for TAVO™ in metastatic melanoma, which could qualify TAVO™ for expedited FDA review, a rolling Biologics License Application review and certain other benefits.
Our current focus is to pursue our study of TAVO™-EP in combination with KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab) in melanoma.
Performance Outlook
As a result of recent cash runway and working capital limitations, we expect to use our available working capital in the near term primarily for the advancement of our existing and planned clinical melanoma programs, including delivery of the KEYNOTE-695 trial results. In order to preserve our existing working capital, we have decreased clinical work on our other clinical trials and studies, including those involving triple negative breast cancer. We anticipate our spending on clinical programs and the development of our next-generation OMS EP Device will continue throughout our current fiscal year. Our spending on research and development programs will be prioritized to support development of TAVO™-EP in melanoma, based on our current focus on the KEYNOTE-695 trial. Due to ongoing restructuring efforts, we expect our cash-based general and administrative expenses to remain relatively flat in the near term, as we seek to continue to leverage internal resources and automate processes to decrease our outside services expenses. See “Results of Operations” below for more information.
Restructuring Plan
As previously disclosed, on October 2, 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a restructuring plan (the “Restructuring Plan”) that is designed to prioritize clinical activities in melanoma to reduce operating expenses while advancing our lead product candidate, TAVO™ EP, toward near-term data milestones in connection with the KEYNOTE-695 clinical trial. As part of the Restructuring Plan, we restructured our internal operations and reduced our workforce by approximately 45%, or approximately 18 employees.
We currently estimate that we will incur charges of approximately $750,000 to $800,000 in connection with the Restructuring Plan, consisting primarily of cash expenditures for employee transition, notice period and severance payments, retention bonus payments, and related costs as well as non-cash expenses related to vesting of share-based awards. We expect that the majority of the restructuring charges will be incurred in the fourth calendar quarter of 2022 and first calendar quarter of 2023, and that the execution of the Restructuring Plan will be substantially complete by the second calendar quarter of 2023.
The charges that we expect to incur in connection with the Restructuring Plan are estimates and subject to a number of assumptions, and actual results may differ materially. The foregoing estimated amounts do not include any non-cash charges associated with stock-based compensation. We expect to operationalize additional cost reduction actions that will include other incremental cost reduction actions unrelated to workforce reductions.
COVID-19
Our operational and financial performance have been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our clinical trials have experienced delays in patient enrollment, potentially due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic or concerns among patients about participating in clinical trials during a public health emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic is also affecting the operations of government entities, such as the FDA, as well as contract research organizations, third-party manufacturers, and other third-parties upon whom we rely. The extent of the impact on our operations cannot be ascertained at this time.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended July 31, 2022 Compared to the Year Ended July 31, 2021
The financial data for the years ended July 31, 2022 and July 31, 2021 is presented in the following table and the results of these two periods are included in the discussion thereafter.
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue since our inception, and we do not anticipate generating any revenue in the near term.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses decreased by approximately $8.3 million, from $34.1 million during the year ended July 31, 2021, to $25.8 million during the year ended July 31, 2022. This decrease was primarily due to the following approximate decreases: (i) a $6.3 million decreases in clinical trial-related costs to support our various clinical studies and costs for discovery research and product development, (ii) a $1.6 million decreases in stock-based compensation expense for employees and consultants, and (iii) a $0.4 million decrease in payroll and related benefits expenses, primarily due to decreased headcount.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $3.1 million, from $14.3 million during the year ended July 31, 2021, to $11.2 million during the year ended July 31, 2022. This decrease was largely due to the following: (i) a $2.4 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense for employees and consultants, (ii) a $1.6 million decrease in payroll and related benefits expenses primarily due to a severance payment of $1.8 million to the former CEO of the Company in the prior period, and (iii) a $0.6 million decrease in consulting costs, primarily related to business development and public relations. The decrease was offset by: (i) a $0.7 million increase in legal expenses, primarily related to $1 million in insurance recoveries received in connection with prior litigation with Alpha Holdings, Inc. in the prior period, and (ii) a $0.6 million increase in insurance costs related to increased D&O insurance premiums.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt decreased by approximately $1.0 million from $1.0 million for the year ended July 31, 2021, to $0 for the year ended July 31, 2022. During the year ended July 31, 2021, the loan issued to the Company under the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under Division A. Title I of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was forgiven, which resulted in a gain on extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.0 million.
Foreign Currency Exchange Loss
Foreign currency exchange loss, increased by approximately $0.4 million from a loss of $0.1 million for the year ended July 31, 2021 to a loss of $0.5 million for the year ended July 31, 2022. The increase was primarily due to unrealized foreign currency transaction losses recognized in connection with our Australian subsidiary’s intercompany loan.
Income Tax benefit
In April 2022, we received $3.3 million in net proceeds from the sale of our net operating losses (“NOL”) under the State of New Jersey NOL Transfer Program. In June 2021, the Company received $2.4 million in net proceeds from the sale of its New Jersey NOL under the State of New Jersey NOL Transfer Program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
The following table and subsequent discussion summarize our working capital as of each of the periods presented:
Current Assets
Current assets as of July 31, 2022 decreased by $34.0 million to $15.2 million, from $49.2 million as of July 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily related to the decrease of cash in the amount of $33.7 million and the decrease of prepaid insurance in the amount of $0.3 million. The decrease in cash was due to cash used to support our operations during the year ended July 31, 2022. The decrease in prepaid insurance was due to decreased D&O insurance premiums upon renewal of D&O insurance in July 2022.
Current Liabilities
Current liabilities as of July 31, 2022 decreased by $1.4 million to $6.6 million, from $8.0 million as of July 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses pertaining to our legal costs and our manufacturing and clinical research activities.
Cash Flow
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended July 31, 2022 was $32.1 million, as compared to $41.8 million for the year ended July 31, 2021. The $9.7 million decrease in cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to a decrease in cash used to support our operating activities, including but not limited to, our clinical trials, a decrease in research and development activities and general working capital requirements.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for year ended July 31, 2022 was $0.2 million, as compared to $0.8 million for the year ended July 31, 2021. During the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company purchased property and equipment for future use in its clinical trials and other research and development efforts. During the year ended July 31, 2021, the Company licensed generator technology and purchased property and equipment for use in its clinical trials and other research and development efforts.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $1.2 million for the year ended July 31, 2022, as compared to $68.2 million provided by financing activities for the year ended July 31, 2021. Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended July 31, 2022 was primarily attributable to principal payments on notes payable. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended July 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to $52.6 million net proceeds received from public offerings of securities in August 2020 and January 2021, $5.0 million received from the co-promotion agreement with Sirtex Medical US Holdings, Inc. (“Sirtex”), $5.4 million received from warrant and option exercises and $5.8 million from the purchase of shares pursuant to participation rights set forth under the Grand Decade Developments Limited, a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of Grand Pharmaceutical Group Limited (formerly China Grand Pharmaceutical & Healthcare Holdings Ltd.) (“CGP”) and Sirtex stockholders agreements originally entered into on October 10, 2019.
Uses of Cash and Cash Requirements
Our primary uses of cash have been to finance clinical and research and development activities focused on the identification and discovery of new potential product candidates, the development of innovative and proprietary medical approaches for the treatment of cancer, and the design and advancement of pre-clinical and clinical trials and studies related to our pipeline of product candidates. We also use our capital resources on general and administrative activities and building and strengthening our corporate infrastructure, programs and procedures to enable compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
Our primary objectives for the next 12 months are to continue the advancement of our KEYNOTE-695 trial and to continue our research and development activities for our next-generation EP device. In addition, we expect to pursue capital-raising transactions, which could include equity or debt financings, in the near term to fund our existing and planned operations and acquire and develop additional assets and technology consistent with our business objectives as opportunities arise.
Going Concern and Management’s Plans
We have sustained losses in all reporting periods since inception, with an accumulated deficit of approximately $286 million as of July 31, 2022. These losses are expected to continue for an extended period of time. Further, we have never generated any cash from our operations and do not expect to generate such cash in the near term. The aforementioned factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the issuance date of the consolidated financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of asset amounts or the classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern within one year after the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
As of October 17, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $6.7 million. Since inception, cash flows from financing activities have been the primary source of the Company’s liquidity. Based on our current cash levels, we believe our cash resources are insufficient to meet our anticipated needs for the 12 months following the date the consolidated financial statements are issued.
We will need to raise additional capital to continue operating our business and fund our planned operations, including research and development, clinical trials and, if regulatory approval is obtained, commercialization of its product candidates. In addition, we will require additional financing if we desire to in-license or acquire new assets, research and develop new compounds or new technologies and pursue related patent protection, or obtain any other intellectual property rights or other assets. There is no assurance that additional financing will be available to us when needed, that Management will be able to obtain financing on terms acceptable to us, or whether we will become profitable and generate positive operating cash flow. The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend principally upon market conditions, and, more specifically, on the progress of our clinical development programs. Similarly, if our common stock is delisted from the Nasdaq Capital Market, it may limit our ability to raise additional funds. See “Nasdaq Deficiency Notice” below. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has also caused volatility in the global financial markets and threatened a slowdown in the global economy, which may negatively affect our ability to raise additional capital on attractive terms or at all. If we are unable to raise sufficient additional funds when needed, on favorable terms or at all, we will not be able to continue the development of our product candidates as currently planned or at all, will need to reevaluate our planned operations and may need to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our development programs, reduce expenses or cease operations, any of which would have a significant negative impact on our prospects and financial condition.
Sources of Capital
We have not generated any revenue since our inception, and we do not anticipate generating revenue in the near term. Historically, we have raised the majority of the funding for our business through offerings of our common stock and warrants to purchase our common stock. If we issue equity or convertible debt securities to raise additional funds, our existing stockholders would experience further dilution, and the new equity or debt securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders. If we incur debt, our fixed payment obligations, liabilities and leverage relative to our equity capitalization would increase, which could increase the cost of future capital. Further, the terms of any debt securities we issue or borrowings we incur, if available, could impose significant restrictions on our operations, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt or issue additional equity or other operating restrictions that could adversely affect our ability to conduct our business, and any such debt could be secured by any or all of our assets pledged as collateral. Additionally, we may incur substantial costs in pursuing future capital, including investment banking, legal and accounting fees, printing and distribution expenses and other costs.
Nasdaq Deficiency Notice
On June 2, 2022, we received notice (the “Notice”) from the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”) that the Company is not in compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2), as the minimum bid price of our common stock had been below $1.00 per share for 30 consecutive business days as of the date of the Notice. The Notice had no immediate effect on the listing of our common stock, which continues to trade at this time on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “ONCS.”
In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A), we have a period of 180 calendar days, or until November 29, 2022, to regain compliance with the minimum bid price requirement. To regain compliance, the closing bid price of our common stock must meet or exceed $1.00 per share for at least ten consecutive business days during this 180 calendar day period. In the event we do not regain compliance by November 29, 2022, we may be eligible for an additional 180 calendar day grace period if the Company meets the continued listing requirement for market value of publicly held shares ($1 million) and all other initial listing standards for the Nasdaq Capital Market, with the exception of the minimum bid price, and we provide written notice to Nasdaq of our intention to cure the deficiency during the second compliance period by effecting a reverse stock split, if necessary. If we do not regain compliance within the allotted compliance period(s), Nasdaq will provide notice that our common stock will be subject to delisting from the Nasdaq Capital Market. In that event, we may appeal such delisting determination to a hearings panel.
We are currently evaluating our alternatives to resolve the listing deficiency including, but not limited to, conducting a reverse stock split. To the extent that we are unable to resolve the listing deficiency, there is a risk that our common stock may be delisted from Nasdaq, which would adversely impact liquidity of our common stock and potentially result in even lower bid prices for our common stock.
On November 29, 2021, we notified Nasdaq that Robert E. Ward had resigned as a member of the Board of Directors and the Company’s Audit Committee, as disclosed on our Current Report filed on Form 8-K on November 30, 2021. After giving effect to Mr. Ward’s resignation, the Company’s Audit Committee no longer consisted of three independent members as required by Nasdaq Listing Rule 5605(c)(2)(A).
On December 8, 2021, we received a letter from Nasdaq noting that we no longer complied with the requirement of Listing Rule 5605. The letter also acknowledged that the Listing Rules provide a cure period in order for us to regain compliance until the earlier of our next annual meeting of stockholders or November 23, 2022.
On June 9, 2022, the Board of Directors appointed Mr. Joon Kim, an incumbent independent director, to the Audit Committee. On June 13, 2022, Nasdaq confirmed that we had regained compliance under Listing Rule 5605.
Critical Accounting Policies
Use of Estimates
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP, which requires Management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Significant accounting estimates related to our ability to continue as a going concern and certain calculations related to that determination. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates to ensure that they appropriately reflect changes in the business or as new information becomes available. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for internal projects, as well as partner-funded collaborative research and development activities. These costs include direct and research-related overhead expenses, which include salaries, stock-based compensation and other personnel-related expenses, facility costs, supplies, depreciation of facilities and laboratory equipment, as well as research consultants and the cost of funding research at universities and other research institutions, and are expensed as incurred. Costs to acquire technologies that are utilized in research and development that have no alternative future use, are expensed when incurred. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 730-20, we account for upfront, non-refundable research and development payments received from a related party as a long-term liability as there has not been a substantive and genuine transfer of risk and there is a presumption that we are obligated to repay the related party.
Equity-Based Awards
We grant equity-based awards (typically stock options or restricted stock units) under our stock-based compensation plan and occasionally outside of our stock-based compensation plan, with terms generally similar to the terms under our stock-based compensation plan. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. For employees, directors and consultants, the fair value of the award is measured on the grant date. The fair value amount is then recognized over the period during which services are required to be provided in exchange for the award, usually the vesting period. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including price volatility of the underlying stock, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, and expected life of the option. We estimate the fair value of restricted stock unit awards based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating lease right of use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use an underlying asset during the lease term, and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating leases are included in ROU assets, current operating lease liabilities, and long-term operating lease liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets.
Lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are initially recognized based on the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date calculated using our incremental borrowing rate applicable to the lease asset, unless the implicit rate is readily determinable. ROU assets also include any lease payments made at or before lease commencement and exclude any lease incentives received. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recognized on the consolidated balance sheets. Our leases do not contain any residual value guarantees. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for all its leases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.