Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes both historical information and forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. We have omitted discussion of 2019 results where it would be redundant to the discussion previously included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our results of operations include the results of operations of Iora for the period from the close of our acquisition on September 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. Our actual results may differ materially from management’s expectations and those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, but not limited to, our ability to timely and successfully achieve the anticipated benefits and potential synergies of our acquisition of Iora Health, Inc. and the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and societal and governmental responses as well as those discussed in “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Our mission is to transform health care for all through our human-centered, technology-powered model. Our vision is to delight millions of members with better health and better care while reducing the total cost of care. We are a membership-based primary care platform with seamless digital health and inviting in-office care, convenient to where people work, shop, live and click. We are disrupting health care from within the existing ecosystem by simultaneously addressing the frustrations and unmet needs of key stakeholders, which include consumers, employers, providers, and health networks.
We have developed a modernized healthcare membership model based on direct consumer enrollment and third-party sponsorship across commercially insured and Medicare populations. Our membership model includes seamless access to 24/7 digital health services paired with inviting in-office care routinely covered by most health care payers. Our technology drives high monthly active usage within our membership, promoting ongoing and longitudinal patient relationships for better health outcomes and high member retention. Our technology also helps our service-minded team in building trust and rapport with our members by facilitating proactive digital health outreach as well as responsive on-demand virtual and in-office care. Our digital health services and our well-appointed offices, which tend to be located in highly convenient locations, are staffed by a team of clinicians who are not paid on a fee-for-service basis, and therefore free of misaligned compensation incentives prevalent in health care. Additionally, we have developed clinically and digitally integrated partnerships with health networks, better coordinating more timely access to specialty care when needed by members. Together, this approach allows us to engage in value-based care across all age groups, including through At-Risk arrangements with Medicare Advantage payers and CMS, in which One Medical is responsible for managing a range of healthcare services and associated costs of our members.
Our focus on simultaneously addressing the unfulfilled needs and frustrations of key stakeholders has allowed us to consistently grow the number of members we serve. From December 31, 2016 through December 31, 2021, inclusive of our acquisition of Iora, we grew our membership by 307%. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2016, inclusive of our acquisition of Iora, our net revenue grew 342%, our digital interactions grew 422%, and the number of in-office visits grew 183%. As of December 31, 2021, we have grown to approximately 736,000 total members including 703,000 Consumer and Enterprise members and 33,000 At-Risk members, 182 medical offices in 25 markets, and have greater than 8,500 enterprise clients across the United States.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our operations, and net revenues, expenses, collectability of accounts receivables and other money owed, capital expenditures, liquidity, and overall financial condition.
During the first half of 2020, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted our business, as many of the communities we serve promoted self-isolation practices, and as shelter-in-place requirements were enacted. These measures and practices reduced in-office visits, and also resulted in temporary closures of certain offices and delays in openings of some of our new medical offices which negatively affected our net revenue. Correspondingly, our cost of care as a percentage of net revenue and loss from operations also increased.
Beginning in the second half of 2020, we believe the COVID-19 pandemic helped drive an increase in membership, an increase in total revenue due to new and expanded service offerings, and an increase in our aggregate billable services. COVID-19 has also resulted in an increase in our medical claims expenses for our At-Risk business.
For example, we believe COVID-19 caused our value proposition to resonate with a broader audience of consumers seeking access to primary care, as well as with a broader audience of employers focusing on safely reopening their workplaces and managing the ongoing health and well-being of employees and their families. As a result, we experienced increased demand for our memberships beginning in the second half of 2020.
In addition, we expanded our service offering in part as a response to COVID-19 and launched several new billable services, including:
•COVID-19 testing, and counseling across all of our markets, including in our offices and in several mobile COVID-19 testing sites;
•COVID-19 vaccinations in select geographies;
•Healthy Together, our COVID-19 screening and testing program for employers, schools and universities;
•Mindset by One Medical, our behavioral health service integrated within primary care;
•One Medical Now, an expansion of our 24/7 on-demand digital health solutions to employees of enterprise clients located in geographies where we are not yet physically present; and,
•Remote Visits, where our providers perform typical primary care visits with our members remotely
We believe some of the precautionary measures and challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic may continue or be reinstated. Such actions or events may present additional challenges to our business, financial condition and results of operations. As a result, we cannot assure you that our recent increase in membership, aggregate reimbursement and revenue are indicative of future results or will be sustained, including following the COVID-19 pandemic, or that we will not experience additional impacts associated with COVID-19, which could be significant. Additionally, it is unclear what the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will be on future utilization, medical expense patterns, and the associated impact on our business.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020. Intended to provide economic relief to those impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act includes various tax and lending provisions, among others. Under the CARES Act, we received an income grant of $1.8 million and $2.6 million from the Provider Relief Fund administered by the Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”), which we recognized as Grant income during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Please see Note 5, "Revenue Recognition" to our consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Acquisition of Iora
On September 1, 2021, we acquired all outstanding equity and capital stock of Iora Health, Inc. ("Iora"), a human-centered, value-based primary care group with built-for-purpose technology focused on serving the Medicare population, for an aggregate purchase consideration of approximately $1.4 billion. Iora developed an innovative, technology-enabled, and relationship-based health care delivery model designed to provide value-based primary care and aims to deliver superior health outcomes and lower overall health care costs primarily for the Medicare population. During 2021, we incurred approximately $39.5 million expenses related to this transaction. Our results of operations include the activity of Iora beginning from the close of our acquisition on September 1, 2021. See Note 8, "Business Combinations" to our consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business Model
Our business is driven by growth in Consumer and Enterprise members, and At-Risk members (see also "Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures"). We have developed a modernized membership model based on direct consumer enrollment and third-party sponsorship. Our membership model includes seamless access to 24/7 digital health paired with inviting in-office care routinely covered by most health care payers. Consumer and Enterprise members join either individually as consumers by paying an annual membership fee or are sponsored by a third party. At-Risk members are members for whom we are responsible for managing a range of healthcare services and associated costs. Digital health services are delivered via our mobile app and website, through such modalities as video and voice encounters, chat and messaging. Our in-office care is delivered in our medical offices, and as of December 31, 2021, we had 182 medical offices, compared to 107 medical offices as of December 31, 2020.
We derive net revenue, consisting of Medicare revenue and commercial revenue, from multiple stakeholders, including consumers, employers and health networks such as health systems and government and private payers.
Medicare Revenue
Medicare revenue consists of (i) Capitated Revenue and (ii) fee-for-service and other revenue that is not generated from Consumer and Enterprise members.
We generate Capitated Revenue from At-Risk arrangements with Medicare Advantage payers and CMS. Under these At-Risk arrangements, we generally receive capitated payments, consisting of each eligible member’s risk adjusted health care premium PMPM, for managing a range of healthcare services and associated costs for such members. The risk adjusted health care premium PMPM is determined by payers and based on a variety of patients' factors such as age and demographic benchmarks, and further adjusted to reflect the underlying complexity of a member’s health conditions. These fees give us revenue economics that are contractually recurring in nature for a majority of our Medicare revenue. Capitated Revenue represents 97% of Medicare revenue and 20% of total net revenue, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We generate fee-for-service and other revenue from fee-for-service visits for Other Patients not covered under At-Risk arrangements and from certain payers for clinical start-up, administration, or on-going coordination of care activities associated with providing care to At-Risk members and other Medicare patients.
Commercial Revenue
Commercial revenue consists of (i) partnership revenue (ii) net fee-for-service revenue and (iii) membership revenue.
We generate our partnership revenue from (i) our health network partners with whom we have clinically and digitally integrated, on a PMPM basis, (ii) largely fixed price or fixed price per employee contracts with enterprise clients for medical services and (iii) COVID-19 on-site testing services for enterprise clients, schools and universities where we typically bill such customers a fixed price per service performed. For our health network arrangements that provide for PMPM payments, when our medical offices provide professional clinical services to covered members, we, as administrator, perform billing and collection services on behalf of the health network, and the health network receives the fees for services provided, including those paid by members’ insurance plans. In those circumstances, we earn and receive PMPM payments from the health network partners in lieu of per visit fees for services from member office visits. See “Business-Our Health Network Partnerships.”
Our net fee-for-service revenue primarily consists of reimbursements received from our members' or other patients' health insurance plans or those with billing rates based on our agreements with our health network partners for healthcare services delivered to Consumer and Enterprise members on a fee-for-service basis.
We generate our membership revenue through the annual membership fees charged to either consumer members or enterprise clients, as well as fees paid for our One Medical Now service offering. As of December 31, 2021, our list price for new members for an annual consumer membership was $199. Our enterprise clients typically pay a discounted fee collected in advance, based on a rate per employee per month.
Our membership fee revenue and partnership revenue are contractual and, with the exception of our COVID-19 on-site testing services, generally recurring in nature. Membership revenue and partnership revenue as a percentage of commercial revenue was 63% and 60% for the year ended 2021 and 2020, respectively. Membership revenue and partnership revenue as a percentage of total net revenue was 50% and 60% for the year ended 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
•Acquisition of Net New Members. Our ability to increase our membership will enable us to drive financial growth as members drive our commercial revenue and Medicare revenue. We believe that we have significant opportunities to increase members in our existing geographies through (i) new sales to consumers and enterprise clients, (ii) expansion of the number of enrolled members, including dependents, within our enterprise clients, (iii) expansion of the number of At-Risk members including Medicare Advantage participants or Medicare members for which we are at risk as a result of CMS' Direct Contracting Program, (iv) expansion of Medicare Advantage payers, with whom we contract and (v) adding other potential services.
•Components of Revenue. Our ability to maintain or improve pricing levels for our memberships and the pricing under our contracts with health networks will also impact our total revenue. As of December 31, 2021, our list price for new members for an annual consumer membership was $199. Our enterprise clients typically pay a discounted fee collected in advance, based on a rate per employee per month. In geographies where our health network partners pay us on a PMPM basis for Consumer and Enterprise members, to the extent that the PMPM
rate changes, our partnership revenue will change. Similarly, if the largely fixed price or number of employees covered by fixed price per employee arrangements change or the number of COVID-19 on-site tests or vaccinations changes, our partnership revenue will also change. Our net fee-for-service revenue is dependent on (i) our billing rates and third-party payer contracted rates through agreements with health networks, (ii) the mix of members who are commercially insured and (iii) the nature of visits. Our net fee-for-service revenue may also change based on the services we provide to commercially insured Other Patients as defined in "Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below. Our Medicare revenue is dependent on (i) the percentage of members in at-risk contracts, (ii) our contracted percentage of premium, (iii) our ability to accurately document the acuity of our At-Risk members, and (iv) the services we provide to Other Patients who are Medicare participants. In the future, we may add additional services for which we may charge in a variety of ways. To the extent the net amounts we charge our members, patients, partners, payers and clients change, our net revenue will also change.
•Medical Claims Expense. The nature of our contracting with Medicare Advantage payers and CMS requires us to be financially responsible for a range of healthcare services of our At-Risk members. Our care model focuses on leveraging the primary care setting as a means of reducing unnecessary or avoidable health care costs and balancing the cost of care with the impact of our service on medical claims expense. We are liable for potentially large medical claims should we not effectively manage our At-Risk members’ health. We call the ratio between medical claims expense divided by Capitated Revenue the "Medical Claims Expense Ratio". As we sign up new At-Risk members, our Medical Claims Expense Ratio is likely to increase initially due to a potential increase in medical claims expense from a lag in improvement in health outcomes with member tenure. Similarly, there may be a lag in adequately documenting the health status of our members, resulting in different Capitated Revenue compared to what is indicated by the health status of an At-Risk member. We believe that the Medical Claims Expense Ratio for a given set of At-Risk members can improve over time as we help improve their health outcomes relative to their underlying health conditions.
•Cost of Care, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization. Cost of care primarily includes our provider and support employee-related costs for both virtual and in-office care, occupancy costs, medical supplies, insurance and other operating costs. Providers include doctors of medicine, doctors of osteopathy, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and behavioral health specialists. Support employees include registered nurses, phlebotomists, health coaches, and administrative assistants assisting our members with all non-medical related services. Virtual care includes video visits and other synchronous and asynchronous communication via our app and website. A large portion of these costs are relatively fixed regardless of member utilization of our services. Our care model focuses on leveraging the primary care setting as a means of reducing unnecessary or avoidable health care costs and balancing the cost of care with the impact of increased service levels on medical claims expense. An increase in cost of care may help us in reducing total health care costs for our members. For Consumer and Enterprise members, this reduction in total health care costs typically accrues to the benefit of our enterprise clients or our members' health insurance plans through lower claims costs, or our members through lower deductibles, making our membership more competitive. For our At-Risk members, reductions in total health care costs typically accrue directly to us, to our health network partners such as Medicare Advantage payers and CMS, or to our At-Risk members, making our membership more competitive. As a result, we seek to balance the cost of care based on a variety of considerations. For example, cost of care as a percentage of net revenue may decrease if our net revenue increases. Similarly, our cost of care as a percentage of net revenue may increase if we decide to increase our investments in our providers or support employees to try to reduce our medical claims expense. As we open new offices, and expand into new geographies, we expect cost of care to increase. Our cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, also excludes stock-based compensation.
•Care Margin. Care Margin is driven by net revenue, medical claims expense, and cost of care. We believe we can (i) improve revenue over time by signing up more members and increasing the revenue per member, (ii) reduce Medical Claims Expense Ratio over time from primary care engagement and population health management, improving member health and satisfaction, while reducing the need for avoidable and costly care, and (iii) reduce cost of care as a percentage of revenue by better leveraging our fixed cost base and technology.
•Investments in Growth. We expect to continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in sales and marketing, technology research and development, and existing and new medical offices. We are working to enhance our digital health and technology offering and increase the potential breadth of our modernized platform solution. In particular, we plan to launch new offices and enter new geographies. As we expand to new geographies, we expect to make significant upfront investments in sales and marketing to establish brand awareness and acquire new members. Additionally, we intend to continue to invest in new offices in new and existing geographies. As we invest in new geographies, in the short term, we expect these activities to increase our operating expenses and cost of care; however, in the long term we anticipate that these investments will positively impact our results of operations.
•Seasonality. Seasonality affects our business in a variety of ways. In the near term, we expect these typical seasonal trends to fluctuate due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Medicare Revenue: We recognize Capitated Revenue from At-Risk members ratably over their period of enrollment. We typically experience the largest portion of our At-Risk member growth in the first quarter, as the Medicare Advantage enrollment from the prior Medicare Annual Enrollment Period (“AEP”) becomes effective January 1. Throughout the remainder of year, we can continue to enroll new At-Risk members predominantly through (i) new Medicare Advantage enrollees joining us outside AEP, (ii) through expanding the Medicare Advantage plans we are participating in, and (iii) adding additional geographies where we participate in At-Risk arrangements.
Commercial Revenue: Our partnership and membership revenue are predominantly driven by the number of Consumer and Enterprise members, and recognized ratably over the period of each contract. While Consumer and Enterprise members have the opportunity to buy memberships throughout the year, we typically experience the largest portion of our Consumer and Enterprise member growth in the first and fourth quarter of each year, when enterprise customers tend to make and implement decisions on their employee benefits. Our net fee-for-service revenue is typically highest during the first and fourth quarter of each year, when we generally experience the highest levels of reimbursable visits.
Medical Claims Expense: Medical claims expense is driven by our At-Risk members and varies seasonally depending on a number of factors, including the weather and the number of business days in a quarter. Typically, we experience higher utilization levels during the first and fourth quarter of the year.
Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including members, Medical Claims Expense Ratio, Care Margin and Adjusted EBITDA, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our business plan and make strategic decisions. These key metrics are presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Care Margin and Adjusted EBITDA are not financial measures of, nor do they imply, profitability. We have not yet achieved profitability and, even in periods when our net revenue exceeds our cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, we may not be able to achieve or maintain profitability. The relationship of operating loss to cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization is also not necessarily indicative of future performance.
Other companies may not publish similar metrics, or may present similarly titled key metrics that are calculated differently. As a result, similarly titled measures presented by other companies may not be directly comparable to ours and these key metrics should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as net loss. We provide investors and other users of our financial information with a reconciliation of Care Margin and Adjusted EBITDA to their most closely comparable GAAP financial measure. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any single financial measure and to view Care Margin and Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with loss from operations and net loss, respectively.
Members
Members include both Consumer and Enterprise members as well as At-Risk members as defined below. Our number of members depends, in part, on our ability to successfully market our services directly to consumers including Medicare-eligible as well as non-Medicare eligible individuals, to Medicare Advantage health plans and Medicare Advantage enrollees, to employers that are not yet enterprise clients, as well as our activation rate within existing enterprise clients. We define estimated activation rate for any enterprise client at a given time as the percentage of eligible lives enrolled as members. While growth in the number of members is an important indicator of expected revenue growth, it also informs our management of the areas of our business that will require further investment to support expected future member growth. Member numbers as of the end of each period are rounded to the thousands.
Consumer and Enterprise Members
A Consumer and Enterprise member is a person who has registered with us and has paid for membership for a period of at least one year or whose membership has been sponsored by an enterprise or other third party under an agreement having a term of at least one year. Consumer and Enterprise members do not include trial memberships, our virtual only One Medical Now users, or any temporary users. Our number of Consumer and Enterprise members depends, in part, on our ability to successfully market our services directly to consumers and to employers that are not yet enterprise clients and our activation rate within existing clients. Consumer and Enterprise members may include individuals who are: (i) Medicare-eligible and (ii) have paid for a membership or whose membership has been sponsored by an enterprise or other third party. Consumer and Enterprise members do not include any At-Risk members as defined below. Consumer and Enterprise members help drive commercial revenue. As of December 31, 2021, we had 703,000 Consumer and Enterprise members.
At-Risk Members
An At-Risk member is a person for whom we are responsible for managing a range of healthcare services and associated costs. At-Risk members help drive Medicare revenue. As of December 31, 2021, we had 33,000 At-Risk members.
Members (in thousands)*
*Number of members is shown as of the end of each period.
Other Patients
An “Other Patient” is a person who is neither a Consumer and Enterprise member nor an At-Risk member, and who has received digital or in-person care from us over the last twelve months. As of December 31, 2021, we had 21,000 Other Patients.
Medical Claims Expense Ratio
We define Medical Claims Expense Ratio as medical claims expense divided by Capitated Revenue. The nature of our contracting with Medicare Advantage payers and CMS requires us to be financially responsible for a range of healthcare services of our At-Risk members. Our care model focuses on leveraging the primary care setting as a means of reducing unnecessary or avoidable health care costs and balancing our cost of care with the impact of our service levels on medical claims expense. We are liable for potentially large medical claims should we not effectively manage our At-Risk members’ health. We therefore consider the Medical Claims Expense Ratio to be an important measure to monitor our performance. As we sign up new At-Risk members or open new offices to serve these members, our Medical Claims Expense Ratio is likely to increase initially due to a potential increase in medical claims expense from a lag in improvement in health outcomes with member tenure. Similarly, there may be a lag in adequately documenting the health status of our members, resulting in different Capitated Revenue compared to what is indicated by the health status of an At-Risk member. We believe that the Medical Claims Expense Ratio for a given set of At-Risk members can improve over time as we help improve their health outcomes relative to their underlying health conditions.
The following table provides a calculation of the Medical Claims Expense Ratio for the year ended December 31, 2021:
Medical Claims Expense Ratio Cohort Trends: 2017 to 2021
The following graph presents the historical Medical Claims Expense Ratio trended by Medicare Advantage At-Risk members by sign-up year. We believe the 2017 to 2021 cohorts are a fair representation of our overall patient population because they include patients across geographies and demographics.
(1) At-Risk members are included in our members count beginning from the acquisition date of September 1, 2021.
The following graph presents our Medicare Advantage At-Risk members by sign-up year. We believe the 2017 to 2021 cohorts are a fair representation of our overall patient population because they include patients across geographies and demographics.
(1) At-Risk members are included in our members count beginning from the acquisition date of September 1, 2021.
Care Margin
We define Care Margin as income or loss from operations excluding depreciation and amortization, general and administrative expense and sales and marketing expense. We consider Care Margin to be an important measure to monitor our performance, specific to the direct costs of delivering care. We believe this margin is useful to both us and investors to measure whether we are effectively pricing our services and managing the health care and associated costs, including medical claims expense and cost of care, of our At-Risk members successfully.
The following table provides a reconciliation of loss from operations, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to Care Margin:
*Includes stock-based compensation
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income or loss excluding interest income, interest and other expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, change in the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant
liability, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, certain legal or advisory costs, and acquisition and integration costs that we do not consider to be expenses incurred in the normal operation of the business. Such legal or advisory costs may include but are not limited to expenses with respect to evaluating potential business combinations, legal investigations, or settlements. Acquisition and integration costs include expenses incurred in connection with the closing and integration of acquisitions, which may vary significantly and are unique to each acquisition. We started to exclude prospectively from our presentation certain legal or advisory costs from the first quarter of 2021 and acquisition and integration costs from the second quarter of 2021, because amounts incurred in the prior periods were insignificant relative to our consolidated operations. We include Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report because it is an important measure upon which our management assesses and believes investors should assess our operating performance. We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure to both management and investors because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, including:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash used for capital expenditures for such replacements or for new capital expenditures;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include the dilution that results from stock-based compensation or any cash outflows included in stock-based compensation, including from our purchases of shares of outstanding common stock; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA, calculated as set forth above:
(1) Approximately $5.6 million of the legal or advisory costs relate to a legal settlement during the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 17 "Commitments and Contingencies".
(2) Amount excludes approximately $1.2 million of legal or advisory costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. We began excluding certain legal or advisory costs from Adjusted EBITDA starting from the first quarter of 2021.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate net revenue through Medicare revenue and commercial revenue. We generate Medicare revenue from Capitated Revenue, and fee-for-service and other revenue. We generate commercial revenue from partnership revenue, net fee-for-service revenue, and membership revenue.
Capitated Revenue. We generate Capitated Revenue from At-Risk arrangements with payers including Medicare Advantage plans and CMS. Under these At-Risk arrangements, we receive capitated payments, consisting of each eligible member’s risk adjusted health care premium per month ("PMPM"), for managing a range of healthcare services and associated costs for such members. The risk adjusted health care premium per month is determined by payers and based on a variety of a patient's factors such as age and demographic benchmarks, and further adjusted to reflect the underlying complexity of a member’s health conditions. Capitated Revenue is recognized in the month in which eligible members are entitled to receive healthcare benefits during the contract term. We expect our Capitated Revenue to increase as a percentage of total net revenue in future periods.
Fee-For-Service and Other Revenue. We generate fee-for-service and other revenue from fee-for-service visits for Other Patients not covered under At-Risk arrangements and from certain payers for clinical start-up, administration, on-going coordination of care activities associated with providing care to At-Risk members and other Medicare patients.
Partnership Revenue. We generate partnership revenue from (i) our health network partners on a PMPM basis, (ii) largely fixed price or fixed price per employee contracts with enterprise clients for medical services and (iii) COVID-19 on-site testing services for enterprise clients, schools and universities for which we typically bill such customers a fixed price per service performed. Under our partnership arrangements, we generally receive fees that are linked to PMPM, fixed price, fixed price per employee, fixed price per service, or capitation arrangements. All partnership revenue is recognized during the period in which we are obligated to provide professional clinical services to the member, employee, or participant, as applicable, and associated management, operational and administrative services to the health network partner, enterprise client, schools and universities.
Net fee-for-service revenue. We generate net fee-for-service revenue from providing primary care services to patients in our offices when we bill the member or their insurance plan on a fee-for-service basis as medical services are rendered. While significantly all of our patients are members, we occasionally also provide care to non-members.
Membership Revenue. We generate membership revenue from the annual membership fees charged to either consumer members or enterprise clients, who purchase access to memberships for their employees and dependents. Membership revenue also includes fees we receive from enterprise clients for trial memberships or for access to our One Medical Now service offering. Membership revenue is recognized ratably over the contract period with the individual member or enterprise client.
Grant Income. Under the CARES Act, we were eligible for and received grant income from the Provider Relief Fund administered by HHS during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The purpose of the payment is to reimburse us for healthcare-related expenses or lost revenues attributable to COVID-19.
The following table summarizes the Company's net revenue by primary source as a percentage of net revenue. Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
Operating Expenses
Medical Claims Expense
Medical claims expenses primarily consist of certain third-party medical expenses paid by payers contractually on behalf of us, including costs for inpatient and outpatient services, certain pharmacy benefits and physician services but excludes cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization. We expect our medical claims expense to increase in absolute dollars as our Capitated Revenue increases in future periods.
Cost of Care, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization
Cost of care primarily includes provider and support employee-related costs for both virtual and in-office care, occupancy costs, medical supplies, insurance and other operating costs. Providers include doctors of medicine, doctors of osteopathy, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and behavioral health specialists. Support employees include registered nurses, phlebotomists, health coaches, and administrative assistants assisting our members with all non-medical related services. Virtual care includes video visits and other synchronous and asynchronous communication via our app and website. A large portion of these costs are relatively fixed regardless of member utilization of our services. As we open new offices, and expand into new geographies, we expect cost of care to increase. Our cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, also excludes stock-based compensation.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs, commissions and stock-based compensation costs for our employees engaged in marketing, sales, account management and sales support. Sales and marketing expenses also include advertising production and delivery costs of communications materials that are produced to generate greater awareness and engagement among our clients and members, third-party independent research, trade shows and brand messages and public relations costs.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase as we strategically invest to expand our business. We expect to hire additional sales personnel and related account management and sales support personnel to capture an increasing amount of our market opportunity. We also expect to continue our brand awareness and targeted marketing campaigns. As we scale our sales and marketing, we expect these expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs and stock-based compensation for all employees except sales and marketing teams, which are included in the sales and marketing expenses. In addition, general and administrative expenses include corporate technology, occupancy costs, legal and professional services expenses.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over time due to the additional costs associated with continuing to grow our business.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization consist primarily of depreciation of property and equipment and amortization of capitalized software development costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income consists of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities.
Interest and Other Expense
Interest and other expense consists of interest costs associated with our notes payable issued pursuant to the loan and security agreement with an institutional lender (the “LSA”) and our convertible senior notes (the “2025 Notes”). On September 1, 2020, the term loans pursuant to the LSA matured and the remaining outstanding principal was repaid, plus accrued and unpaid interests. Interest and other expense also consists of remeasurement adjustment related to our indemnification asset. Upon the close of the Iora acquisition, as part of the Merger Agreement, certain shares of our common stock were placed into a third-party escrow account to satisfy any then pending and unsatisfied or unresolved claim for indemnification for any indemnifiable loss incurred by us pursuant to the indemnity provisions of the Merger Agreement. The indemnification asset is subject to remeasurement at each reporting date until the shares are released from escrow, with the remeasurement adjustment reported as interest and other expense in our consolidated statement of operations.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
Prior to our initial public offering in January 2020, we classified our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants as a liability in our consolidated balance sheets. We remeasured the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value at each reporting date and recognized changes in the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability as a component of other income (expense), net in our consolidated statements of operations.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering, the warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock became exercisable for shares of common stock, at which time we adjusted the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value prior to reclassifying the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. As a result, following the closing of our initial public offering, the warrants are no longer subject to fair value accounting.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In determining whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is necessary, we analyze both positive and negative evidence related to the realization of deferred tax assets and inherent in that, assess the likelihood of sufficient future taxable income. We also consider the expected reversal of deferred tax liabilities and analyze the period in which these would be expected to reverse to determine whether the taxable temporary difference amounts serve as an adequate source of future taxable income to support the realizability of the deferred tax assets.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
In September 2014, we entered into a joint venture agreement with a healthcare system to jointly operate physician-owned primary care offices in a market. We had the responsibility for the provision of medical services and for the day-to-day operation and management of the offices, including the establishment of guidelines for the employment and compensation of the physicians. Based upon this and other provisions of the operating agreement that indicated that we directed the economic activities that most significantly affect the economic performance of the joint venture, we determined that the joint venture was a variable interest entity and we were the primary beneficiary. Accordingly, we consolidated the joint venture and the healthcare system’s interest was shown within equity (deficit) as noncontrolling interest. The healthcare system’s share of earnings was recorded in the consolidated statements of operations as net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest.
Effective April 1, 2020, we terminated the joint venture agreement with the healthcare system and transferred our ownership interest in the joint venture to the healthcare system. As a result, we determined that the joint venture no longer met the definition of a variable interest entity and accordingly, we determined that the joint venture was no longer required to be consolidated under the variable interest entity model. The joint venture was deconsolidated in the consolidated financial statements as of April 1, 2020 and we derecognized all assets and liabilities of the joint venture. We did not record a gain or loss in association with the deconsolidation as we did not retain any noncontrolling interest in the joint venture and no consideration was transferred as a result of the ownership interest transfer to the healthcare system.
The consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes the operations of the joint venture through the date of deconsolidation. The consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
and the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 do not include the operations of the joint venture.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our net revenue for those periods. Percentages presented in the following tables may not sum due to rounding.
(1)Includes stock-based compensation, as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenue
nm - not meaningful
Medicare revenue increased $130.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was due to revenue contribution from our acquisition of Iora on September 1, 2021.
Commercial revenue increased $113.1 million, or 30%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in Consumer and Enterprise members by 154,000, or 28%, from 549,000 as of December 31, 2020 to 703,000 as of December 31, 2021.
Partnership revenue increased $64.6 million, or 40%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily a result of the new and expanded partnerships with health networks and increased members, in addition to an increase in the COVID-19 on-site testing services for employers, schools and universities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net fee-for-service revenue increased $32.1 million, or 21%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in aggregate billable services driven by an increase in billable in-office and remote visits, partially offset by a decrease in COVID-19 testing visits for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Membership revenue increased $17.2 million, or 25%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in Consumer and Enterprise members by 154,000, or 28%, from 549,000 as of December 31, 2020 to 703,000 as of December 31, 2021.
Operating Expenses
Medical claims expense
Medical claims expense increased $116.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increases were due to medical claims expenses from our acquisition of Iora on September 1, 2021.
Cost of Care, Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization
The $83.7 million, or 36%, increase in cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to increases in provider employee and support employee-related expenses of $48.3 million, occupancy costs of $16.8 million, COVID-19 testing site and related security expenses of $7.5 million and medical supply costs of $7.3 million. In addition to growth in our existing offices, we added 75 offices during the year, bringing our total number of offices to 182 as of December 31, 2021. The cost of care in 2021 included cost of care from Iora from September 1, 2021 through the year end.
Cost of care, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, as a percentage of net revenue decreased from 62% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 51% for the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease was due to the impact of the Iora acquisition on September 1, 2021.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $25.0 million, or 68%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $16.9 million increase in advertising expenses and a $7.6 million increase in employee-related expenses. The sales and marketing expenses in 2021 included sales and marketing expenses from our acquired Iora business from September 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
General and Administrative
The $165.8 million, or 105%, increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to higher employee-related expenses by $97.3 million, $75.5 million of which was related to stock-based compensation expense and the remainder of which was related to salaries and benefits as we expanded our team to support our growth. In addition, legal and professional services expenses increased by $54.9 million, $5.6 million of which relates to expenses incurred in connection with the legal settlement during the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 17 "Commitments and Contingencies" in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The remainder of the increase in legal and professional services expenses primarily relates to expenses incurred in connection with the Iora acquisition. The general and administrative expenses in 2021 included general and administrative expenses from Iora from September 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $24.1 million, or 108%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. This was primarily due to depreciation and amortization expenses recognized related to new medical offices, capitalization of software development, upgraded office software, and the Iora acquisition during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income
Interest income decreased $1.0 million, or 56%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was due to higher amortization of premiums from marketable securities, partially offset by higher interest rates and investment yields, as well as interest income from the note receivable issued in connection with the Iora acquisition prior to September 1, 2021.
Interest and Other Expense
Interest and other expense increased $0.3 million, or 2% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the payment of cash interest, amortization of the issuance costs on our 2025 Notes, and an unrealized loss recorded for the indemnification asset recognized as a result of the Iora acquisition, mostly offset
by elimination of debt discount amortization on our 2025 Notes issued in the second quarter of 2020 as a result of the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
nm - not meaningful
The change in fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability decreased $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. Upon the closing of our initial public offering in the first quarter of 2020, the warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock were automatically converted to warrants to purchase shares of common stock, at which time we adjusted the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value prior to reclassifying the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. As a result, following the closing of the initial public offering in the first quarter of 2020, the warrants are no longer subject to fair value accounting.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
nm - not meaningful
The provision for (benefit from) income taxes increased $1.7 million from a benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to a benefit of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to impact of amortization on book basis identified intangibles, establishing a valuation allowance and state tax law changes.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
nm - not meaningful
The $0.7 million decrease in net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 was due to the deconsolidation of the joint venture as of April 1, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily with the issuance of the 2025 Notes, our initial public offering, the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock, and to a lesser extent, the issuance of term notes under credit
facilities. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $501.9 million, compared to $683.0 million as of December 31, 2020. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next twelve months. We believe we will meet longer-term expected future cash requirements and obligations through a combination of available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, cash flows from operating activities, and access to private and public financing sources. We expect capital expenditures to increase in future periods to support growth initiatives in existing and new markets.
On September 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Iora, a human-centered, value-based primary care group with built-for-purpose technology focused on serving the Medicare population, for an aggregate purchase consideration of $1.4 billion, which was paid in part through the issuance of shares of our common stock with a fair value of $1.3 billion, in part by cash of $62.9 million, and in part by stock options of Iora assumed by 1Life towards pre-combination services of $48.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred costs related to this acquisition of $39.5 million.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our pace of new member growth and expanded enterprise client and health network relationships, our pace and timing of expansion of new medical offices in existing and new markets, the timing and extent of spend to support the expansion of sales, marketing and development activities, acquisitions and related costs, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations would be harmed. See Part I - Item 1A. to this Annual Report "Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business and Our Industry - In order to support the growth of our business, we may need to incur additional indebtedness or seek capital through new equity or debt financings, which sources of additional capital may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.”
In addition, given the uncertainty around the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot accurately predict at this time the future potential impact of the pandemic on our business, results of operations, financial condition or liquidity.
The Company's material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Debt
In May 2020, we issued $275.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.0% convertible senior notes due June 2025 in a private offering and in June 2020, an additional $41.2 million aggregate principal amount of such notes pursuant to the exercise in full of the over-allotment option by the initial purchasers. The 2025 Notes are unsecured obligations and bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.0% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, commencing on December 15, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the principal amount of debt outstanding from the 2025 Notes was $316.3 million. Total interest expense associated with the convertible senior notes is $33.2 million, of which $9.5 million is due within 12 months.
Leases
We have operating lease arrangements for medical offices and our headquarter office facilities. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $408.1 million, with $51.3 million payable within 12 months.
Other Purchase Obligations
Our other purchase obligations primarily consist of non-cancelable purchase obligations related to professional and technology services and non-cancelable purchase obligations to acquire capital assets. We did not have material non-cancellable purchase obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash used in operating activities was $88.6 million, resulting from our net loss of $254.6 million and net cash used by our working capital of $15.7 million, partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $181.7 million. Cash used by our working capital consisted primarily of a $19.0 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $20.9 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, and a $16.5 million increase in accounts receivables, net, partially offset by an increase of $20.3 million in other liabilities, an increase of $14.3 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable, an increase of $3.4 million in deferred revenue, and a decrease of $2.8 million in inventory and other assets. The increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets is primarily due to $8.9 million prepaid income taxes and a $6.0 million receivable from insurers related to a legal settlement recovery as described in Note 17 "Commitments and Contingencies" to our consolidated financial statements. The increase in other liabilities is primarily due to an indemnification liability of $13.0 million recognized as part of the Iora acquisition as described in Note 8 "Business Combinations", and a legal settlement liability of $11.5 million as described in Note 17 "Commitments and Contingencies". The changes in accounts receivable and deferred revenue are primarily due to timing of billing and cash collections from our health network partners and enterprise clients. The net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses is primarily related to timing of payments for accrued compensation and accrued interest on our 2025 Notes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in operating activities was $4.4 million, resulting from our net loss of $89.4 million and net cash used by our working capital needs of $3.1 million, largely offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $82.0 million. The cash decrease resulting from changes in our working capital in 2020 consisted primarily of a $35.2 million increase in accounts receivables, net, a $12.2 million decrease in operating lease liabilities and a $4.9 million increase in inventories and other assets, partially offset by an increase of $27.1 million in accrued expenses and accounts payable, an increase of $16.6 million in deferred revenue, a decrease of $6.5 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase of $5.1 million in other liabilities. The increase in accounts receivable, net and deferred revenue is primarily due to growth of our partnership with health networks and growth of our enterprise and on-site clients. The net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses is primarily related to timing of payments for accrued compensation and accrued interest on our 2025 Notes.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash provided by investing activities was $291.8 million, resulting primarily from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $624.0 million, partially offset by purchases of marketable securities of $215.3 million, acquisition of business and issuance of note receivable of $53.3 million and purchases of property and equipment of $63.6 million related to leasehold improvements, computer equipment, and furniture and fixtures for new offices, remodels and improvements to existing offices, capitalization of internal-use software development costs, and office hardware and software.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used by investing activities was $514.5 million, resulting primarily from purchases of marketable securities of $963.3 million and purchases of property and equipment, net of $63.7 million related to leasehold improvements, computer equipment, and furniture and fixtures for new offices, remodels and improvements to existing offices, capitalization of internal-use software development costs, and office hardware and software. This was partially offset by sales and maturities of marketable securities of $513.3 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash provided by financing activities was $27.8 million, resulting primarily from exercise of stock options of $22.8 million and proceeds from employee stock purchase plan of $5.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash provided by financing activities was $604.5 million, resulting primarily from proceeds from the issuance of our 2025 Notes of $316.3 million, our initial public offering of $281.8 million,
exercises of stock options and warrants of $35.8 million, proceeds from the issuance of stock under our employee stock purchase plan of $4.8 million, offset by payment of the 2025 Notes issuance costs of $9.4 million, payment of offering costs associated with our initial public offering net against reimbursements for our secondary offering of $20.5 million and payment of a debt obligation of $3.3 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our future financial statements will be affected.
While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies," to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations
Accounting for business combinations requires us to allocate the fair value of purchase considerations to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values, which were determined primarily using the income method. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identified assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, revenue growth rates, medical claims expense, cost of care expenses, operating expenses, trademark royalty rate, contributory asset charges, discount rate, contract terms and useful life from acquired payer contracts with Medicare Advantage plans and CMS.
Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the useful life, whereas any indefinite lived intangible assets, including goodwill, are not amortized. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the five-step method described in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We generate net revenue through Medicare revenue and commercial revenue. We generate Medicare revenue primarily from Capitated At-Risk arrangements with Medicare Advantage payers and CMS. We generate commercial revenue from partnership revenue, net fee-for-service revenue and membership revenue. We recognize partnership revenue from contracts with health systems to provide professional clinical services and the associated management and administrative services. Our contracts with health systems contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on their relative standalone selling price. We determine standalone selling price, or SSP, for all our performance obligations using observable inputs, such as standalone sales and historical contract pricing. SSP is consistent with our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration the type of services. SSP also reflects the amount we would charge for that performance obligation if it were sold separately in a standalone sale, and the price we would sell to similar customers in similar circumstances.
We review the contract terms and conditions to evaluate the timing and amount of revenue recognition; the related contract balances; and our remaining performance obligations. For our contracts with health systems, we estimate the variable consideration related to customer rebates or discounts based on our assessment of historical, current, and forecasted performance. These evaluations require significant judgment that could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized.
The transaction price for our capitated At-Risk arrangements with payers including Medicare Advantage payers and CMS is variable as it primarily includes PMPM fees for our At-Risk members. PMPM fees can fluctuate throughout the contract based on the health status (acuity) of each individual member. In certain contracts, PMPM fees also include “risk adjustments” for items such as risk shares. The adjustment to the PMPM fees must be estimated due to reporting lag times, and requires significant judgment. These are estimated using the expected value methodology based on historical data and actuarial inputs. Final adjustments related to the contracts may take up to 18 months due to reserves for claims incurred but not reported. The Capitated Revenue, net of risk shares and adjustments, is recognized in the month in which eligible members are entitled to receive healthcare benefits during the contract term. Subsequent changes in PMPM fees and the amount of revenue to be recognized are reflected through subsequent period adjustments to properly recognize the ultimate capitation amount.
For our capitated revenue arrangements, we concluded that we are the principal, and report revenues on a gross basis. In this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified services before they are transferred to our customers, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment.
Medical Claims Expense
Medical claims expenses are costs for third-party health care service providers that provide medical care to our At-Risk members for which we are contractually obligated to pay through our At-Risk arrangements. The IBNR claims liability is recorded at the contract level and consist of the Company’s Capitated Revenue attributed from enrolled At-Risk members less actual paid medical claims expense. If the Capitated Revenue exceeds the actual medical claims expense at the end of the reporting period, such surplus is recorded as capitated accounts receivable within accounts receivable, net in the consolidated balance sheets. If the actual medical claims expense exceeds the Capitated Revenue, such deficit is recorded as capitated accounts payable within other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. Actual claims expense will differ from the estimated liability due to factors in estimated and actual member utilization of healthcare services, the amount of charges and other factors. We assess our estimates with an independent actuarial expert to ensure our estimates represent the best, most reasonable estimate given the data available to us at the time the estimates are made. The actuarial models consider significant assumptions such as completion factors and per member per month claim trends, as well as other factors such as health care professional contract rate changes, membership volume and demographics, the introduction of new technologies and benefit plan changes.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award.
For stock option awards issued with market-based vesting conditions, the grant date fair value is determined based on multiple stock price paths developed through the use of a Monte Carlo simulation that incorporates into the valuation the possibility that the market condition may not be satisfied. A Monte Carlo simulation requires the use of various assumptions, including the underlying stock price, volatility and the risk-free interest rate as of the valuation date, corresponding to the length of the time remaining in the performance period, and expected dividend yield. The expected term represents the derived service period for the respective tranches, which is the longer of the explicit service period or the period in which the market conditions are expected to be met. Stock-based compensation expense associated with market-based awards is recognized over the derived requisite service using the accelerated attribution method, regardless of whether the market conditions are achieved. If the related market conditions are achieved earlier than the derived service period, the stock-based compensation expense will be recognized as a cumulative catch-up expense from the grant date to that point in time in achieving the share price goal.
We continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected volatility and expected term utilized in our stock-based compensation expense calculation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimates of expected volatility and expected term, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see Note 2, "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" to our consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.