Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Report.
This section generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons. Similar discussion for 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons may be found in the "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" section of our 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 30, 2021.
Overview
We provide a leading, cloud-based platform for digital engagement that delivers insights for revenue growth through interactive webinar experiences, virtual event experiences and multimedia content experiences. Our platform’s portfolio of interactive, personalized and content-rich digital experience products creates and captures actionable, real-time data at scale from millions of professionals every month to provide businesses with buying signals and behavioral insights to efficiently convert prospects into customers.
Similar to what has taken place in the B2C market, our platform for digital engagement empowers B2B companies with insights to better personalize their engagement. Large social media platforms have been successful at leveraging experiences and insights of consumers on their platforms to enable B2C companies to effectively understand their potential consumers. While these have been effective in the B2C market, B2B companies often lack deep insights about prospective customers to effectively understand and engage them.
Businesses today primarily use automated solutions, such as digital advertising and email, for marketing. While these automated solutions reach large numbers of prospective customers, they have generally failed to deepen customer engagement because they were designed with the simple purpose of pushing marketing messages in one direction-from the business to the prospective customer. For businesses to succeed, we believe their sales and marketing strategies must evolve from the era of automation to the era of engagement. Our platform provides an innovative way both to scale digital marketing and deepen prospective customer engagement. We believe our opportunity to help businesses convert digital engagement into revenue will continue to grow as industries modernize their sales and marketing processes.
We sell subscriptions to our platform’s experience products that are backed by analytics and our ecosystem of third-party integrations. Before 2013, we offered services and licensed software for managing webinars and virtual events primarily on a per event basis. In 2013, we transitioned to be a software-as-a-service company with the release of ON24 Elite and ON24 Virtual Conference as cloud-based subscription products. Substantially all of our customers subscribe to ON24 Elite, which enables customers to seamlessly broadcast video-based content and drive real-time interactivity in a single immersive experience. Our customers can host multiple tracks of their webinar experiences as a large-scale virtual event experience using ON24 Virtual Conference.
In 2018, we launched two complementary experience products, ON24 Engagement Hub and ON24 Target, to provide our customers with a system for digital engagement, offering customers the ability to curate and disseminate rich, multimedia content experiences. In addition to our products, we also provide professional services such as experience management, monitoring and premium support services, which provide the opportunity for recurring revenue, as well as implementation and other services.
In 2021, we launched ON24 Breakouts, which expanded the functionality and interactivity of webinars built with ON24 Elite. For example, breakouts enable attendees and presenters to network with each other face-to-face, sales teams to connect immediately with prospects and subject matter experts to offer two-way communication to support customer education and training.
We recently launched ON24 Go Live, which provides a new self-service virtual event solution for companies to stand up live-streaming video events faster and easier. Organizations can build a complete end-to-end external or internal event ranging from roadshows, customer conferences, virtual pop-ups, town halls, and company meetings, using pre-built templates and an easy-to-use and engaging interface.
We deliver our platform products as cloud-based subscriptions that are easy to use and purpose-built for sales and marketing professionals. As of December 31, 2021, we had over 2,100 customers.
Prior to developing our current cloud-based subscription model, we generated revenue from our Legacy offering, which primarily consisted of fully managed events and associated services. In connection with shifting to our current data-driven, cloud-based subscription model, we stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018 and stopped selling it to all customers in 2020. As a result, substantially all Legacy revenue ceased after December 2020.
Table of Contents.
Our revenue was $203.6 million, $156.9 million and $89.1 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, representing a period-over-period increase of 30% and 76% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our revenue, excluding our Legacy offering, was $203.5 million, $154.8 million and $80.7 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, representing, a period-over-period increase of 31% and 92%, respectively. We had a net loss of $24.3 million for 2021, net income of $20.8 million for 2020, and net loss of $17.5 million for 2019.
COVID-19 Update
The recent spread of the Delta and Omicron variants of COVID-19, which appear to be more transmissible than other variants to date, may extend the impact of COVID-19 on our business. The impact of these variants cannot be predicted at this time and could depend on numerous factors, including vaccination rates among the population, the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines against emerging variants, and any new measures that may be introduced by governments or other parties in response to an increase in COVID-19 cases.
As conditions continue to fluctuate around the world, with vaccine administration rising in certain regions, governments and organizations have responded by adjusting their restrictions and guidelines accordingly. Our focus remains on promoting employee health and safety, serving our customers and ensuring business continuity. In compliance with applicable regulations and guidance, we partially reopened our offices in the second half of 2021 for employees who are fully vaccinated and want to work in that office. With different regions recovering at different rates, we continue to evaluate our plans to fully reopen our facilities.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, digital has become the primary way for people to connect, work, learn and be entertained, and for businesses to engage with customers. The imperative to optimize digital sales and marketing investments to drive revenue conversion has become more important as businesses accelerate digital transformation initiatives in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in increased usage of our subscription and other platforms. Our revenue increased by 30% in 2021 compared to 2020, in part due to the impact of COVID-19.
There is no assurance that we will continue to experience such accelerated growth. For example, our revenue growth rate declined in 2021 compared to 2020 and we may face similar declines in future periods as the impact of COVID-19 lessens. If the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subside, particularly as more people get vaccinated, our customers and their users may resume in-person marketing activities in a way that decreases usage of our platform. The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business and financial performance may be influenced by a number of factors, many of which we cannot control, including the emergence of recent and any future variants of the virus, future spikes of COVID-19 infections resulting in additional preventative and mitigative measures, the severity of the economic decline attributable to or influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic, the timing and nature of a potential economic recovery, the impact on our customers and our sales cycles, and our ability to generate new business leads. For additional details, see the section titled “Risk Factors.”
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Acquiring New Customers
We are focused on continuing to grow the number of customers that use our platform. We define a customer as a unique organization, including its subsidiaries and affiliates, that has entered into an agreement for paid access to our platform. A single customer may have multiple agreements with us for separate divisions, subsidiaries or affiliates. Our operating results and growth prospects will depend in part on our ability to attract new customers. While we believe we have a significant market opportunity that our platform addresses, it is difficult to predict customer adoption rates or the future growth rate and size of the market for our platform. We will need to continue to invest in our sales and marketing functions in order to address this opportunity by hiring, developing and retaining talented sales personnel who are able to achieve desired productivity levels in a reasonable period of time.
Despite our strong growth to date, we believe our market is still relatively underpenetrated and, as a result, we see significant opportunity to market our solutions globally. We intend to pursue new customers through specialized and aligned sales teams focused on Enterprise customers and Commercial customers.
Retention and Expansion of ON24 Across Existing Customers
We believe we can achieve significant growth by retaining and further penetrating our existing customer base with the addition of new users and new products, and through upsell and cross sell. Our multi-dimensional land and expand model drives onboarding and allows us to acquire customers via free trials, live demos and continuous engagement with an efficient sales and marketing investment. As we continue to drive more actionable revenue generating marketing insights, we believe that we have a significant opportunity to further increase sales among existing customers across different functional and geographic departments within each respective organization. Our ability to pursue this opportunity will require us to continue to retain our customers, scale our sales and marketing organization and otherwise increase our operating expenses, and we may not be successful on the timetable we anticipate, or at all, for any number of reasons, which may cause our results to vary from period to period.
Table of Contents.
Innovation and Expansion of Our Platform
We plan to continually develop new products that enhance the functionality of our platform, improve our user experiences and drive customer engagement in order to further capitalize on new opportunities. We intend to sell these new solutions to both existing and new customers, to drive an increase in revenue as the breadth and depth of our solutions and use cases expands. We also intend to continue investing in our platform and related infrastructure to improve capacity, security and scalability. These development efforts will require significant investments, some of which may be episodic or otherwise cause our expenses to vary from period to period.
International Expansion
We believe the expansion of real-time, revenue-generating marketing intelligence in international markets is a significant opportunity. For 2021, 2020 and 2019, approximately 26%, 24% and 21%, respectively, of our revenue came from outside the United States. We believe there is a compelling opportunity to expand our solutions internationally, both in countries where we currently operate and countries where we do not yet sell subscriptions to our solutions. Continuing to expand our international operations will require considerable management attention and other resources and may present challenges associated with complying with local expectations, customs, laws and regulations, which may impact our ability to sell subscriptions to our solutions and otherwise cause our results to vary from period to period.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. Our methods for calculating these metrics may differ from similarly titled metrics at other companies, which may hinder comparability with other companies. The following table sets forth as of the dates indicated our number of customers, our annual recurring revenue (ARR), our dollar-based net retention rate (NRR) and our customers contributing at least $100,000 in ARR ($100k Customers) as of the periods presented (in thousands):
Number of Customers
Increasing awareness of our platform and its broad range of capabilities has enabled us to substantially expand our customer base. We define a customer as a unique organization, including its subsidiaries and affiliates, that has entered into an agreement for paid access to our platform. We serve customers of all sizes, ranging from small businesses to global Fortune 100 organizations across a diverse set of industries, including technology, financial services, healthcare, industrial and manufacturing, professional services and B2B information services companies. Our diverse customer base has grown from 760 customers as of December 31, 2015 to over 2,100 customers as of December 31, 2021. We added 128 net customers in 2021 compared to 2020 with our small and midsize customers representing the largest contributor to the increase. Our platform is designed with a long-term view toward our customer relationships and to grow with customers as their needs expand.
Table of Contents.
Annual Recurring Revenue
We believe that ARR is a key metric to measure our business because it is driven by our ability to acquire new subscription customers and to maintain and expand our relationship with existing subscription customers. ARR is calculated as the sum of the annualized value of our subscription contracts as of the measurement date, including existing customers with expired contracts that we expect to be renewed. Our ARR amounts exclude professional services, overages from subscription customers and Legacy revenue. Our ARR as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $171.4 million, $153.4 million and $76.9 million, respectively. Our continued growth of ARR reflects our success in acquiring new customers and expanding subscriptions with existing customers, which was occurring prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, accelerated in 2020 partly in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and has continued to grow in 2021, though at a slower pace.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
We believe NRR is an important metric that provides insight into the long-term value of our subscription agreements and our ability to retain and organically grow revenue from our customers. Our NRR as of a specified period end is calculated by dividing current period ARR by prior period ARR. Prior period ARR is the ARR for all engagement platform customers as of twelve months prior to such period end. Current period ARR is the ARR for the same customers as of the specified period end. Our NRR includes the effect of any customer renewals, expansion, contraction and churn but excludes ARR from customers that were acquired in the twelve months prior to the specified period end. Our NRR is subject to adjustment for mergers, acquisitions, dispositions and similar transactions involving our customers. Our NRR was 97%,149%, and 108% as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The decrease in NRR from 2021 to 2020 was primarily driven by elevated churn within the first-time renewal cohort and existing customers rationalizing their expansions from 2020 to 2021 to align to their post-pandemic needs.
Customers Contributing $100,000 or More to ARR
We believe that our ability to increase our $100k Customers is a key indicator for important components of the growth of our business, including our success in expanding the use of our platform within large organizations. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had 366, 302 and 144 $100k Customers, respectively, demonstrating our continued penetration of larger organizations.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription and Other Platform Revenue
Subscription and other platform revenue primarily consists of subscription fees from customer agreements to access our platform for digital engagement. Our customers do not have the ability to take possession of our software. We recognize subscription revenue on a straight-line basis over the term of the contract beginning on the date access to our platform is granted. Subscription and other platform revenue also includes usage fees from customers who acquire incremental capacity during their contract term. We recognize usage fees on a straight-line basis over the remaining term of the subscription contract, beginning when usage occurs. We expect our subscription revenue to increase over the long-term, depending on our ability to attract new customers and expand usage with current customers, which may fluctuate from period to period.
Subscription and other platform revenue also contains revenue from our Legacy offering, which consists of contracts with customers for which we grant customers access to our platform only for the duration of specific contracted events. Our Legacy revenue is primarily recognized at a point in time as events occur. We stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018, and substantially all subscription and other platform revenue associated with our Legacy offering ceased after December 2020.
Professional Services Revenue
Professional services revenue primarily consists of fees from customer agreements to provide consulting, support for product and platform adoption as well as support for experience management, monitoring and production. The majority of our professional services consists of experience management and monitoring services, which are prepaid rights to a defined number of managed and monitored experiences. Professional services are generally considered distinct from the access provided to our platform. Professional services are available through hourly rate and fixed fee contracts, as well as one-time and ongoing engagements. We recognize revenue from experience management, monitoring and production services in the period the experience occurs and the services are delivered or, if they are not used by the customer, at the end of the subscription term. We recognize revenue from implementation services upon completion of the services. We recognize revenue from premium support offerings on a ratable basis over the subscription term. We expect our professional services revenue to fluctuate in the future based on customer needs. While more of our customers have elected to be “self-service” and not purchase our professional services, the needs of our customer base have grown more complex which may require more expert services. This fluctuation may also include seasonality, with increased customer utilization of our platform in the fourth quarter and decreased utilization in the first quarter, reflecting the timing of our customers’ marketing initiatives and their internal budget cycles.
Table of Contents.
Professional services revenue also contains revenue from our Legacy offering, which consists of event-related services, and is recognized when the event occurs. We stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018 and substantially all professional services revenue associated with our Legacy offering ceased after December 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Subscription and Other Platform Cost of Revenue
Subscription and other platform cost of revenue primarily consists of costs related to hosting our platform and providing operating support services to our customers. These costs are related to our co-located data centers, personnel-related costs such as salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, benefits costs associated with our operations and support personnel, software license fees and allocated overhead. We expect our subscription and other platform cost of revenue to increase in the near term in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue as we continue to invest in our customer success organization, move more of our infrastructure to a hybrid cloud, and expand our infrastructure. Over the long term, we expect our subscription and other platform cost of revenue will also increase in absolute dollars as our subscription revenue increases.
Subscription and other platform cost of revenue also includes Legacy cost of revenue. We stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018 and the Legacy component of subscription and other platform cost of revenue substantially ceased after December 2020.
Professional Services Cost of Revenue
Professional services cost of revenue consists primarily of personnel-related costs, including salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation, third-party consulting services and allocated overhead. We expect our professional services cost of revenue to fluctuate based on customer needs.
Professional services cost of revenue also includes Legacy cost of revenue. We stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018 and substantially all of the Legacy component of professional services cost of revenue ceased after December 2020.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation directly associated with our sales and marketing organization. Other sales and marketing expenses include promotional events to promote our brand, such as awareness programs, digital programs, tradeshows and our annual user conference, software license expenses and allocated overhead. Sales commissions that are directly related to acquiring customer contracts, as well as associated payroll taxes, are deferred upon execution of a contract with a customer, and subsequently amortized to sales and marketing expense. Sales commissions paid upon the initial acquisition of a customer contract are amortized over an estimated period of benefit of five years, as we specifically anticipate renewals of the customer contracts and commissions paid on renewal contracts are not commensurate with commissions paid on new customer contracts. Sales commissions paid upon renewal of customer contracts are amortized over the contractual renewal term. Amortization is recognized on a straight-line basis commensurate with the pattern of revenue recognition. Sales commissions paid related to professional services are amortized over the expected service period. We plan to increase our investment in sales and marketing over the foreseeable future, primarily through increased headcount in our sales and marketing functions and investment in brand- and product marketing efforts. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing expenses will increase in the near term in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue. However, we expect such expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term as our revenue grows, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period depending on fluctuations in the timing and extent of our sales and marketing expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation directly associated with our research and development employees, contractor costs related to third-party development and allocated overhead. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We plan to increase the dollar amount of our investment in research and development for the foreseeable future as we focus on further developing our platform and infrastructure. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses will increase as a percentage of revenue in the near term.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, salaries and benefits for our personnel in executive, finance, legal and human resources organizations. In addition, these expenses include external legal costs, accounting and other consulting services, bad debt expense and allocated overhead.
Table of Contents.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business. In addition, as a public company, we expect to incur increased expenses in the areas of insurance, investor relations and professional services. As a result, we expect the absolute dollar amount of our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future. We expect, however, that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of our revenue over time, although the percentage may fluctuate from period to period.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense incurred on our capital leases and revolving credit facility.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net consists primarily of currency transaction gains or losses, interest income, amortization and accretion on marketable securities, and miscellaneous non-operational income and expense.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Table of Contents.
Results of Operations
We manage and operate as one reportable segment. The discussion below summarizes our results of operations for the periods presented, which we derived from the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods presented:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
Table of Contents.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The increase in total revenue for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by an overall increase in digital engagement platform revenue and partially offset by a decrease in Legacy revenue.
Total digital engagement platform revenue increased $48.7 million, or 31%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily attributable to an increase in subscription and other platform revenue mainly due to increased purchases of our platform by our existing customers, and to a lesser extent increases in our customer base. The increase was offset in part by the decrease of $5.9 million in professional service revenue, primarily reflecting higher than typical demand for our implementation and deployment services in 2020 that continued into the first quarter of 2021. The decline in professional services revenue as a percentage of total revenue also reflects platform improvements that enable more customer self-service, which may cause professional services revenue to continue to decline in future periods.
Total Legacy revenue decreased $2.0 million, or 94%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily attributable to a decrease in subscription and other Legacy platform revenue as we stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018. Substantially all Legacy revenue ceased after December 2020.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Table of Contents.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for 2021 increased $14.0 million, or 42%, compared to 2020, primarily driven by an overall increase in digital engagement platform revenue and partially offset by a decrease in Legacy cost of revenue.
Total digital engagement platform cost of revenue for 2021 increased 15.4 million, or 48%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in subscription and other platform cost of revenue of $13.3 million, and an increase in professional services cost of revenue of $2.1 million. The increase in total digital engagement platform cost of revenue was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel-related expenses of $11.8 million driven by both increased headcount to support our platform and deliver services and increased stock-based compensation expense of $2.1 million. The increase in total digital engagement platform cost of revenue in 2021 also reflected a $2.4 million increase in bandwidth, transmission and software costs due to the expansion of infrastructure and data centers.
Total Legacy cost of revenue for 2021 decreased $1.4 million, or 99%, compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a reduction in headcount and facilities allocation costs as we stopped selling our Legacy offering to new customers in 2018 and substantially all Legacy revenue ceased after December 2020.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 77% for 2021 compared to 79% for 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to the increase in total digital engagement platform cost of revenue, which increased 48%, compared to total digital engagement platform revenue, which increased 31%. We continue to invest in our cloud infrastructure capabilities to enable sustained growth and are also expanding our customer success teams.
We expect gross margin to decrease in 2022 as we continue to invest in our infrastructure, increase our utilization of the public cloud for our newer product offerings and scale our customer success organization.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased $43.4 million, or 72%, in 2021 compared 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel-related expenses of $31.7 million driven by both increased headcount to support the growth in our sales force and increased stock based compensation expense of $7.8 million. The increase in sales and marketing expense was also driven by the increase of $7.7 million in advertising, content marketing and demand generation activity and, the increase of $3.1 million in facilities and other expenses. The increase in sales and marketing expense as a percentage of total revenue was primarily driven by our continued investment to drive market awareness and add sales capacity across regions and segments.
We expect our sales and marketing expense to continue to increase in 2022 to support increased demand for our digital experiences.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased $15.6 million, or 81%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $11.2 million in personnel-related expenses driven by both increased headcount for the development of our solutions and increased stock-based compensation expense of $4.0 million. The increase of $2.6 million in contractor costs for development activities and $1.7 million in facilities and other expenses also contributed to the increase of
Table of Contents.
research and development expense in 2021. We have been ramping our investment in research and development as we accelerate our pace of product innovation and bring new products to the market.
We expect our research and development expense to continue to increase in 2022 as we focus on further developing our platform and infrastructure.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased $19.1 million, or 87%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $12.1 million in personnel-related expenses driven by both increased headcount and increased stock based compensation expense of $8.8 million, as well as an increase of $3.9 million in insurance expense. The increase in general and administrative expense in 2021 was also driven by a $2.0 million increase in professional and legal expenses related to IPO readiness in the first quarter of 2021 and ongoing costs associated with being a public company.
We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in 2022 as we increase the size of our general and administrative function to support the growth of our business.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for 2021 decreased $0.4 million compared 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, we repaid in full the $22.4 million aggregate then outstanding principal balance of our line of credit under the revolving credit facility.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net for 2021 increased $0.6 million compared to 2020, primarily driven by foreign exchange transaction losses.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Table of Contents.
The decrease in provision for income taxes in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by the tax benefits associated with the exercise of stock options and settlement of restricted stock units in a foreign jurisdiction.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $382.6 million. Our investments generally consist of money market funds, certificates of deposit, U.S. Treasury securities and debt securities, all of which are available for use in our current operations. Our liquidity requirements arise primarily from our working capital needs, capital expenditures and debt service requirements. We have historically funded our liquidity requirements through sales of convertible preferred stock, cash generated from our operations, borrowings and availability under our revolving credit facility, and most recently through our IPO.
In February 2021, we closed our IPO in which we sold 7,599,928 shares of our common stock, which included 1,284,139 shares from the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $50 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $347.8 million after deducting the underwriting discount of approximately $26.6 million and offering costs of approximately $5.6 million.
In the first quarter of 2021, we repaid in full the $22.4 million aggregate then outstanding principal balance of our line of credit under the revolving credit facility.
In December 2021, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program allowing us to periodically repurchase up to $50.0 million of our common stock over an 18-month period in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The program may be modified, suspended, or discontinued at any time. We expect any repurchases under the program to extend over multiple quarters. In December 2021 and the first quarter of 2022, we spent $7.2 million and $9.1 million, respectively, on share repurchases. As of March 9, 2022, we had $33.7 million remaining for future share buyback under the repurchase program.
Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been to fund our operations, invest in research and development, purchase investments, and repurchase shares of our common stock.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, subscription renewal activity, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support further sales and marketing and research and development efforts, as well as expenses associated with our international expansion, including the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new office spaces. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, services and technologies, and we may need to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is needed from outside sources, we may not be able to raise the necessary capital or raise the capital on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations and financial condition could be materially and adversely affected.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our customers for subscriptions to use our platform. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are from personnel-related expenditures, costs related to hosting our platform and marketing expenses. Our cash flow from operating activities will continue to be influenced principally by the extent to which we increase spending on our business and our working capital requirements.
Net cash provided by operating activities is primarily impacted by our net income (loss) adjusted for certain non-cash items such as stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, as well as the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities. Our cash flows from operating activities provided net cash of $5.2 million for 2021 compared to $37.5 million for 2020, a decrease of $32.3 million. The decrease was primarily attributable to the $45.0 million increase in net loss and $16.2 million unfavorable changes in operating assets and liabilities between the periods, partially reduced by an increase in non-cash expenses of $28.9 million.
The total non-cash adjustments for 2021 was $48.9 million compared to $20.0 million for 2020. The $28.9 million favorable change of non-cash adjustment was primarily driven by an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $22.7 million and an increase in amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs of $4.1 million.
Table of Contents.
Working capital used cash of $19.5 million for 2021 compared to $3.3 million for 2020, an increase of cash outflow of $16.2 million. The unfavorable change in working capital in the comparative periods were impacted by, among other items, the timing of vendor payments and prepayments, timing of cash receipts from customers, and increased business activities due to company growth.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $219.2 million for 2021 compared to provided cash of $1.0 million for 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in purchases of marketable securities of $230.8 million and an increase in capital expenditures of $2.6 million, partially offset by an increase in proceeds from maturities and paydowns of marketable securities of $13.2 million. Our most significant capital expenditures have been investments in our equipment to support ongoing operations. We expect our capital investment will continue in the future.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $320.5 million for 2021 compared to $0.8 million for 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the proceeds of $353.4 million from our IPO, net of underwriting discounts and a decrease in principal repayments of $5.6 million on our line of credit, partially offset by a decrease in borrowings of $28.4 million from our line of credit, as well as by our $7.2 million spending on share repurchases in December 2021 and payment of tax withholding obligation of $3.6 million related to net share settlement on option exercise and RSU releases in 2021.
Debt Obligations
Revolving Credit Facility
In September 2021, we amended our revolving credit facility with Comerica Bank with an effective date of August 31, 2021, which increases our borrowing capacity to a maximum of $50.0 million with a letter of credit sublimit of $4.0 million and a credit card sublimit of $1.0 million. The amendment allows us to borrow up to $50.0 million if we maintain at least $100.0 million on deposit with Comerica Bank. If such deposit is less than $100.0 million, we may borrow up to the lesser of $50.0 million or an amount determined by our trailing five months of recurring revenue, annualized renewal rate and annualized monthly churn rate. The terms of the agreement permit voluntary prepayment without premium or penalty. The revolving credit facility matures in August 2024 and is secured by substantially all of our assets. We are required to pay a quarterly commitment fee of 0.15% per annum on the undrawn portion available under the revolving line of credit.
Outstanding principal amounts on the revolving credit facility incur interest at a rate equal to Comerica Bank’s prime referenced rate, as defined in the loan agreement. Prior to August 31, 2021, interest on the revolving line of credit was the prime rate, as published by the Wall Street Journal, plus 0.75% effective July 31, 2020. The referenced prime rate was 3.25% as of December 31, 2021 and the prime rate was 3.25% as of December 31, 2020.
We borrowed $22.4 million against the revolving credit facility as of December 31, 2020, which was repaid in full during the first quarter of 2021. We incurred an immaterial amount of interest expense prior to our full repayment of the principal outstanding under our line of credit in the first quarter of 2021.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our non-cancelable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Amounts primarily represent our commitment under various software license and co-location facilities and services agreements. See Note 7 to consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Table of Contents.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those accounting policies and estimates that are both the most important to the portrayal of our net assets and results of operations and require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These estimates are developed based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Critical accounting estimates are accounting estimates where the nature of the estimates are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change and the impact of the estimates on financial condition or operating performance is material.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenue from subscription agreements with customers for access to our platform and related services. We recognize revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for promised goods or services. We apply the following five-step revenue recognition model in accounting for our revenue arrangements:
1. Identification of the contract, or contracts, with the customer
We determine a contract with a customer to exist when the contract is approved, each party’s rights regarding the services to be transferred can be identified, the payment terms for the services can be identified, the customer has the ability and intent to pay, and the contract has commercial substance. At contract inception, we will evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract and whether the combined or single contract includes more than one performance obligation. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience or, in the case of a new customer, credit and financial information pertaining to the customer.
2. Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
Performance obligations committed in a contract are identified based on the services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the services and the products is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
Our performance obligations generally consist of access to our digital engagement platform and related support services, which, together, are considered one performance obligation. Our customers do not have the ability to take possession of our software, and through access to our platform we provide a series of distinct software-based services that are satisfied over the term of the subscription. Customers may also purchase incremental capacity to our digital engagement platform. We recognize incremental access as a series of distinct software-based services that are satisfied over the remaining term of the subscription. Our Legacy offering includes performance obligations to provide customers with access to our platform for the duration of specific contracted events, and revenue is recognized primarily as events occur. Amounts related to our digital engagement platform and our Legacy offering are recorded as subscription and other platform revenue in the consolidated statements of operations.
We also provide professional services, which include consulting services, such as experience management, monitoring and production services, implementation services and premium support services. Professional services are generally considered distinct from the access to our digital engagement platform. Amounts are recorded as Professional Services revenue in the consolidated statements of operations.
We enter into contracts with customers that regularly include promises to transfer multiple services through access to our platform. For arrangements with multiple services, we evaluate whether the individual services qualify as distinct performance obligations. In our assessment of whether a service is a distinct performance obligation, we determine whether the customer can benefit from the service on its own or with other readily available resources and whether the service is separately identifiable from other services in the contract. This evaluation requires us to assess the nature of each individual service offering and how the services are provided in the context of the contract, including whether the services are significantly integrated, highly interrelated or significantly modify each other, which may require judgment based on the facts and circumstances of the contract.
3. Determination of the transaction price
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring services to the customer. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur. We apply the practical expedient in Topic 606 paragraph 10-32-18 and do not adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component for contracts that are one year or less, and none of our multi-year contracts contain a significant financing
Table of Contents.
component. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers which are subsequently remitted to governmental entities, such as sales and other indirect taxes.
Our digital engagement platform and related support services are typically warranted to perform in a professional manner that will comply with the terms of the subscription agreements. In addition, we include service level commitments to our customers warranting certain levels of uptime reliability and performance and permitting those customers to receive credits in the event that we fail to meet those service levels. These credits represent a form of variable consideration. Historically, we have not experienced any significant incidents affecting the defined levels of reliability and performance as required by the subscription agreements. We have not provided any material refunds related to these agreements in the consolidated financial statements during the periods presented.
4. Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on each performance obligation’s relative standalone selling price, or the SSP. The SSP is the price at which we would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. In instances where we do not sell or price a product or service separately, establishing SSP requires significant judgement. We estimate the SSP by considering available information, such as market conditions, internally approved pricing guidelines and the underlying cost of delivering the performance obligation.
5. Recognition of the revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied
Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring the control of the promised service to a customer. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those services. We recognize subscription revenue on a straight-line basis over the term of the applicable contract subscription period beginning on the date access to our platform is granted. We recognize revenue from consulting services related to events in the period the event occurs and the service is delivered. We recognize revenue from implementation services upon completion of the services. We recognize revenue from premium support offerings on a ratable basis over the applicable subscription term.
Costs to Obtain a Contract
We capitalize sales commissions and associated payroll taxes paid to internal sales personnel and third-party referral fees that are incremental to the acquisition of customer contracts. These costs are recorded as deferred contract acquisition costs on our consolidated balance sheets. We determine whether costs should be deferred based on our sales compensation plans and if the commissions are incremental and would not have occurred absent the customer contract.
Sales commissions paid upon the initial acquisition of a customer contract are amortized over an estimated period of benefit of five years, as we specifically anticipate renewals of customer contracts and commissions paid on renewal contracts are not commensurate with commissions paid on new customer contracts. Sales commissions paid upon renewal of customer contracts are amortized over the contractual renewal term. Amortization is recognized on a straight-line basis commensurate with the pattern of revenue recognition. Sales commissions paid related to professional services are amortized over the expected service period. We determine the period of benefit for commissions paid for the acquisition of the initial customer contract by taking into consideration the initial estimated customer life and the technological life of our platform and related significant features. Amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs is included in sales and marketing expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We issue stock-based compensation awards to employees in the form of restricted stock awards and stock options. We measure stock-based compensation expense related to these awards based on the fair value of the awards on the date of grant and recognize stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the awards, which generally equals the vesting period. Effective January 1, 2021, we elected to account for forfeited awards as they occur. Prior to 2021, we estimated forfeitures at the time of grant and revised those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from our estimates. This change in accounting policy did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Stock options we grant to employees generally vest over four years. We have selected the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock option awards, which model requires management to apply judgment and make highly subjective assumptions and estimates.
These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. Prior to our IPO, the fair value was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and valuation reports prepared by independent third-party valuation firms. For valuations of option grants made after the closing of our IPO, our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant, or other relevant determination date, as reported on the New York Stock Exchange.
Table of Contents.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the options was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant.
•Expected Term. The expected term of options represents the period of time that options are expected to be outstanding. Our historical stock option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate an expected term due to a lack of sufficient data. For stock options granted to employees, we estimate the expected term by using the simplified method. The simplified method calculates the expected term as the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For stock options granted to nonemployees, the expected term equals the contractual term of the option.
•Expected Volatility. As we do not have a trading history for our common stock prior to the IPO, the expected volatility was estimated by taking the average historic price volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in our industry which are either similar in size, stage of life cycle, or financial leverage, over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards.
•Expected Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently plan to declare or pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, an expected dividend yield of zero percent was used.
The Black-Scholes assumptions used in evaluating our employee stock options are as follows:
Restricted stock awards we grant to employees generally vest over three to four years. Stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards is based on the closing market value of our common stock at the date of grant and is recognized as expense ratably over the requisite service period.
Common Stock Valuations
For periods prior to the closing of our IPO, the fair value of our business, or enterprise value, was determined using either the market approach or a combination of the market and income approaches. The market approach estimates value based on a comparison of the subject company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined and then applied to the subject company’s financial results to estimate the value of the subject company. The income approach estimates the fair value of a company based on the present value of the company’s future estimated cash flows and the residual value of the company beyond the forecast period. These future cash flows, including the cash flows beyond the forecast period for the residual value, are discounted to their present values using an appropriate discount rate, to reflect the risks inherent in the company achieving these estimated cash flows.
For valuations prior to October 1, 2019, the resulting equity value is then allocated to each class of stock using the Option Pricing Method, or the OPM. The OPM treats common stock and convertible preferred stock as call options on an equity value, with exercise prices based on the liquidation preference of our convertible preferred stock. The common stock is modeled as a call option with a claim on the equity value at an exercise price equal to the remaining value immediately after our convertible preferred stock is liquidated. For valuations as of and subsequent to October 1, 2019, we have used a hybrid method utilizing a combination of the OPM and the probability-weighted expected return method, which includes a probability-weighted analysis of varying values for our common stock assuming possible future events for our company, including scenarios for completing an initial public offering, completing an acquisition, and remaining a private company. Prior October 1, 2019, we believed the use of the OPM was appropriate because the range of possible future outcomes was difficult to predict and highly speculative. Under either methodology, after the equity value was determined and allocated to the various classes of shares, a discount for lack of marketability, or DLOM, was applied to arrive at the fair value of common stock on a non-marketable basis. A DLOM is applied based on the theory that the stockholder of a private company has limited information and opportunities to sell their stock. A market participant that would purchase this stock would recognize this risk and thereby require a higher rate of return, which would reduce the overall fair market value.
Our assessments of the fair value of common stock for grant dates were based in part on the current available financial and operational information and the common stock value provided in the most recent valuation as compared to the timing of each grant. For financial reporting purposes, we considered the amount of time between the valuation date and the grant date to determine whether to use the latest common stock valuation or a straight-line interpolation between the two valuation dates. This determination included an evaluation of whether the subsequent valuation indicated that any significant change in valuation had occurred between the previous valuation and the grant date. For valuations during the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined the fair values of each share of common stock based on a straight-line interpolation between the valuation date of September 15, 2020, the date on which we first obtained a third-party valuation after we held our IPO organizational meeting on September 3,
Table of Contents.
2020, and the midpoint of the preliminary IPO price range on an assumed pricing on February 2, 2021, the day prior to our shares were listed on the New York Stock Exchange.
For valuations after February 3, 2021, when our shares began trading on the New York Stock Exchange in connection with our IPO, our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant, or other relevant determination date, as reported on the New York Stock Exchange.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We intend to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards. Accordingly, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies or that have opted out of using such extended transition period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for more information.
Table of Contents.