ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering and developing novel products for patients with cancer. We have proprietary targeted anti-cancer agents designed to disrupt specific cellular pathways that are important for cancer cell proliferation. We believe that the product candidates in our pipeline have the potential to be efficacious in a variety of cancers with unmet medical need. We have the following two clinical-stage programs: 1. narazaciclib (ON 123300), a multi-kinase inhibitor in solid tumors; and 2. rigosertib administered alone or in combination with PD-1 inhibitors for treatment of solid tumors. We are currently evaluating potential compounds for in-licensing opportunities.
We were incorporated in Delaware in December 1998 and commenced operations in January 1999. Our operations to date have included our organization and staffing, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing technology from research institutions, identifying potential product candidates, developing product candidates and building strategic alliances, as well as undertaking preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates.
Since commencing operations, we have dedicated a significant portion of our resources to the development of our clinical-stage product candidates, particularly rigosertib. We incurred research and development expenses of $7.3 million and $16.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We anticipate that a significant portion of our operating expenses will continue to be related to research and development as we continue to advance narazaciclib and our other programs.
In January 2020, we closed on an offering of common stock. We issued 1,844,168 shares of common stock and net proceeds were approximately $9.0 million. Also, during 2020, common warrants were exercised for 3,057,560 shares of common stock and net proceeds were approximately $10.3 million.
In January 2021, we closed on an offering of common stock. We issued 1,303,408 shares of common stock and net proceeds were approximately $8.5 million. In February 2021, we closed on an offering of common stock. We issued 1,916,667 shares of common stock and net proceeds were approximately $26.7 million. In September 2021, we closed on an offering of common stock. We issued 5,000,000 shares of common stock and net proceeds were approximately $19.5 million.
Our net losses were $16.2 million and $25.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $444.7 million. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates, even if milestones under our license and collaboration agreements may be met.
As of December 31, 2021 we had $55.1 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Financial Overview
Revenue
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our revenues were derived exclusively from activities conducted in accordance with our collaboration arrangement with SymBio.
We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. In the future, if any of our product candidates currently under development are approved for commercial sale in the United States or other territories where we have retained commercialization rights, we may generate revenue from product sales, or alternatively, we may choose to select a collaborator to commercialize our product candidates in these markets.
We are recognizing the $7.5 million upfront payment received in 2011 under the SymBio collaboration agreement as revenue on a straight-line basis through December 2037, reflecting our estimate of when we will complete our obligations under the agreement. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized revenues of $226,000 and $226,000, respectively, under the SymBio collaboration agreement. In addition, we recognized revenues of $0 and $5,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the supply agreement.
Operating Expenses
The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for executive and other administrative personnel, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses. Other general and administrative
expenses include facility-related costs, communication expenses, insurance, board of directors expenses and professional fees for legal, patent review, consulting and accounting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will remain consistent in the short-term, but would increase in the future with the continued research and development and potential commercialization of our product candidates. These increases will likely include increased costs for insurance, costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and payments to outside consultants among other expenses. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and expense as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidates.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates, which include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
● the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
● direct expenses for maintenance of research equipment, clinical trial insurance and other supplies; and
● costs associated with preclinical activities and regulatory operations.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. License fees and milestone payments we make related to in-licensed products and technology are expensed if it is determined that they have no alternative future use. We record costs for some development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
Through the year ended December 31, 2020, our research and development expenses related primarily to the development of rigosertib and the related INSPIRE trial in HR-MDS patients. The INSPIRE trial failed to meet its primary endpoint and was discontinued in August 2020. For 2021 and in the future, research and development expenses will be related to narazaciclib, other candidates in our pipeline, and potentially in-licensed products. We do not currently utilize a formal time allocation system to capture expenses on a project-by-project basis because we are organized and record expense by functional department and our employees may allocate time to more than one development project. Accordingly, we do not allocate expenses to individual projects or product candidates, although we do allocate some portion of our research and development expenses by functional area and by compound.
It is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of our current or future preclinical programs and clinical trials of our product candidates, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how
much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each product candidate, an assessment of each product candidate’s commercial potential and our available funds.
Interest Expense and Other Income, Net
Other income, net consists principally of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalent balances and foreign exchange gains and losses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following accounting policies may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity in their application than our other accounting policies and represent the most critical judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are presented within Note 2 to our Financial Statements.
Clinical Trial Expense
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. Our clinical trial accrual process is designed to account for expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, consultants and CROs and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our consolidated financial statements by matching the appropriate expenses with the period in which services are provided and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by patient progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial. We determine accrual estimates through financial models that take into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accrual and prepaid assets are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based payments to employees and non-employees using an option pricing model for estimating fair value. Accordingly, stock-based compensation expense is measured based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, net of forfeitures. Compensation expense is recognized for the portion that is ultimately expected to vest over the period during which the recipient renders the required services, using the straight-line single option method.
We record stock-based compensation expense as a component of research and development expenses or general and administrative expenses, depending on the function performed by the optionee. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we allocated stock-based compensation as follows:
Fair Value Estimates
We estimate the fair value of share-based awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes model requires the input of highly complex and subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected stock price volatility, (b) the calculation of the expected term of the award, (c) the risk free interest rate and (d) expected dividends. Expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock. We estimate the expected life of our employee stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby, the expected life equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the option are based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect during the period the options were granted. We have never paid, and do not expect to pay dividends in the foreseeable future.
Income Taxes
We recorded deferred tax assets of $173.9 million as of December 31, 2021, which have been fully offset by a valuation allowance due to uncertainties surrounding our ability to realize these tax benefits. The deferred tax assets are primarily composed of federal and state tax net operating loss (“NOL”), carry forwards and research and development tax credit carry forwards. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal NOL carry forwards of $293.7 million, state NOL carry forwards of $251.3 million, federal research and development tax credit carry forwards of $87.9 million and state research and development tax credit carry forwards of $1.1 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any. Federal NOL carry forwards generated before 2018 will begin to expire at various dates starting in 2022. The state NOL carry forwards will begin to expire at various dates starting in 2025. In general, if we experience a greater than 50 percentage point aggregate change in ownership of specified significant stockholders over a three-year period, utilization of our pre-change US NOL, tax credit and other tax attribute carry forwards may be subject to an annual limitations under Sections 382 and 383 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and similar state laws. Such limitations may result in expiration of a portion of the NOL carry forwards before utilization and may be substantial. The amount of the annual limitation, if any, will be determined based on the value of the Company immediately prior to the ownership change. Subsequent ownership changes may further affect the limitation in future years. The Company believes such a change occurred and may impact available net operating losses and carry over research credits generated. The Company has not performed any detailed analysis as it expects these to expire before utilization and has provided for a full valuation allowance but will perform a Section 382 and 383 study if any tax attributes are to be utilized in a given year.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues decreased by $5,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020 due to lower clinical supply revenue from SymBio in 2021.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $1.1 million or 13.2%, to $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable primarily to $1.5 million higher expenses for investor relations, proxy solicitation, and fees related to our special meeting by proxy in the 2021 period, to $0.3 million higher personnel related costs, to $0.3 million higher stock compensation expenses in the 2021 period, and to $0.2 million higher insurance costs. These increases were partially offset by $0.4 million lower professional and consulting fees, and $0.8 million lower commercial expenses during the 2021 period.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $9.6 million, or 56.8%, to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was caused primarily by $6.9 million lower clinical development and consulting expenses on the INSPIRE program and the oral rigosertib combination program in the 2021 period, by $0.1 million lower manufacturing costs, and also by $2.6 million lower personnel and stock compensation expense during the 2021 period, following reductions in our workforce completed in the third and fourth quarter of 2020.
The details of our research and development expenses are:
Change in fair value of warrant liability
The fair value of the warrant liability decreased $321,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an increase of $208,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was caused by the elimination of the warrant liability during the third quarter of 2021 due to the expiration of the tradable warrants in July, 2021.
Other income, net
Other income, net, decreased by $36,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to $45,000 lower foreign exchange expense and $81,000 lower net interest income in the 2020 period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred net losses and experienced negative cash flows from our operations. We incurred net losses of $16.2 million and $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our operating activities used $19.5 million and $23.1 million of net cash during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $444.7 million, working capital of $49.3 million, and cash and cash equivalents of $55.1 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our ongoing trials and business operations for at least two years.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $16.2 million, including a favorable change in fair value of warrant liability of $0.3 million and $0.6 million of noncash stock-based compensation and depreciation expense. Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net decrease in cash of $3.6 million. Significant changes in operating assets and liabilities included a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $3.9 million as a result of the timing of clinical trial and other accruals, and receipt and payment of vendor invoices, and the reduction of prepaid expenses of $0.5 million primarily as a result of recognition of insurance expense. Deferred revenue decreased $0.2 million due to recognition of the unamortized portion of the upfront payment under our collaboration agreement with SymBio.
Net cash used in operating activities was $23.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $25.2 million, including an unfavorable change in fair value of warrant liability of $0.2 million and $0.4 million of noncash stock-based compensation and depreciation expense. Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net increase in cash of $1.5 million. Significant changes in operating assets and liabilities included an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.7 million as a result of the timing of clinical trial and other accruals, and receipt and payment of vendor invoices. Deferred revenue decreased $0.2 million due to recognition of the unamortized portion of the upfront payment under our collaboration agreement with SymBio.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0 in the 2021 period. Net cash used in investing activities was $15,000 in the 2020 period related to our purchase of information technology assets.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $55.6 million, which resulted from the proceeds received from the sale of common stock in January, February, and September 2021 and through the at-the-market facility during August and September 2021. An additional $0.5 million was provided by the exercise of common stock warrants. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $19.4 million, which resulted from the proceeds received from the sale of common stock in January 2020 and the exercise of warrants.
Material Cash Requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception and we expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect net cash expended in 2022 to be slightly higher than 2021. We expect clinical trial costs to increase as we focus on our earlier clinical stage compound, narazaciclib, and increased headcount in our clinical and regulatory groups. We also expect an increase in costs for potential in-licensing, the timing of which will be determined by the timing of any potential in-licensing. We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with third-party contract organizations for clinical trials, preclinical studies, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination following a certain period after notice and therefore we believe that, currently, our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our ongoing trials and operations for at least two years.
We are exploring various sources of funding for continued development of narazaciclib and any potential in-licensed compounds as well as our ongoing operations. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates, even if milestones under our license and collaboration agreements may be met. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant NDA preparation and commercialization expenses. We do not currently have an organization for the sales, marketing and distribution of pharmaceutical products. We may rely on licensing and co-promotion agreements with strategic or collaborative partners for the commercialization of our products in the United States and other territories. If we choose to build a commercial infrastructure to support marketing in the United States for any of our product candidates that achieve regulatory approval, such commercial infrastructure could be expected to include a targeted, oncology sales force supported by sales management, internal sales support, an internal marketing group and distribution support. To develop the appropriate commercial infrastructure internally, we would have to invest financial and management resources, some of which would have to be deployed prior to having any certainty about marketing approval. Furthermore, we have and expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
Please see “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Segment Reporting
We view our operations and manage our business in one segment, which is the identification and development of oncology therapeutics.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued new guidance on the accounting for credit losses on financial instruments. The guidance was amended in November 2019. The new guidance introduces an expected loss model for estimating credit losses, replacing the incurred loss model. The new guidance also changes the impairment model for available-for-sale debt securities, requiring the use of an allowance to record estimated credit losses (and subsequent recoveries). The
guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, and interim periods within those years, for companies deemed to be smaller reporting companies as of November 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted. We are evaluating the impact of the adoption of the standard on our consolidated financial statements.