Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes. This management’s discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause our actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in section Item 1A. “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. Except as required by applicable law we do not undertake any obligation to update our forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances occurring after the date of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are an early-stage biotechnology company that is focusing on building high fidelity, 3D tissues that recapitulate key aspects of human disease. We use these models to identify gene targets responsible for driving the disease and intend to initiate drug discovery programs around these validated targets. We are initially focusing on the intestine and have ongoing 3D tissue development efforts in ulcerative colitis (“UC”) and Crohn’s disease (“CD”). We intend to add additional tissues/diseases/targets to our portfolio over time. In line with these plans, we are building upon both our external and in-house scientific expertise, which will be essential to our drug development effort.
We use our proprietary technology to build functional 3D human tissues that mimic key aspects of native human tissue composition, architecture, function and disease. Our advances include cell type-specific compartments, prevalent intercellular tight junctions, and the formation of microvascular structures. Management believes these attributes can enable critical complex, multicellular disease models that can be used to develop clinically effective drugs across multiple therapeutic areas.
Our NovoGen Bioprinters® are automated devices that enable the fabrication of 3D living tissues comprised of mammalian cells. We believe that the use of our bioprinting platform as well as complementary 3D technologies will allow us to develop an understanding of disease biology that leads to validated novel drug targets, and therapeutics to those targets to treat disease.
The majority of our current focus is on inflammatory bowel disease (“IBD”), including CD and UC. We are creating high fidelity disease models, leveraging our prior work including the work found in our peer-reviewed publication on bioprinted intestinal tissues (Madden et al. Bioprinted 3D Primary Human Intestinal Tissues Model Aspects of Native Physiology and ADME/Tox Functions. iScience. 2018 Apr 27;2:156-167. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2018.03.015.) Our current understanding of intestinal tissue models and IBD disease models leads us to believe that we can create models that provide greater insight into the biology of these diseases than are generally currently available. Using these disease models, we intend to identify and validate novel therapeutic targets. After finding therapeutic drug targets, we will focus on developing novel small molecule, antibody, or other therapeutic drug candidates to treat the disease, and advance these drug candidates towards an Investigational New Drug (“IND”) filing and potential future clinical trials. We may also form partnerships around the development of targets or therapeutics for the treatment of IBD.
We expect to broaden our work into additional therapeutic areas over time and are currently exploring specific tissues for development. In our work to identify the areas of interest, we evaluate areas that might be better served with 3D disease models than currently available models as well as the commercial opportunity.
We hold a large and diverse patent portfolio related to our bioprinting platform and complementary 3D technologies. The strength of this patent portfolio, the fact that it was created early in the bioprinting revolution and growth in the bioprinting industry have made for an attractive business opportunity for us. We are now beginning to invest resources to explore and expand business and revenue opportunities from the leveraging of our patent portfolio.
COVID-19
Global health concerns relating to the COVID-19 pandemic continue to weigh on the macroeconomic environment, and the pandemic has significantly increased economic volatility and uncertainty.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the rise of vaccine-resistant variants, the duration of the outbreak, and any travel bans, restrictions or other limitations that may be imposed in the future. In particular, the continued COVID-19 pandemic could adversely impact various aspects of our operations, including among others, our ability to raise additional capital, the timing and ability to pursue our revised strategy, given the impact the pandemic may have on the manufacturing and supply chain, sales and marketing and clinical trial operations of potential strategic partners and the ability to advance our research and development activities and pursue development of our pipeline products each of which could have an adverse impact on our business and our financial results. Our employees and consultants have recently returned to working at our office and lab when necessary. We have developed guidelines and protocols to handle exposures and infections intended to keep disruptions to operations to a minimum.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Any reference in this annual report to applicable guidance is meant to refer to the authoritative accounting principles generally accepted in the United States as found in the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) and Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments, the most critical of which are those related to revenue recognition and the valuation of stock-based compensation expense. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Besides the estimates identified above that are considered critical, we make many other accounting estimates in preparing our financial statements and related disclosures. All estimates, whether or not deemed critical, affect reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and judgments are also based on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known, even for estimates and judgments that are not deemed critical.
Since March 31, 2021, the significant change to our critical accounting policies includes adding revenue recognition related items. Our significant accounting policies are set forth in “Note 1. Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this Annual Report. Of those policies, we believe that the policies discussed below may involve a higher degree of judgment and may be more critical to an accurate reflection of our financial condition and results of operations. Accounting policies regarding stock-based compensation are considered critical, as they require significant estimates, judgements, and assumptions. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining our stock-based compensation expense and the actual factors that become known over time, specifically with respect to anticipated forfeitures, we may change the input factors used in determining stock-based compensation costs for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact our results of operations in the period such changes are made.
Stock-based compensation
For purposes of calculating stock-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of stock options and shares acquirable under our Amended and Restated 2012 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2012 Plan”), our 2016 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “ESPP”) or our 2021 Inducement Equity Plan (the “Inducement Plan”) using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based payment awards utilizing the Black-Scholes model is affected by our stock price and a number of assumptions, including expected volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. For stock options, prior to fiscal year 2020, we used a blend of historical volatility and implied volatility of comparable companies. As of April 1, 2019, we were using the Company-specific historical volatility rate as it was more reflective of market conditions and a better indicator of expected volatility. For certain options granted with vesting criteria contingent on market conditions, we engage with valuation specialists to calculate fair value and requisite service periods using Monte Carlo simulations. For certain options granted with vesting criteria contingent on pre-defined Company performance criteria, we periodically assess and adjust the expense based on the probability of achievement of such performance criteria. For shares acquirable under our ESPP, we use our Company-specific volatility rate. The expected life of the stock options is based on historical and other economic data trended into the future. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates appropriate for the expected terms of our stock options. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of no dividend payouts. If factors change and we employ different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past.
For purposes of calculating stock-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and performance-based restricted stock units (“PBRSUs”) with pre-defined performance criteria, based on the closing stock price on the date of grant. No exercise price or other monetary payment is required for receipt of the shares issued in settlement of the respective award; instead, consideration is furnished in the form of the participant’s service to us. The expense for PBRSUs with pre-defined performance criteria is adjusted with the probability of achievement of such performance criteria at each period end.
All of the above accounting policies regarding stock-based compensation are considered critical, as they require significant estimates, judgements, and assumptions. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining our stock-based compensation expense and the actual factors that become known over time, specifically with respect to anticipated forfeitures, we may change the input factors used in determining stock-based compensation costs for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact our results of operations in the period such changes are made.
Revenue
We assess whether our license agreements are considered a contract with a customer under ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”) or an arrangement with a collaborator subject to guidance under ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“Topic 808”). These agreements can include one or more of the following: (i) non-refundable upfront fees and (ii)
royalties based on specified percentages of net product sales. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services agreed upon within each contract and assess whether each good or service is distinct and determine those that are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these agreements, we must develop estimates and assumptions that require judgment of management to determine the underlying stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation which determines how the transaction price is allocated among the performance obligations. We evaluate each performance obligation to determine if it can be satisfied at a point in time or over time. In addition, variable consideration must be evaluated to determine if it is constrained and, therefore, excluded from the transaction price. Differences in the allocation of the transaction price between delivered and undelivered performance obligations can impact the timing of revenue recognition but do not change the total revenue recognized under any agreement.
For agreements that include license fees, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For agreements that include sales-based royalties, we recognize revenue in the period the underlying sales occur.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended March 31, 2022 and 2021
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenues
We had $1.5 million of royalty revenue for the year ended March 31, 2022 compared to no revenue for the year ended March 31, 2021. The $1.5 million of royalty revenue for the year ended March 31, 2022, was an upfront payment related to the licensing of certain intellectual property (“IP”).
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 (in thousands, except percentages):
Research and development expenses increased by $2.2 million, or 201%, from approximately $1.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 to approximately $3.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2022 as we materially increased research and development activities following the change of control on September 15, 2020. Our full-time research and development staff increased from an average of two employees for the year ended March 31, 2021 to an average of nine employees for the year ended March 31, 2022. Research and development activities consisted of $1.6 million in personnel related costs, $0.8 million in lab expenses, $0.7 million in facility costs, and $0.2 million in consulting fees, depreciation, and other miscellaneous expenses. Going forward, in line with our renewed research and development efforts, we expect to hire additional employees and incur significantly more research and development expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 (in thousands, except percentages):
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased approximately $6.0 million, or 39%, from $15.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 to approximately $9.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2022. Overall, the decrease year over year is due to the change in business operations from fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2022. During the year ended March 31, 2021, the majority of our costs were for personnel and general corporate costs, as we were in the midst of a strategic alternatives process and at the time we had an average of five full-time employees, three of whom were executives. A change in control occurred in September 2020, which triggered the resignations and related severance costs for the three executives. This included the accelerated vesting of any outstanding share based compensation. During the year ended March 31, 2022, we had an average of four full-time employees, only one of whom is an executive. This decrease in headcount and a shift in business operations resulted in the decrease of personnel related costs by approximately $7.1 million year over year, which was offset by a $0.1 million increase in consulting costs year over year, as we utilized part-time consultants for officer positions in the Company as well as various other consultants for operations. Lastly, we had an increase in corporate costs of $1.0 million year over year, which was a result of a shift in business operations. Our corporate costs during the year ended March 31, 2022 were approximately $5.5 million. Of these corporate costs, approximately $0.5 million are legal costs directly related to IPR proceedings and $1.4 million are legal costs directly related to litigation regarding patent enforcement. As of March 31, 2022, these legal matters were closed and no further costs are expected.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income was less than $0.1 million for the years ended March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021. For the year ended March 31, 2022, other income consisted of a sale of a bioprinter asset to an academic research institution as well as interest income. For the year ended March 31, 2021, a loss of less than $0.1 million from the disposal of fixed assets was offset by interest income of less than $0.1 million.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
We originally devoted our efforts to developing a platform technology to produce and study living tissues, with a focus on liver tissue, that emulate key aspects of human biology and disease, raising capital and building infrastructure. Following the decision to explore strategic alternatives, we took steps to manage our resources and extend our cash runway. These steps included reducing all commercial and research and development laboratory activities related to our liver tissues, except for sales of primary human cells out of inventory, negotiating an exit from our long-term facility lease, selling lab equipment and other inventory, and reducing our workforce. We have retained certain key management, employees and consultants, our core intellectual property, licenses, collaborations with research institutions and universities, and proprietary equipment. Going forward, we intend to leverage our proprietary technology platform to develop therapeutic drugs. Our initial plan is to focus on IBD, including CD and UC with a goal of broadening our work into additional therapeutic areas over time. In connection with our new strategy, we intend to rebuild our research and development functions to support our screening and drug development efforts.
As of March 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $28.7 million and an accumulated deficit of $307.7 million. As of March 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $37.4 million and an accumulated deficit of $296.3 million. We had negative cash flows from operations of $8.5 million and $13.3 million for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
As of March 31, 2022, we had total current assets of approximately $29.5 million and current liabilities of approximately $1.4 million, resulting in working capital of $28.1 million. At March 31, 2021, we had total current assets of approximately $38.4 million and current liabilities of approximately $0.7 million, resulting in working capital of $37.7 million.
The following table sets forth a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $8.5 million and $13.3 million for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The $4.8 million decrease in operating cash usage, for the year ended March 31, 2022, can be attributed primarily to our operational restructuring.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The net cash used in investing activities for both the years ended March 31, 2022 and March 31, 2021 was related to the purchase of fixed assets.
Financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $0.2 million and $23.8 million for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The results in both years are primarily driven by at-the-market share offerings. Refer to “Operations funding requirements” below for further information regarding financing activities.
Operations funding requirements
During the year ended March 31, 2022, we raised net proceeds of approximately $0.3 million through the sale of 27,545 shares of our common stock through at-the-market (“ATM”) offerings.
Through March 31, 2022, we have financed our operations primarily through the sale of common stock through public and ATM offerings, the private placement of equity securities, from revenue derived from the licensing of intellectual property, products and research-based services, grants, and collaborative research agreements, and from the sale of convertible notes.
Our ongoing cash requirements include research and development expenses, compensation for personnel, consulting fees, legal and accounting support, insurance premiums, facilities, maintenance of our intellectual property portfolio, license and collaboration agreements, listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market, and other miscellaneous fees to support our operations. We expect our total operating expense for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2023 to be between $10.0 million and $12.0 million. Based on our current operating plan and available cash resources, we believe we have sufficient resources to fund our business for at least the next twelve months.
We previously had an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-222929) (the “2018 Shelf”) that registered $100.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants and units, or any combination of the foregoing, that was set to expire on February 22, 2021. On January 19, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-252224) to register $150.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and units, or any combination of the foregoing (the “2021 Shelf”) and a related prospectus. The 2021 Shelf was declared effective by the SEC on January 29, 2021 and replaced the 2018 Shelf at that time.
On March 16, 2018, we entered into a Sales Agreement with H.C. Wainwright & Co., LLC and Jones Trading Institutional Services LLC (each an “Agent” and together, the “Agents”). On January 29, 2021, we filed a prospectus supplement to the 2021 Shelf (the “ATM Prospectus Supplement”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time through the Agents, shares of our common stock in ATM sales transactions having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. Any shares offered and sold will be issued pursuant to our 2021 Shelf. During the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, we sold 27,545 and 1,553,317 shares of common stock in ATM offerings, respectively, with net proceeds of approximately $0.3 million and $20.8 million under the Sales Agreement, respectively. As of March 31, 2022, we have sold an aggregate of 1,580,862 shares of common stock in ATM offerings under the Sales Agreement, with gross proceeds of approximately $21.7 million. As of March 31, 2022, there was approximately $100.0 million available in future offerings under the 2021 Shelf (excluding amounts available but not yet issued under the ATM Prospectus Supplement), and approximately $28.3 million available for future offerings through our ATM program.
Having insufficient funds may require us to relinquish rights to our technology on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. Failure to obtain adequate financing could adversely affect our ability to operate as a going concern. If we raise additional funds from the issuance of equity securities, substantial dilution to our existing stockholders would likely result. If we raise additional funds by incurring debt financing, the terms of the debt may involve significant cash payment obligations as well as covenants and specific financial ratios that may restrict our ability to operate our business.
As of March 31, 2022, we had 8,710,627 total issued and outstanding shares of common stock.
Our 2008 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2008 Plan”) provided for the issuance of up to 76,079 shares of common stock upon the exercise of outstanding stock options, of which 44,812 shares were issued. The 2008 Plan terminated on July 1, 2018. The 2012 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2012 Plan”), as amended, provides for the issuance of up to 2,327,699 shares of our common stock, of which 710,333 shares remain available for issuance as of March 31, 2022, to executive officers, directors, advisory board members, employees and consultants. Additionally, 75,000 shares of common stock have been reserved for issuance under the 2016 ESPP, of which 59,435 shares remain available for future issuance as of March 31, 2022. Finally, 750,000 shares of common stock have been reserved for issuances under our Inducement Plan, of which 700,000 remain available for issuance as of March 31, 2022. In aggregate, issued and outstanding common stock and shares issuable under outstanding equity awards or reserved for future issuance under the 2008 Plan, the 2012 Plan, the Inducement Plan, and the 2016 ESPP total 11,399,566 shares of common stock as of March 31, 2022.
Effect of Inflation and Changes in Prices
Management does not believe that inflation and changes in price will have a material effect on our operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements, see “Note 12. Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report.