Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Onyx Acquisition Co. I. The following discussion and analysis of the company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 2, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (a “business combination”). We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on November 2, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On November 5, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 26,450,000 Units, which includes the exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase up to an additional 3,450,000 Units at the initial public offering price to cover over-allotments. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-half of one public warrant, each whole public warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $264,500,000.
Simultaneous with the consummation of the initial public offering and the issuance and sale of the Units, we consummated the private placement of 12,190,000 private placement warrants (including 690,000 private placement warrants purchased in connection with the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option) at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating total proceeds of $12,190,000. The private placement warrants, which were purchased by the sponsor and BTIG, LLC (“BTIG”), are identical to the public warrants, except that if held by the sponsor or BTIG or their permitted transferees, they are, subject to certain limited exceptions, subject to transfer restrictions until 30 days following the consummation of our initial business combination. Additionally, the private placement warrants held by BTIG are subject to the lock-up and registration rights limitations imposed by FINRA Rule 5110 and may not be exercised after five years from November 2, 2021.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering and the private placement, $269,790,000 has been placed in a trust account, representing the redemption value of the Class A ordinary shares sold in the initial public offering, at their redemption value of $10.20 per share.
If we are unable to consummate an initial business combination within 15 months from the closing of our initial public offering (the “Combination Period”), the we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to the company to pay income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless if the company fails to complete its initial business combination within the Combination Period.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we have not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, relates to our formation and initial public offering, and, since the completion of our initial public offering, searching for a target to consummate an initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from our initial public offering and placed in the trust account.
For the period from February 2, 2021 (Inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $527,807, which consisted entirely of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside our trust account of $781,709, available for working capital needs. All remaining cash was held in the trust account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
The company’s liquidity needs up to November 5, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of $104,808, which was paid in full on November 18, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor, initial shareholders, officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, provide the company Working Capital Loans (as defined below). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
However, the Company is within 12 months of its mandatory liquidation as of the time of filing this 10K. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the mandatory liquidation raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, February 5, 2023.
These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
The underwriters are entitled to deferred underwriting commissions of $0.04 per unit on the 23,000,000 units issued and $0.06 on the 3,450,000 overallotment units for a total of $11,270,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement for the offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The company accounts for its Class A ordinary share subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary share subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary share (including ordinary share that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary share are classified as stockholders’ equity. The company’s ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 26,450,000 shares of Class A ordinary share subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the company’s balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The potential ordinary shares for outstanding warrants to purchase our shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the period from February 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. On February 2, 2021, the date of the company’s inception, the company adopted the new standard.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the company’s financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company”, we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.