ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The last day of our fiscal year is January 31, and we refer to our fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 as fiscal 2022, our fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 as fiscal 2021 and our fiscal year ended January 31, 2020 as fiscal 2020. All other references to years are references to calendar years.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal 2022 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2022 and 2021. Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2021 as compared to 2020 is included in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2021, filed with the SEC on April 7, 2021.
Executive Overview
Ooma provides leading communications services and related technologies that bring unique features, ease of use, and affordability to businesses of all sizes and residential customers through our smart SaaS and unified communications platforms. For businesses, we deliver advanced voice and collaboration features including messaging, intelligent virtual attendants, and video conferencing to help them run more efficiently. For consumers, our residential phone service provides PureVoice high-definition voice quality, advanced functionality and integration with mobile devices.
We generate subscription and services revenue by selling subscriptions and other services for our communications services, as well as other connected services. We generate our product and other revenue from the sale of our on-premise devices and end-point devices. We primarily offer our solutions in the U.S. and Canada.
We refer to Ooma Office and Ooma Enterprise collectively as Ooma Business. Ooma Residential includes Ooma Telo basic and premier services as well as our smart security solutions. See Item 1. Business above for additional information regarding our business, including products and services offered, competitive market and regulatory matters.
Fiscal 2022 Financial Performance
•
Total revenue was $192.3 million, up 14% year-over-year, primarily driven by the continued growth of Ooma Business.
•
Subscription and services revenue from Ooma Business and Ooma Residential grew 23% and 3% year-over-year, respectively.
•
Subscription and services gross margin was 72%, up from 71% in fiscal 2021. Total gross margin was 62%, consistent with fiscal 2021.
•
GAAP net loss was $1.8 million, improved from a net loss of $2.4 million in fiscal 2021, largely driven by our revenue growth and higher gross margins for subscription and services.
•
Non-GAAP net income was $12.6 million, compared to $11.5 million in fiscal 2021.
•
Adjusted EBITDA was $15.6 million, compared to $14.0 million in fiscal 2021.
•
As of January 31, 2022, we had total cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $31.3 million, up $3.0 million from $28.3 million as of January 31, 2021.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 46
COVID-19 Update
During fiscal 2022, we remained focused on executing our growth strategy while adapting to the evolving changes in our market environment and business activities driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. We have continued to evaluate and refine our return to work strategy, as well as our investments in our go-to-market, channel development and product development efforts. We and our third-party reseller partners have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, challenges in attracting and retaining sales employees and contractors, which we believe is largely attributable to the ongoing effects of the pandemic.
The severity and duration of the pandemic, including any resurgences, and the extent to which it may impact our operations remains uncertain. In recent periods, we have increased our inventory levels to mitigate global supply chain disruptions caused by component shortages and longer lead times. These increased levels may result in excess and/or obsolete inventory in future periods. In addition, although we saw improvement in our customer churn rate from the increased levels that we experienced earlier in the pandemic, our churn could again increase in future periods which may result in a decline to our core user growth rate. The overall effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
The global macroeconomic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and related impacts on our customers’ business operations and their demand for our products and services may persist for an indefinite period, even after the pandemic has subsided. See “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A above for more information on risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance and key business metrics have been, and we expect that our financial performance and key business metrics in the future will be, primarily driven by the following factors:
Core user growth. Our growth in the number of core users, a key business metric defined below, is a key indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business and our anticipated future subscription and services revenue, especially Ooma Business.
Low core user churn. We believe that maintaining our current low core user churn is an important factor in our ability to continue to improve our financial performance and is a distinguishing advantage over many of our competitors. We focus on providing high-quality services and support to our users so they are motivated to remain with us. Our core user churn rate is higher for Ooma Business customers than Ooma Residential customers, which is driven in part by the failure rate of small businesses as well as the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, we expect that our overall core user churn rate will increase to the extent that sales of our business products increase relative to sales of residential products.
Growth in additional services and products. We believe that there is significant opportunity for us to increase the additional subscription and services that our customers purchase from us in both the business and residential markets, which generates more value to Ooma over the life of our customer relationship. In order to drive adoption of additional services, we will need to continue to enhance our existing solutions and develop new connected services and products. We are investing in Ooma Business to develop additional features to continue our momentum serving businesses of all sizes and further increase our average revenue per user. For example, we plan to launch a third Ooma Office tier of service during fiscal 2023 that will contain features that are even more advanced than Office Pro. Additionally, we see opportunity to capitalize on Ooma AirDial as an integrated solution for businesses to replace legacy copper-wire analog phone service. We also plan to evolve our Ooma Connect and Wi-Fi solutions as part of our longer-term strategy to provide a more complete solution for small and medium-sized businesses.
Investing in long-term revenue growth. We believe that our total addressable market opportunity is large and we intend to continue significantly investing in sales and marketing to grow our user base in multiple verticals and channels. We expect the domestic and international markets in which we conduct our business will remain highly competitive. We plan to work together with our strategic partners to explore and pursue potential growth opportunities related to the market transition to 5G internet. We expect to continue investing in research and development to enhance our platforms and develop additional connected services and products, as well as launch our Ooma Business services in a number of international countries. We may evaluate additional possible acquisitions of businesses, products and technologies that are complementary to our business.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 47
Key Business Metrics
We review the key metrics below to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions.
The following table sets forth our key business metrics for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
Core Users increased year-over-year, which was primarily driven by growth in business users. As of January 31, 2022, Ooma Business users comprised approximately 28% of our total core users, up from 25% as of January 31, 2021. We believe that the number of our core users is an indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business and our anticipated future subscription and services revenue. We define our core users as the number of active residential user accounts and office user extensions. We believe that the relationship that we establish with our core users positions us to sell additional premium communications services and other new connected services to them.
Annualized Exit Recurring Revenue grew year-over-year due to an increase in the average revenue per core user, which was largely driven by an increase in business users. We believe that AERR is an indicator of recurring subscription and services revenue for near-term future periods. We estimate our AERR by dividing our recurring quarterly subscription revenue (excluding Talkatone revenue) by the average number of core users each quarter and annualize by multiplying by four. We then multiply that result by the number of core users at the end of the period to calculate AERR.
Net Dollar Subscription Retention Rate was comparable on a year-over-year basis. We believe that our net dollar subscription retention rate provides insight into our ability to retain and grow our subscription and services revenue, and is an indicator of the long-term value of our customer relationships and the stability of our revenue base. It measures the percentage year-over-year change in our recurring subscription revenue per core user (excluding Talkatone revenue), which is then adjusted by factoring in the percentage of our core users we have retained during the same period. Our net dollar subscription retention rate is affected by changes in average amounts that our core users pay to us, fluctuations in the number of our core users, and our core user churn rate.
We calculate our estimated net dollar subscription retention rate for our core users by multiplying:
(i)
our year-over-year percentage change in annual recurring revenue per core user, which is calculated by:
▪
determining the annual recurring revenue per core user by dividing annual recurring revenue for the period ended by the number of core users at the end of that particular period; and
▪
calculating the year-over-year percentage change in annual recurring revenue per core user by dividing the current period recurring revenue per core user by the annual recurring revenue per core user for the same period in the prior year.
by:
(ii)
our core user annual retention rate, which is calculated by:
▪
determining our core user churn, by identifying the number of paying core users who terminate service during a month, excluding infant churn, which we define as office extensions and home users who terminate service prior to the end of the second full calendar month after their activation date;
▪
calculating our monthly churn rate by dividing our churn in a month by the number of core users at the beginning of that month; and
▪
calculating our annual retention rate as one minus the sum of our monthly churn rates for the preceding 12-month period.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 48
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition, we use Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest, Tax and Depreciation and Amortization) to manage our business, evaluate our performance and make planning decisions. We consider this metric to be a useful measure of our operating performance, because it contains adjustments for unusual events or factors that do not directly affect what management considers being the core operating performance, and are used by our management for that purpose. We also believe this measure enables us to better evaluate our performance by facilitating a meaningful comparison of our core operating results in a given period to those in prior and future periods. Investors often use similar measures to evaluate the operating performance with competitors. Adjusted EBITDA represents net income before interest and other income, income tax provision or benefit, depreciation and amortization of capital expenditures, amortization of acquired intangible assets and other acquisition-related charges, stock-based compensation and related taxes, restructuring charges and certain litigation costs that are not representative of the ordinary course of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not consider any expenses for assets being depreciated and amortized that are necessary to our business;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the impact of income tax provisions or benefits, other income/expense, stock-based compensation and related taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets and other acquisition-related charges, restructuring charges and certain litigation costs that are not recurring in nature; and
•
Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net loss and our other GAAP results.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss (the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure) to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 49
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Subscription and services revenue is derived primarily from recurring subscription fees related to service plans such as Ooma Business, Ooma Residential and other communications services, and to a lesser extent from payments associated with our Talkatone mobile application and prepaid international calls. We expect our subscription and services revenue to grow as we expand our core user base, driven primarily by growth in Ooma Business.
Product and other revenue consists primarily of sales of our on-premise devices and end-point devices used in connection with our services, including shipping and handling fees for our direct customers.
Cost of revenue and gross margin
Cost of subscription and services revenue includes payments made for third-party network operations and telecommunications services; certain telecom taxes and fees, including Federal USF contributions; credit card processing fees; costs to build out and maintain data centers; depreciation and maintenance of servers and equipment; personnel costs associated with customer care and network operations support and allocated overhead costs.
Cost of product and other revenue includes the costs associated with the manufacturing of our on-premise devices and end-point devices, as well as personnel costs for employees and contractors, costs related to porting our customers’ phone numbers to our service, shipping and handling costs, tariffs imposed on imported product and allocated overhead costs.
Subscription and services gross margin may fluctuate from period-to-period based on the interplay of a number of factors, including revenue mix and fluctuations in the costs described above. We expect our subscription and services gross margin to increase over the long-term, primarily as we achieve scale efficiencies and as Ooma Business revenue becomes a larger portion of total subscription revenue.
Product and other gross margin may fluctuate from period-to-period based on a number of factors, including total units shipped as compared to the direct costs of production and relatively fixed personnel costs incurred. We sell our on-premise devices at aggressive price points to facilitate the adoption of our platforms and services. We expect our product and other gross margin to continue to be negative for the foreseeable future.
Our subscription and services gross margin is significantly higher than product and other gross margin. As a result, any significant change in revenue mix will cause our total gross margin to change. For example, in periods where we sell significantly more on-premise devices, we would expect our total gross margin to be impacted.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors, advertising and marketing costs, amortization of sales commissions paid to internal sales personnel and third parties, amortization of acquired intangible assets, travel expenses and allocated overhead costs. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business.
Research and development expenses are focused on developing new and expanded features for our services and improvements to our platforms and backend architecture. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors, as well as license and product certification fees and allocated overhead costs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs for our finance, legal, human resources and other administrative employees and contractors, as well as professional service fees and allocated overhead costs. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 50
Consolidated Results of Operations
The tables in this section set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Costs and expenses included stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes as follows (in thousands):
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 51
Revenue
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
We derived approximately 49% and 44% of our total revenue from Ooma Business and approximately 49% and 54% from Ooma Residential in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Subscription and services revenue increased $19.1 million or 12% year-over-year, primarily attributable to an increase in our core users and an increase in the average revenue per user, driven by the growth in sales of Ooma Business and a higher mix of sales of our Office Pro tier service. Subscription and services revenue from Ooma Business and Ooma Residential grew 23% and 3% year-over-year, respectively.
Product and other revenue increased $4.3 million or 35% year-over-year due to an increase in shipments of Ooma Business products, primarily driven by sales of our fixed wireless products to a strategic customer.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Subscription and services gross margin of 72% increased year-over-year from 71% reflecting the continued growth of Ooma Business revenues with higher average revenue per user and associated benefits of economies of scale. Cost of subscription and services revenue for fiscal 2022 increased $3.4 million or 7% year-over-year, primarily due to a $1.6 million increase in regulatory costs, a $0.9 million increase in personnel-related costs and a $0.8 million infrastructure costs that support the growth of Ooma Business.
Product and other revenue gross margin of negative 49% was comparable year-over-year. Cost of product and other revenue increased $6.3 million or 35% year-over-year, primarily due to a significant increase in product sales volume as described above.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 52
Operating Expenses
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Sales and marketing expenses increased $7.7 million or 15% year-over-year, primarily due to a $6.4 million increase in advertising and marketing costs and a $2.0 million increase in amortization of capitalized sales commissions, that were offset in part by a $0.6 million decrease in personnel-related costs. Overall, the year-over-year increase in sales and marketing reflects our strategy to drive continued growth in sales of Ooma Business.
Research and development expenses increased $2.1 million or 6% year-over-year, primarily due to a $1.1 million increase in personnel-related costs and a $0.5 million increase in facilities-related costs, driven by higher headcount, as well as a $0.5 million increase in prototype-related and other engineering costs. Overall, the year-over-year increase in research and development supports our efforts in the development of new features for both Ooma Office and Ooma Enterprise, new products such as Ooma AirDial, and launching our Ooma Business services in a number of international countries.
General and administrative expenses increased $3.0 million or 14% year-over-year, primarily due to a $1.8 million increase in personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, a $0.7 million increase in professional services related to our international expansion efforts, and a $0.5 million increase in other administrative expenses.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 53
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Form 10-K contains certain non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP net income (loss) below and Adjusted EBITDA (see “Key Metrics” above). These non-GAAP financial measures exclude non-cash stock-based compensation expense and related taxes, amortization of acquired intangible assets and other acquisition-related charges, restructuring charges and certain litigation costs that are not representative of the ordinary course of our business.
These non-GAAP financial measures are presented to provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results and core business operations. We consider these non-GAAP financial measures to be useful measures of the operating performance of the Company, because they contain adjustments for unusual events or factors that do not directly affect what management considers to be our core operating performance, and are used by our management for that purpose. We also believe that these non-GAAP financial measures allow for a better evaluation of our performance by facilitating a meaningful comparison of our core operating results in a given period to those in prior and future periods. In addition, investors often use similar measures to evaluate the operating performance of a company.
Non-GAAP financial measures are presented for supplemental informational purposes only to aid an understanding of our operating results and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies. A limitation of the non-GAAP financial measures presented is that the adjustments relate to items that the Company generally expects to continue to recognize. The adjustment of these items should not be construed as an inference that the adjusted expenses or gains are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring. Therefore, both GAAP financial measures of Ooma’s financial performance and the respective non-GAAP measures should be considered together.
The following table presents a reconciliation of GAAP net loss to non-GAAP net income (loss) for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 54
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of January 31, 2022, we had $31.3 million of total cash, cash equivalents and investments, which we believe will be sufficient to meet our cash needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the introduction of new and enhanced offerings, the timing and extent of our sales and marketing activities and research and development expenditures, the expansion of our business internationally and other factors. We may in the future make investments in or acquisitions of businesses or technologies, which may require the use of cash.
The table below provides selected cash flow information, for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
The table below provides selected cash flow information, for the periods indicated (in thousands):
For fiscal 2022, our net loss of $1.8 million included non-cash charges primarily related to stock-based compensation expense, operating lease expense and depreciation and amortization expense. Operating asset and liability changes for fiscal 2022 included:
•
an increase of $2.1 million in accounts receivable due to a higher volume of product shipments in the latter half of our fiscal fourth quarter and the timing of cash collections
•
an increase of $1.6 million in inventories to mitigate the risk of global supply chain disruptions caused by component shortages and longer lead times
•
an increase of $4.6 million in prepaid expenses and other current and non-current assets primarily due to the capitalization of sales commissions and the timing of payments
•
a decrease of $3.6 million in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities due to the timing of payments
Cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2022 increased $2.3 million year-over-year, which primarily reflected a decrease in net loss as well as working capital impacts resulting from the timing of payments.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $4.9 million for fiscal 2022, which consisted of $17.5 million used for purchases of short-term investments and $4.2 million used for capital expenditures, offset in part by proceeds of $16.8 million from maturities and sales of short-term investments. Cash used by investing activities increased $5.1 million year-over-year, which reflected higher capital expenditures and lower net proceeds from short-term investments.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 55
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $0.6 million for fiscal 2022, which consisted of proceeds of $2.7 million from the issuance of common stock from our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”) and stock option exercises, largely offset by payments of $2.1 million related to shares repurchased for tax withholdings on vesting of restricted stock units (“RSUs”). Cash provided by financing activities decreased by $0.4 million year-over-year, which primarily reflected lower proceeds from stock option exercises.
Revolving Credit Facility
In January 2021, we entered into a credit and security agreement with certain banks that provided for a secured revolving credit facility under which we may borrow up to an aggregate of $25 million and, subject to certain conditions, may be increased to up to $45 million. We currently have no outstanding borrowings. See Note 12: Financing Arrangements of the accompanying notes of our consolidated financial statements for more information.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of January 31, 2022 and 2021, non-cancelable inventory purchase commitments to our contract manufacturers and other suppliers totaled approximately $19.4 million and $5.4 million, respectively. We have increased our purchase commitments during fiscal 2022 to mitigate supply disruptions caused by component shortages and longer lead times, as well as to secure our needs for new products.
Additionally, we have a non-cancelable service agreement with a telecommunications provider that contains total annual minimum purchase commitments of $0.6 million between August 2021 and July 2022, $1.5 million between August 2022 and July 2023 and $2.5 million between August 2023 and July 2024.
As of January 31, 2022, our total future expected payment obligations under non-cancelable operating leases with initial terms longer than one year were approximately $16.1 million. See Note 7: Operating Leases in the notes to our consolidated financial statements for a table of contractual obligations, including payments due by period.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 56
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, cash flows and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates. Note 2 to the notes to consolidated financial statements of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue Recognition
Subscription and services revenue is derived primarily from recurring subscription fees related to service plans such as Ooma Business, Ooma Residential and other communications services. Subscription revenue is generally recognized ratably over the contractual service term. Product and other revenue is primarily generated from the sale of on-premise devices and end-point devices, including shipping and handling fees for our direct customers. We recognize product and other revenue from sales to direct end-customers and channel partners at the point in time that control transfers which is typically when we deliver the product.
Our contracts with customers typically contain multiple performance obligations that consist of communications services and related products. Judgment is required to properly identify the accounting units of multiple performance obligations and to determine the manner in which revenue should be allocated among the obligations. Individual performance obligations are accounted for separately if they are distinct. The contract transaction price is then allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine the SSP for our communications services based on observable historical stand-alone sales to customers, for which we require that a substantial majority of selling prices fall within a reasonably narrow pricing range. We determine the SSP for our on-premise devices and end-point devices based upon our best estimates and judgments, considering company-specific factors such as pricing strategies, discounting practices, and estimated product and other costs. The determination of SSP is made through consultation with and approval by our management. As our business offerings evolve over time, we may be required to modify our estimated selling prices in subsequent periods, and the timing of our revenue recognition could be affected.
Our distribution agreements with channel partners typically contain clauses for price protection and right of return. We record reductions to revenue for estimated product returns from end users and customer sales incentives at the time the related revenue is recognized. Product returns and customer sales incentives are estimated based on our historical experience, current trends and expectations regarding future experience. Trends are influenced by product life cycles, new product introductions, market acceptance of products, the type of customer, seasonality and other factors. Product return and sales incentive rates may fluctuate over time but are sufficiently predictable to allow our management to estimate expected future amounts. If actual future returns and sales incentives differ from past experience, additional reserves may be required. To date, actual results have not been materially different from our estimates.
Inventories
Inventories consist of raw materials and finished goods and are stated at the lower of actual cost and net realizable value on a first-in, first-out basis. At each balance sheet date, we determine excess or obsolete inventory write-downs based on multiple factors, including: forecast demand for our products within a specified time horizon, generally 12 months, product acceptance and competitiveness in the marketplace, product life cycles, product development plans, and current and historical sales levels. Inventory write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory are recorded in cost of goods sold within the consolidated statement of operations during the period in which such write-downs are determined as necessary by management. If actual future demand or market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required. This would have a negative impact on our gross margin in that period. If in any period we are able to sell inventories that were not valued or that had been written down in a previous period, related revenues would be recorded without any offsetting charge to cost of sales resulting in a net benefit to our gross margin in that period. Overall, our estimates of inventory carrying value adjustments have been materially consistent with actual results.
Ooma | FY2022 Form 10-K | 57