Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion is intended to assist readers in understanding and evaluating the financial condition, changes in financial condition and the results of operations of the Company, consisting of the parent company (the Parent) and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, the Bank and Trust. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and other financial information contained elsewhere in this report. In addition to current and historical information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements relate to future business, financial condition or results of operations. For a description of certain factors that may have a significant impact on the Company’s future business, financial condition or results of operations, see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” prior to Item 1. “Business.”
Overview
The Company’s primary goals are to maximize earnings by maintaining strong asset quality and deploying capital in profitable growth initiatives that will enhance long-term stockholder value. The Company operates in three principal business segments: the Bank, the Trust, and the Company as a separate segment, the Parent. Revenues from the Bank’s operations consist primarily of interest earned on loans and investment securities, fees earned on deposit accounts, debit card interchange, and treasury and commercial services and mortgage banking income. Trust’s operating revenues consist principally of income from fiduciary and asset management fees. The Parent’s revenues are mainly fees and dividends received from the Bank and Trust.
Index
Net income for 2021 was $8.4 million ($1.61 per diluted share) compared to $5.4 million ($1.03 per diluted share) in 2020. Assets as of December 31, 2021 were $1.3 billion, an increase of $111.7 million or 9.1% compared to assets as of December 31, 2020.
Key factors affecting comparisons of consolidated net income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows: Comparisons are to prior year unless otherwise stated.
•
Loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs), excluding PPP (non-GAAP), increased 9.9%.
•
Average earning assets increased $104.5 million, or 9.6%.
•
Interest income increased $2.2 million, or 5.6%.
•
Interest expense decreased $1.8 million, or 34.7%, due primarily to lower rates, shifts in funding to lower cost deposits, and prepayment of FHLB advances during the fourth quarter of 2020.
•
Consolidated net interest margin (NIM) was 3.26% for 2021 compared to 3.19%.
•
Fiduciary and asset management fees increased $321 thousand, or 8.3%.
•
Mortgage banking income increased $499 thousand or 28.0%.
•
On July 14, 2021, the Company issued $30.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2031 in a private placement transaction. The Notes initially bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.50% for five years and convert to the three-month SOFR plus 286 basis points, resetting quarterly, thereafter.
•
Non-performing assets (NPAs) decreased to $1.5 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $2.0 million at December 31, 2020. NPAs as a percentage of total assets was 0.11% and 0.16% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
•
In 2020, the Bank recognized one-time pre-tax expenses of $1.1 million associated with three strategic initiatives: prepayment of FHLB advances, a voluntary Early Retirement Incentive Plan (ERIP), and a loss on sale of a loan pool effectively removing non- or under-performing credit relationships from the balance sheet.
Capital Management and Dividends
Total equity was $120.8 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $117.1 million at December 31, 2020. Capital growth resulted primarily from earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by increased cash dividends and net unrealized losses on available-for-sale securities, a component of accumulated comprehensive income.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company declared dividends of $0.50 per share. Annual dividends per share increased 4.2% over dividends of $0.48 per share declared in 2020. The Board of Directors of the Company continually reviews the amount of cash dividends per share and the resulting dividend payout ratio. The Company’s principal goals related to the maintenance of capital are to provide adequate capital to support the Company’s risk profile consistent with the board approved risk appetite, provide financial flexibility to support future growth and client needs, comply with relevant laws, regulations, and supervisory guidance, and provide a competitive return to stockholders. Risk-based capital ratios, which include CET1 capital, Tier 1 capital and Total capital for the Bank are calculated based on regulatory guidance related to the measurement of capital and risk-weighted assets.
Effective October 19, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program. The Company is authorized pursuant to this program to repurchase up to 10% of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock through November 30, 2022. Repurchases under the program may be made through privately negotiated transactions or open market transactions, including pursuant to a trading plan in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 and/or Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and shares repurchased will be returned to the status of authorized and unissued shares of common stock. The timing, number and purchase price of shares repurchased under the program, if any, will be determined by management in its discretion and will depend on a number of factors, including the market price of the shares as a percentage of tangible book value, general market and economic conditions, applicable legal requirements and other conditions, and there is no assurance that the Company will purchase any shares under the program. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased 6,600 shares, or $150 thousand of its common stock under the 2021 repurchase program. During the first quarter of 2022, approximately 111,000 shares were repurchased by the Company under this plan.
At December 31, 2021, the book value per share of the Company’s common stock was $23.06, and tangible book value per share (non-GAAP) was $22.69, compared to $22.42 and $22.05, respectively, at December 31, 2020. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” below, for information about non-GAAP financial measures, including a reconciliation to the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The accounting and reporting policies of the Company are in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and conform to general practices within the banking industry. The Company’s financial position and results of operations are affected by management’s application of accounting policies, including estimates, assumptions and judgments made to arrive at the carrying value of assets and liabilities and amounts reported for revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Different assumptions in the application of these policies could result in material changes in the Company’s consolidated financial position and/or results of operations. Those accounting policies with the greatest uncertainty and that require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments affecting the application of these policies, and the greatest likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions, or using different assumptions, are described below.
Index
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is established through charges to earnings in the form of a provision for loan losses. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when it is believed the collection of the principal is unlikely. Subsequent recoveries of losses previously charged against the allowance are credited to the allowance. The allowance represents an amount that, in the Company’s judgment, will be adequate to absorb probable and estimable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The judgment in determining the level of the allowance is based on evaluations of the collectability of loans while taking into consideration such factors as trends in delinquencies and charge-offs for relevant periods of time, changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, current economic conditions that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay and the value of collateral, overall portfolio quality and review of specific potential losses. This evaluation is inherently subjective because it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available. In evaluating the level of the allowance, management considers a range of possible assumptions and outcomes related to the various factors identified above. Under alternative assumptions that we considered in developing our estimate of an allowance that will be adequate to absorb probable and estimable losses inherent in the loan portfolio at December 31, 2021, our estimate of the allowance varied between $7 million and $10 million.
For further information concerning accounting policies, refer to Note 1, Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Net Interest Income
The principal source of earnings for the Company is net interest income. Net interest income is the difference between interest and fees generated by earning assets and interest expense paid to fund them. Changes in the volume and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as their respective yields and rates, have a significant impact on the level of net interest income. The NIM is calculated by dividing tax-equivalent net interest income by average earning assets.
Net interest income was $38.8 million in 2021, an increase of $4.1 million from 2020. The NIM was 3.24% in 2021 as compared to 3.18% in 2020. Net interest income, on a fully tax-equivalent basis, was $39.0 million in 2021, an increase of $4.2 million from 2020. On a fully tax-equivalent basis, NIM was 3.26% in 2021 as compared to 3.19% in 2020. Year-over-year, average loan yields were higher by 19 basis points. While the lower interest rate environment during 2021 resulted in lower average yields on new loan originations, including PPP loans, which earn interest at a fixed 1%, and repricing within the existing loan portfolio, average loan yields were higher due to accelerated recognition of deferred fees and costs related to PPP forgiveness and the collection of prepayment penalties on one commercial relationship. Loan fees and costs related to PPP loans are deferred at time of loan origination, are amortized into interest income over the remaining terms of the loans and accelerated upon forgiveness or repayment of the PPP loans. Net PPP fees of $3.2 million and $813 thousand were recognized in 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, unamortized net deferred PPP fees were $630 thousand. High levels of liquidity invested at lower yielding short-term levels in the low interest rate environment also continue to impact the NIM. For more information about these FTE financial measures, please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Average loans, which includes both loans held for investment and loans held for sale, increased $7.5 million to $841.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. Average loans held for investment included $53.5 million and $63.8 million of average balances of loans originated under the PPP for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The remaining increase in average loans outstanding 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to growth in the commercial real estate segment of the loan portfolio. Average securities available for sale increased $42.5 million for 2021, compared to 2020, due primarily to higher purchases of securities. The average yield on the securities portfolio on a taxable-equivalent basis decreased 22 basis points for 2021, compared to 2020, due to purchases of securities in 2020 and 2021 at lower average yields relative to the average yield of the portfolio as a whole.
Average money market, savings and interest-bearing demand deposits increased $99.3 million and average time deposits decreased $29.5 million, for the year ended 2021, respectively, compared to the same periods in 2020, due to growth in consumer and business deposits primarily as a result of new accounts and liquidity from government stimulus programs as well as a shift from time deposits as a result of lower interest rates. Average noninterest-bearing demand deposits increased $66.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. The average cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 27 basis points for 2021 compared to the same 2020 period, due primarily to lower rates on deposits and a shift in composition from time deposits. While changes in rates take effect immediately for interest checking, money market and savings accounts, changes in the average cost of time deposits lag changes in pricing based on the repricing of time deposits at maturity.
Index
Average borrowings decreased $44.8 million year-over-year due primarily to the repayment of PPPLF borrowings during 2021 and long-term borrowings in 2020. The average cost of borrowings increased 87 basis points during 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to the issuance of subordinated notes by the Company during July 2021 partially offset by the repayment of higher-cost long-term borrowings during 2020.
The following table shows an analysis of average earning assets, interest-bearing liabilities and rates and yields. Nonaccrual loans are included in loans outstanding.
TABLE 1: AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS, NET INTEREST INCOME AND RATES
*Computed on a fully tax-equivalent basis (non-GAAP) using a 21% rate, adjusting interest incomeby $248 thousand, $187 thousand, and $253 thousand, respectively.
Index
Interest income and expense are affected by fluctuations in interest rates, by changes in volume of earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and by the interaction of rate and volume factors. The following table shows the direct causes of the year-to-year changes in the components of net interest income. The Company calculates the rate and volume variances using a formula prescribed by the SEC. Rate/volume variances, the third element in the calculation, are not show separately in the table, but are allocated to the rate and volume variances in proportion to the absolute dollar amounts of each.
TABEL 2: VOLUME AND RATE ANALYSIS*
* Computed on a fully tax-equivalent basis, non-GAAP, using a 21% rate.
** Other investments include interest-bearing balances due from banks.
The Company believes NIM may be affected in future periods by several factors that are difficult to predict, including (1) changes in interest rates, which may depend on the severity of adverse economic conditions, the timing and extent of any economic recovery, and the extent or continuing impact of government stimulus measures, which are inherently uncertain, (2) possible changes in the composition of earning assets which may result from decreased loan demand as a result of the current economic environment; and (3) the recognition of net deferred fees on PPP loans, which is subject to the timing of repayment or forgiveness. However, if market interest rates rise to a meaningful degree in 2022, as some financial markets predict, the Company may benefit from higher yields on certain interest earning assets, which would be expected to outpace any increases in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities
Discussion of net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Net Interest Income” in the Company’s 2020 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on March 30, 2021, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is a charge against earnings necessary to maintain the allowance for loan losses at a level consistent with management's evaluation of the portfolio. This expense is based on management's estimate of probable credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio. Management’s evaluation included credit quality trends, collateral values, discounted cash flow analysis, loan volumes, geographic, borrower and industry concentrations, the findings of internal credit quality assessments and results from external regulatory examinations. These factors, as well as identified impaired loans, historical losses and current economic and business conditions including uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, were used in developing estimated loss factors for determining the loan loss provision. Based on its analysis of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses, management concluded that the provision was appropriate.
Index
The provision for loan losses was $794 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.0 million for 2020. Historical loss rates, levels of non-performing assets, and credit quality continued to improve in 2021 and contributed to a lower provision recognized in 2021; however, these developments were partially offset by the impact of two commercial relationships that were downgraded during 2021 and qualitative factor adjustments for loan volume trends. During 2020, increased qualitative reserves primarily related to uncertainties associated with expected asset quality deterioration as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic disruption offset by improvements in qualitative historical loss factors. Charged-off loans totaled $1.1 million in 2021, compared to $2.0 million in 2020. Recoveries amounted to $649 thousand in 2021 and $886 thousand in 2020. The Company’s net loans charged off to average loans were 0.06% in 2021 as compared to 0.13% in 2020.
The state of the local economy can have a significant impact on the level of loan charge-offs. If the economy begins to contract, nonperforming assets could increase as a result of declines in real estate values and home sales or increases in unemployment rates and financial stress on borrowers. Increased nonperforming assets would increase charge-offs and reduce earnings due to larger contributions to the loan loss provision.
Noninterest Income
Unless otherwise noted, all comparisons in this section are between the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Noninterest income increased $187 thousand or 1.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, increases in fiduciary and asset management fees ($321 thousand or 8.3%), other service charges, commissions and fees ($141 thousand or 3.50%), bank-owned life insurance income ($175 thousand or 20.9%), and mortgage banking income ($499 thousand or 28.0%) were partially offset by nonrecurring gains on sale of real estate ($818 thousand) which occurred in 2020. Trust’s operating results improved significantly from 2020 to 2021, primarily due to increased fiduciary and asset management fees across Trust’s retirement solutions, wealth management and trust business lines, as well as strong market performance during 2021 that increased Trust client account balances.
Other service charges, commissions and fees increased primarily due to growth in merchant processing income, debit card fee income, and telephone payment fees. Mortgage banking income increased primarily due to (i) higher volume resulting from the current low interest rate environment, (ii) higher gains on sales of loans as a result of higher margins on loan originated for resale and (iii) expansion of the mortgage lending team.
The Company continues to focus on diversifying noninterest income through efforts to expand Trust, insurance, and mortgage banking activities, and a continued focus on business checking and other corporate services.
Discussion of noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2019 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Noninterest Income” in the Company’s 2020 Form 10-K. which was filed with the SEC on March 30, 2021, and is incorporated by reference herein.
Noninterest Expense
Unless otherwise noted, all comparisons in this section are between the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
The Company’s noninterest expense increased $644 thousand or 1.5%. Year-over-year increases were primarily related to data processing, professional services and, other operating expense partially offset by decreased ATM and other losses and losses related to FHLB prepayments.
During 2021, data processing expenses increased $1.1 million or 31.0% as the Company fully executed and implemented multiple solutions as part of the ongoing roadmap for bank-wide technology and operating efficiency initiatives. Initiatives completed during 2021 include a new loan origination system, new online appointment scheduling system, bank-wide ATM upgrades, a new deposit origination platform, a new data analytics solution, and a new payments platform. Critical infrastructure software related to imaging, a new teller platform, and a new online account opening solution are expected to reach completion in first quarter 2022. These initiatives have driven period-over-period increases in data processing costs during the implementation and transition time frames as our operational structure pivoted from in-house to outsourced environments and shifted costs previously included in occupancy and equipment expense. Implementing, integrating, and leveraging these digital and technological strategies as fully implemented and integrated solutions to gain operational efficiencies will remain one area of focus in 2022. The Company is actively engaged in assessing major vendor contracts.
Index
Of the remaining categories of noninterest expense, the most significant changes when comparing 2021 to 2020 were in:
•
Professional services, which increased $325 thousand primarily due to higher legal costs, audit expense and expenses related to the transition from in-house to outsourced data processing environments, and an increased OCC assessment.
•
ATM and other losses, which decreased $367 thousand primarily due to lower impairment of certain low-income housing equity investments.
•
Loss on extinguishment of borrowings, which is related to FHLB advance prepayments of $38.5 million and was recognized in 2020. There were no similar losses during 2021.
•
Other operating expenses, which increased $260 thousand or 7.7% due primarily to an increase in FDIC insurance expense, telephone and courier expense, and other loan expenses due to costs associated with higher loan volumes. The Company recognized a single loss event of $85 thousand in the first quarter of 2020, which did not impact 2021.
The Company also continues to focus on balance sheet repositioning, exploring disposition opportunities of under-utilized real estate and branch optimization with two branch closures completed in the first quarter of 2022, as well as digital initiatives that complement this repositioning.
The provision for income taxes is based upon the results of operations, adjusted for the effect of certain tax-exempt income, non-deductible expenses, and tax credits. In addition, certain items of income and expense are reported in different periods for financial reporting and tax return purposes. The tax effects of these temporary differences are recognized currently in the deferred income tax provision or benefit. Deferred tax assets or liabilities are computed based on the difference between the financial statement and income tax bases of assets and liabilities using the applicable enacted marginal tax rate.
The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 13.3% and 8.8%, respectively. The effective tax rate was affected by to higher pre-tax income.
Discussion of noninterest expense and income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019 has been omitted as such discussion was provided in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis,” under the heading “Noninterest Expense” in the Company’s 2020 Form 10-K, which was filed with the SEC on March 30, 2021, and in incorporated by reference herein.
Balance Sheet Review
At December 31, 2021, the Company had total assets of $1.3 billion, an increase of $112.0 million or 9.1% compared to assets as of December 31, 2020.
Net loans held for investment increased $6.9 million or 0.8%, from $826.8 million at December 31, 2020 to $833.7 million at December 31, 2021. The change in net loans held for investment was primarily affected by a decline of $67.0 million in the PPP loan segment due to forgiveness of $115.3 million of PPP loans, partially offset by new PPP originations of $48.3 million. Loans held for investment, excluding PPP, grew 9.9%, or $74.2 million, driven by loan growth in the following segments: commercial real estate of $66.6 million, construction, land development, and other land loans of $14.9 million, and automobile of $4.7 million. This segmented growth was partially offset by decreases in commercial and industrial and multi-family residential real estate. Cash and cash equivalents increased $67.5 million or 56.0% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, and securities available for sale increased $47.9 million or 25.7% over the same period as additional liquidity provided by growth in deposit accounts was deployed in the Company’s investment portfolio.
Total deposits of $1.2 billion as of December 31, 2021 increased $109.9 million, or 10.3%, from December 31, 2020. Noninterest-bearing deposits increased $60.9 million, or 16.9%, savings deposits increased $73.5 million, or 14.3%, and time deposits decreased $24.5 million, or 12.7%. Liquidity continues to be impacted by record cumulative levels of consumer savings, government stimulus, and PPP loan related deposits. Expanding the low-cost deposit base and re-pricing to reduce interest expense to buffer NIM compression during the low rate environment were key strategies in 2021.
The Company utilized the PPPLF initiated by the Federal Reserve Bank to partially fund PPP loan originations. PPPLF borrowings were $480 thousand at December 31, 2021 compared to $28.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The Company also utilizes FHLB advances as a source of liquidity as needed. At December 31, 2021, the Company had no FHLB advances.
Securities Portfolio
When comparing December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020, securities available-for-sale increased $47.9 million, or 25.7%. The majority of the change was due primarily to purchases of U.S. Treasury securities, securities issued by state and political subdivisions, and mortgage-backed securities to deploy additional liquidity provided by growth in deposit accounts rather than holding in lower yielding cash reserves.
Index
The Company’s strategy for the securities portfolio is primarily intended to manage the portfolio’s susceptibility to interest rate risk and to provide liquidity to fund loan growth. The securities portfolio is also adjusted to achieve other asset/liability objectives, including pledging requirements, and to manage tax exposure when necessary.
The following table sets forth a summary of the securities portfolio:
TABLE 3: SECURITIES PORTFOLIO
The following table summarizes the contractual maturity of the securities portfolio and their weighted average yields as of December 31, 2021:
TABLE 4: MATURITY OF SECURITIES
The table above is based on maturity. Therefore, it does not reflect cash flow from principal payments or prepayments prior to maturity. The weighted average life of the $89.1 million in mortgage-backed securities as of December 31, 2021 was 6.1 years. The weighted average yield is calculated on a fully tax-equivalent basis using a 21% rate on a pro rata basis for each security based on its relative amortized cost.
Index
Loan Portfolio
The following table shows a breakdown of total loans by segment at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
TABLE 5: LOAN PORTFOLIO
(1)
The real estate-mortgage segment included residential 1-4 family, multi-family, second mortgages and equity lines of credit.
Based on the North American Industry Classification System code, there are no categories of loans that exceed 10% of total loans other than the categories disclosed in the preceding table.
As of December 31, 2021, the total loan portfolio increased by $7.2 million or 0.9% from December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in real estate construction and real estate-commercial which were offset by reductions in commercial and industrial due to a decline of $67.0 million in PPP loans outstanding. Net loans held for investment increased 0.8% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. Loans held for investment (net of deferred fees and costs), excluding PPP (non-GAAP), grew 9.9%
The maturity distribution and rate sensitivity of the Company's loan portfolio at December 31, 2021 is presented below:
TABLE 6: MATURITY/REPRICING SCHEDULE OF LOAN PORTFOLIO
(1)
The real estate-mortgage segment included residential 1-4 family, multi-family, second mortgages and equity lines of credit.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and accruing interest, nonperforming restructured loans, and other real estate owned (OREO). Restructured loans are loans with terms that were modified in a troubled debt restructuring (TDR) for borrowers experiencing financial difficulties. Refer to Note 4, Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this report Form 10-K for more information.
Nonperforming assets decreased by $455 thousand or 23.3%, from $2.0 million at December 31, 2020 to $1.5 million at December 31, 2021. The 2021 total consisted of $1.0 million in loans still accruing interest but past due 90 days or more and $478 thousand in nonaccrual loans. All of the nonaccrual loans are classified as impaired and 63.6% of the nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 were secured by real estate. Impaired loans are a component of the allowance for loan losses. When a loan changes from “90 days past due but still accruing interest” to “nonaccrual” status, the loan is normally reviewed for impairment. If impairment is identified, then the Company records a charge-off based on the value of the collateral or the present value of the loan’s expected future cash flows, discounted at the loan's effective interest rate. If the Company is waiting on an appraisal to determine the collateral’s value, management allocates funds to cover the deficiency to the allowance for loan losses based on information available to management at the time.
Index
The recorded investment in impaired loans decreased to $1.3 million as of December 31, 2021 from $2.1 million as of December 31, 2020 as detailed in Note 4, Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K. The majority of these loans were collateralized.
The following table presents information concerning the aggregate amount of nonperforming assets, which includes nonaccrual loans, past due loans, TDRs and OREO:
TABLE 7: NONPERFORMING ASSETS
(1)
The real estate-mortgage segment includes residential 1 - 4 family, second mortgages and equity lines of credit.
(2)
Amounts listed include student loans and small business loans with principal and interest amounts that are 97 - 100% guaranteed by the federal government. The past due principal portion of these guaranteed loans totaled $711 thousand at December 31, 2021 and $547 thousand at December 31, 2020. For additional information, refer to Note 4, Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this report on Form 10-K.
(3)
Amounts listed represent restructured loans that are in compliance with their modified terms as of the date presented.
Index
As shown in the table above, as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020, the nonaccrual loan category decreased by $736 thousand or 60.6% and the 90-days past due and still accruing interest category increased by $281 thousand or 37.8%.
The nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 were related to four credit relationships. All loans in these relationships have been analyzed to determine whether the cash flow of the borrower and the collateral pledged to secure the loans is sufficient to cover outstanding principal balances. The Company has set aside specific allocations for those loans without sufficient cash flow or collateral and charged off any balance that management does not expect to collect.
The majority of the loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest at December 31, 2021 ($711 thousand) were small business and student loans. The federal government has provided guarantees of repayment of these small business and student loans in an amount ranging from 97% to 100% of the total principal and interest of the loans; as such, management does not expect even a significant increase in past due small business or student loans to have a material effect on the Company.
Management believes the Company has excellent credit quality review processes in place to identify problem loans quickly. For a detailed discussion of the Company’s nonperforming assets, refer to Note 4, Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses and Note 5, Other Real Estate Owned (OREO) of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K.
The Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is based on several components. In evaluating the adequacy of the allowance, each segment of the loan portfolio is divided into several pools of loans:
1. Specific identification (regardless of risk rating)
2. Pool-substandard
3. Pool-other assets especially mentioned (OAEM) (rated just above substandard)
4. Pool-pass loans (all other rated loans)
The first component of the allowance for loan losses is determined based on specifically identified loans that may become impaired. These loans are individually analyzed for impairment and include nonperforming loans and both performing and nonperforming TDRs. This component may also include loans considered impaired for other reasons, such as outdated financial information on the borrower or guarantors or financial problems of the borrower, including operating losses, marginal working capital, inadequate cash flow, or business interruptions. Changes in TDRs and nonperforming loans affect the dollar amount of the allowance. Increases in the impairment allowance for TDRs and nonperforming loans are reflected as an increase in the allowance for loan losses except in situations where the TDR or nonperforming loan does not require a specific allocation (i.e., the discounted present value of expected future cash flows or the collateral value is considered sufficient).
The majority of the Company's TDRs and nonperforming loans are collateralized by real estate. When reviewing loans for impairment, the Company obtains current appraisals when applicable. If the Company has not yet received a current appraisal on loans being reviewed for impairment, any loan balance that is in excess of the estimated appraised value is allocated in the allowance. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the impaired loan component of the allowance for loan losses amounted to $128 thousand and $11 thousand, respectively. The increase in the impaired loan component is due primarily to the impairment of one credit relationship. The impaired loan component of the allowance for loan losses is reflected as a valuation allowance related to impaired loans in Note 4, Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K.
The second component of the allowance consists of qualitative factors and includes items such as economic conditions, growth trends, loan concentrations, changes in certain loans, changes in underwriting, changes in management and legal and regulatory changes.
Historical loss is the final component of the allowance for loan losses. The calculation of the historical loss component is conducted on loans evaluated collectively for impairment and uses migration analysis with eight migration periods covering twelve quarters each on pooled segments. These segments are based on the loan classifications set by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council in the instructions for the Call Report applicable to the Bank.
Consumer loans not secured by real estate and made to individuals for household, family and other personal expenditures are segmented into pools based on whether the loan's payments are current (including loans 1 - 29 days past due), 30 - 59 days past due, 60 - 89 days past due, or 90 days or more past due. All other loans, including loans to consumers that are secured by real estate, are segmented by the Company's internally assigned risk grades: substandard, other assets especially mentioned (rated just above substandard), and pass (all other loans). The Company may also assign loans to the risk grades of doubtful or loss, but as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had no loans in these categories.
Index
The overall historical loss rate from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, improved 12 basis points as a percentage of loans evaluated collectively for impairment as a result of overall improving asset quality combined with continued improvement in non-performing assets. For the same period, the qualitative factor components increased 3 basis points as a percentage of loans evaluated collectively for impairment overall. This increase was primarily due to segment adjustments for economic conditions and uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic and change in volume for certain segments. While there have not been significant changes in overall credit quality of the loan portfolio from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, management will continue to monitor economic recovery challenges at macro and micro levels, including levels of inflation, the impacts of new COVID-19 variants, expansion and contraction of pandemic-related government stimulus efforts, supply chain disruption, and employment levels, which may be delaying signs of credit deterioration. If there are further challenges to the economic recovery, elevated levels of risk within the loan portfolio may require additional increases in the allowance for loan losses.
On a combined basis, the historical loss and qualitative factor components amounted to $9.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and $9.4 million at December 31, 2020. Management is monitoring portfolio activity, such as levels of deferral and/or modification requests, deferral and/or modification concentration levels by collateral, as well as industry concentration levels to identify areas within the loan portfolio which may create elevated levels of risk should the economic environment created by uncertainty related to COVID-19 pandemic present indications of economic instability that is other than temporary in nature.
Acquired loans are recorded at their fair value at acquisition date without carryover of the acquiree's previously established ALLL, as credit discounts are included in the determination of fair value. The fair value of the loans is determined using market participant assumptions in estimating the amount and timing of both principal and interest cash flows expected to be collected on the loans and then applying a market-based discount rate to those cash flows. During evaluation upon acquisition, acquired loans are also classified as either purchased credit impaired or purchased performing.
Acquired impaired loans reflect credit quality deterioration since origination, as it is probable at acquisition that the Company will not be able to collect all contractually required payments. These acquired impaired loans are accounted for under ASC 310-30, Receivables - Loans and Debt Securities Acquired with Deteriorated Credit Quality. The acquired impaired loans are segregated into pools based on loan type and credit risk. Loan type is determined based on collateral type, purpose, and lien position. Credit risk characteristics include risk rating groups, nonaccrual status, and past due status. For valuation purposes, these pools are further disaggregated by maturity, pricing characteristics, and re-payment structure. Acquired impaired loans are written down at acquisition to fair value using an estimate of cash flows deemed to be collectible. Accordingly, such loans are no longer classified as nonaccrual even though they may be contractually past due because the Company expects to fully collect the new carrying values of such loans, which is the new cost basis arising from purchase accounting.
Acquired performing loans are accounted for under ASC 310-20, Receivables - Nonrefundable Fees and Other Costs. The difference between the fair value and unpaid principal balance of the loan at acquisition date (premium or discount) is amortized or accreted into interest income over the life of the loans. If the acquired performing loan has revolving privileges, it is accounted for using the straight-line method; otherwise the effective interest method is used.
Overall Change in Allowance
As a result of management's analysis, the Company added, through the provision, $794 thousand to the ALLL for the year ended December 31, 2021. The ALLL, as a percentage of year-end loans held for investment, was 1.17% in 2021 and 1.14% in 2020. The increase in the ALLL as a percentage of loans held for investment at December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily attributable to an increase in loans held for investment, excluding PPP loans, the downgrade of two commercial relationships and qualitative factor adjustments for economic conditions, uncertainty related to the COVID-19 pandemic, and change in volume for certain segments partially offset by improvement in historical loss rates. Excluding PPP loans, the ALLL as a percentage of loans held for investment was 1.20% and 1.27% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Loans held for investment excluding PPP loans is a non-GAAP financial measure. For more information about financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP, please see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below. Management believes that the allowance has been appropriately funded for losses on existing loans, based on currently available information. Low levels of past dues, NPAs, and year-over-year quantitative historical loss rates continue to demonstrate improvement. The Company will continue to monitor the loan portfolio, levels of nonperforming assets, and the sustainability of improving asset quality trends experienced in 2021 closely and make changes to the allowance for loan losses when necessary. As the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, elevated levels of risk within the loan portfolio may require additional increases in the ALLL.
Index
The allowance for loan losses represents an amount that, in management’s judgement, will be adequate to absorb probable losses inherent in the loan portfolio. The provision for loan losses increase the allowance and loans charged-off, net of recoveries, reduce the allowance. The following table presents the Company’s loan loss experience for the periods indicated:
TABLE 8: ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
(1)
The real estate-mortgage segment included residential 1-4 family, multi-family, second mortgages and equity lines of credit.
The following table shows the amount of the allowance for loan losses allocated to each category and the ratio of corresponding outstanding loan balances at December 31 of the years presented. Although the allowance for loan losses is allocated into these categories, the entire allowance for loan losses is available to cover loan losses in any category.
TABLE 9: ALLOCATION OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
(1)
The real estate-mortgage segment included residential 1-4 family, multi-family, second mortgages and equity lines of credit.
Deposits
The following table shows the average balances and average rates paid on deposits for the periods presented.
Index
TABLE 10: DEPOSITS
The Company’s average total deposits were $1.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $135.9 million or 13.7% from average total deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020. Demand deposit and money market account categories had the largest increases, totaling $66.1 million and $65.0 million, respectively. Average time deposits, which is the Company’s most expensive deposit category, decreased by a total of $29.5 million as seen in the table above. The average rate paid on interest-bearing deposits by the Company in 2021 was 0.39% compared to 0.66% in 2020.
The impact of government stimulus, PPP loan related deposits, and higher levels of consumer savings were primary drivers of the increase in total deposits. The Company remains focused on increasing lower-cost deposits by actively targeting new noninterest-bearing deposits and savings deposits.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the estimated amounts of total uninsured deposits were $271.7 million and $209.5 million, respectively. The following table shows maturities of the estimated amounts of uninsured time deposits at December 31, 2021. The estimate of uninsured deposits generally represents the portion of deposit accounts that exceed the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 and is calculated based on the same methodologies and assumptions used for purposes of the Bank’s regulatory reporting requirements.
TABLE 11: MATURITIES OF UNINSURED TIME DEPOSITS
Capital Resources
Total stockholders' equity as of December 31, 2021 was $120.8 million, up 3.1% from $117.1 million on December 31, 2020 as the result of increased retained earnings partially offset by net unrealized loss on available-for-sale securities, a component of accumulated other comprehensive income on the consolidated balance sheets. The change in the unrealized gain/loss position was driven by changes in market rates and shift in portfolio composition.
The assessment of capital adequacy depends on such factors as asset quality, liquidity, earnings performance, and changing competitive conditions and economic forces. The adequacy of the Company’s and the Bank’s capital is regularly reviewed. The Company targets regulatory capital levels that will assure an adequate level of capital to support anticipated asset growth and to absorb potential losses. While the Company will continue to look for opportunities to invest capital in profitable growth, the Company will also consider investing capital in other transactions, such as share repurchases, that facilitate improving shareholder return, as measured by ROE and earnings per share.
The Bank’s capital position remains strong as evidenced by the regulatory capital measurements. Under the banking regulations, Total Capital is composed of core capital (Tier 1) and supplemental capital (Tier 2). Tier 1 capital consists of common stockholders' equity less goodwill. Tier 2 capital consists of certain qualifying debt and a qualifying portion of the allowance for loan losses.
Index
In June 2013, the federal bank regulatory agencies adopted the Basel III Capital Rules (i) to implement the Basel III capital framework and (ii) for calculating risk-weighted assets. These rules became effective January 1, 2015, subject to limited phase-in periods. The EGRRCPA, enacted in May 2018, required action by the FRB to expand the applicability of its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement, which, among other things, exempts certain bank holding companies from reporting consolidated regulatory capital ratios and from minimum regulatory capital requirements that apply to other bank holding companies. In August 2018, the FRB issued an interim final rule provisionally expanding the applicability of the small bank holding company policy statement to bank holding companies with consolidated total assets of less than $3 billion. The statement previously applied only to bank holding companies with consolidated total assets of less than $1 billion. As a result of the interim final rule, which was effective upon its issuance, the Company expects that it will be treated as a small bank holding company and will not be subject to regulatory capital requirements. For an overview of the Basel III Capital Rules and the EGRRCPA, refer to “Regulation and Supervision” included in Item 1, “Business” of this report on Form 10-K.
On September 17, 2019 the FDIC finalized a rule that introduces an optional simplified measure of capital adequacy for qualifying community banking organizations (i.e., the community bank leverage ratio (CBLR) framework), as required by the EGRRCPA. The CBLR framework is designed to reduce burden by removing the requirements for calculating and reporting risk-based capital ratios for qualifying community banking organizations that opt into the framework.
In order to qualify for the CBLR framework, a community banking organization must have a Tier 1 leverage ratio of greater than 9%, less than $10 billion in total consolidated assets, and limited amounts of off-balance-sheet exposures and trading assets and liabilities. A qualifying community banking organization that opts into the CBLR framework and meets all requirements under the framework will be considered to have met the well-capitalized ratio requirements under the Prompt Corrective Action regulations and will not be required to report or calculate risk-based capital. The CBLR framework was available for banks to begin using in their March 31, 2020, Call Report. The Bank did not opt into the CBLR framework.
The following is a summary of the Bank’s capital ratios for the past two years. As shown below, these ratios were all well above the recommended regulatory minimum levels.
TABLE 12: REGULATORY CAPITAL
On July 14, 2021, the Company issued $30.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 3.50% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes due 2031 (the Notes) in a private placement transaction. The Notes initially bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.50% for five years and convert to three month SOFR plus 286 basis points, resetting quarterly, thereafter. The Notes were structured to qualify as Tier 2 capital for regulatory purposes and are included in the Company’s Tier 2 capital as of December 31, 2021.
Effective October 19, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program. The Company is authorized pursuant to this program to repurchase up to 10% of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock through November 30, 2022. Repurchases under the program may be made through privately negotiated transactions or open market transactions, including pursuant to a trading plan in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 and/or Rule 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and shares repurchased will be returned to the status of authorized and unissued shares of common stock. The timing, number and purchase price of shares repurchased under the program, if any, will be determined by management in its discretion and will depend on a number of factors, including the market price of the shares as a percentage of tangible book value, general market and economic conditions, applicable legal requirements and other conditions, and there is no assurance that the Company will purchase any shares under the program. The Company repurchased 6,600 shares of the Company’s common stock at an aggregate cost of $150,000 under this plan during 2021. During the first quarter of 2022, approximately 111,000 shares were repurchased by the Company under this plan.
Year-end book value per share was $23.06 in 2021 and $22.42 in 2020. The common stock of the Company has not been extensively traded. The stock is quoted on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol “OPOF.” There were 1,568 stockholders of record of the Company as of March 15, 2022. This stockholder count does not include stockholders who hold their stock in a nominee registration.
Liquidity
Liquidity is the ability of the Company to meet present and future financial obligations through either the sale or maturity of existing assets or the acquisition of additional funds through liability management. Liquid assets include cash, interest-bearing deposits with banks, federal funds sold, investments in securities and loans maturing within one year.
Index
The Company’s major source of liquidity is its large, stable deposit base. In addition, secondary liquidity sources are available through the use of borrowed funds if the need should arise, including secured advances from the FHLB and FRB. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $391.3 million in FHLB borrowing availability. The Company believes that the availability at the FHLB is sufficient to meet future cash-flow needs. As of year-end 2021 and 2020, the Company had $115.0 million and $100.0 million available in federal funds lines of credit to address any short-term borrowing needs, respectively.
As a result of the Company’s management of liquid assets, the availability of borrowed funds and the ability to generate liquidity through liability funding, management believes that the Company maintains overall liquidity sufficient to satisfy its depositors’ requirements and to meet its customers’ future borrowing needs.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company’s ability to maintain sufficient liquidity may be affected by numerous factors, including economic conditions nationally and in the Company’s markets. Depending on its liquidity levels, its capital position, conditions in the capital markets and other factors, the Company may from time to time consider the issuance of debt, equity, other securities or other possible capital markets transactions, the proceeds of which could provide additional liquidity for the Company’s operations.
The following table sets forth information relating to the Company’s sources of liquidity and the outstanding commitments for use of liquidity at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Dividing the total short-term sources of liquidity by the outstanding commitments for use of liquidity derives the liquidity coverage ratio.
TABLE 13: LIQUIDITY SOURCES AND USES
(1) Represents partial draw levels based on loan segment.
The fair value of unpledged available-for-sale securities increased from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to an increase in the securities portfolio.
Management is not aware of any market or institutional trends, events or uncertainties, other than potential impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, that are expected to have a material effect on the liquidity, capital resources or operations of the Company. Nor is management aware of any current recommendations by regulatory authorities that would have a material effect on liquidity or operations. The Company’s internal sources of liquidity are deposits, loan and investment repayments and securities available-for-sale. The Company’s primary external source of liquidity is advances from the FHLB.
The Company’s operating activities provided $23.2 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $8.6 million used during 2020. The Company’s investing activities used $60.7 million of cash during 2021, compared to $122.2 million of cash used during 2020. The Company’s financing activities provided $105.0 million of cash during 2021 compared to $161.4 million of cash provided during 2020.
In the ordinary course of business, the Company has entered into contractual obligations and has made other commitments to make future payments. For further information concerning the Company’s expected timing of such payments as of December 31, 2021, refer to Note 7, Leases, Note 10, Borrowings, and Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
To meet the financing needs of customers, the Company is a party, in the normal course of business, to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, commitments to sell loans and standby letters of credit. These instruments involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in addition to the amount on the balance sheet. The Company’s exposure to credit loss in the event of nonperformance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit written is represented by the contractual amount of these instruments. The same credit policies are used in making these commitments and conditional obligations as used for on-balance-sheet instruments. Collateral is obtained based on the credit assessment of the customer in each circumstance.
Index
Loan commitments are agreements to extend credit to a customer provided that there are no violations of the terms of the contract prior to funding. Commitments have fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee by the customer. Since many of the commitments may expire without being completely drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. The total amount of unused loan commitments at the Bank was $167.1 million at December 31, 2021, and $151.6 million at December 31, 2020.
Standby letters of credit are written conditional commitments issued by the Bank to guarantee the performance of a customer to a third party. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loans to customers. The total contract amount of standby letters of credit was $3.6 million at December 31, 2021 and $4.8 million at December 31, 2020.
Management believes that the Company has the liquidity and capital resources to handle these commitments in the normal course of business. See Note 15 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this report on Form 10-K.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recent accounting pronouncements affecting the Corporation are described in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” under the heading “Note 1: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Significant Accounting Pronouncements.”
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In reporting the results of the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has provided supplemental financial measures on a tax-equivalent or an adjusted basis. These non-GAAP financial measures are a supplement to GAAP, which is used to prepare the Company’s financial statements, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for comparable measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. In addition, the Company’s non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to non-GAAP financial measures of other companies. The Company uses the non-GAAP financial measures discussed herein in its analysis of the Company’s performance. The Company’s management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide additional understanding of ongoing operations and enhance comparability of results of operations with prior periods presented without the impact of items or events that may obscure trends in the Company’s underlying performance. A reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures used by the Company to evaluate and measure the Company’s performance to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures is presented below.
Index
TABLE 14: Non-GAAP FINACIAL MEASURES