ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, and elsewhere in this report, for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our fiscal year ends on April 30. References to fiscal 2021 are to the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021.
Business Overview
We provide ocean data collection and reporting, marine power, offshore communications, and Maritime Domain Awareness (“MDA”) products and consulting services. We offer our products and services to a wide-range of customers, including those in government and offshore energy, oil and gas, construction, wind power and other industries. We are involved in the entire life cycle of product development, from product design through manufacturing, testing, deployment, maintenance and upgrades. working closely with partners across our supply chain. We also work closely with our third party partners that provide us with, among other things, software, controls, sensors, integration services, and marine installation services. Our solutions enable technologies for data collection, analysis, and communication in ocean and other offshore environments, and generate actionable intelligence via a variety of inputs. We then channel the information we collect, and other communications, through control equipment linked to edge computing and cloud hosting environments.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic presented substantial health and economic risks, uncertainties and challenges to our business, the global economy and financial markets. During 2020 we started to experience some delays related to the impact of COVID-19 on the international supply chain. We were able to mitigate much of the impact by consuming not only internal inventory but also by expanding our supply base. While our supply chain is primarily domestically oriented with the majority of our products domestically sourced, we obtain some components from Asia and Europe. We use a combination of off-the-shelf components and equipment as well as custom developed parts. There have been a number of disruptions throughout the global supply chain which have impacted our development and manufacturing. As the global economy continues to open up, it is driving the demand for certain components. This has outpaced the return of the global supply chain to full production. Although we have been able to find alternatives for many component shortages without compromising our product standards or integrity, we experienced, and continue to experience, some delays and cost increases with respect to container shortages, ocean shipping and air freight. In addition, our key suppliers have experienced longer lead times and cost increases for raw materials and have experienced periods of interruption to production due to COVID-19 and its variants affecting manpower.
As of April 30, 2022, local manpower and similar COVID-related problems are starting to ease. Like others in the industry we continue to have concerns over component shortages, particularly for semiconductors, lithium-ion batteries and specialty metals, however, this has not prevented us from manufacturing our products. If spikes in COVID-19 and its variants occur in regions in which our supply chain operates, we could experience periodic interruptions or impacts due to delays in components and incur further freight price increases. We continue to monitor and adjust our operations, as appropriate. in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Capital Raises
At the Market Offering Agreements
On January 7, 2019, the Company entered into an At the Market Offering Agreement (“2019 ATM Facility”) with AGP, under which the Company may issue and sell to or through AGP, acting as agent and/or principal, shares of the Company’s common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million. From inception of the program through its termination on December 8, 2020, under the 2019 ATM Facility, the Company sold and issued an aggregate of 17,595,472 shares of its common stock with an aggregate market value of $23.4 million at an average price of $1.33 per share and paid AGP a sales commission of approximately $0.8 million related to those shares. The agreement was fully utilized and terminated on December 8, 2020.
On November 20, 2020, the Company entered into an At the Market Offering Agreement with AGP (the “2020 ATM Facility”). On December 4, 2020, the Company filed a prospectus with the Securities and Exchange Commission whereby, the Company could issue and sell to or through AGP, acting as agent and/or principal, shares of the Company’s common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. From inception of the 2020 ATM Facility through April 30, 2022, the Company sold and issued an aggregate of 17,179,883 shares of its common stock with an aggregate market value of $50.0 million at an average price of $2.91 per share and paid AGP a sales commission of approximately $1.6 million related to those shares. A prospectus supplement was filed on January 10, 2022 to allow the Company to sell an additional $25.0 million (or an aggregate of $75.0 million) under the 2020 ATM Facility, none of which has been sold to date.
Equity Line Common Stock Purchase Agreements
On October 24, 2019, the Company entered into a common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital which provided that, subject to certain terms, conditions and limitations, Aspire Capital was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $10.0 million shares of the Company’s common stock over a 30-month period. Through September 18, 2020, the Company had sold an aggregate of 6,424,205 shares of common stock with an aggregate market value of $4.0 million at an average price of $0.63 per share pursuant to this common stock purchase agreement. The agreement was fully utilized and terminated on September 18, 2020.
On September 18, 2020, the Company entered into a new common stock purchase agreement with Aspire Capital which provided that, subject to certain terms, conditions and limitations, Aspire Capital was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $12.5 million shares of the Company’s common stock over a 30-month period subject to a limit of 19.99% of the outstanding common stock on the date of the agreement if the price did not exceed a specified price in the agreement. The number of shares the Company could issue within the 19.99% limit was 3,722,251 shares without shareholder approval. Shareholder approval was received at the Company’s annual meeting of shareholders on December 23, 2020 for the sale of 9,864,706 additional shares of common stock which exceeds the 19.99% limit of outstanding common stock on the date of the agreement. Through April 30, 2022, the Company had sold an aggregate of 3,722,251 shares of common stock with an aggregate market value of $11.8 million at an average price of $3.17 per share pursuant to this common stock purchase agreement.
The sale of additional equity or convertible securities could result in dilution to our shareholders. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock, these securities could have rights senior to those associated with our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. The Company currently has committed sources of equity financing through it’s At the Market Offering Agreement with A.G.P/Alliance Global Partners (“AGP”) and the Aspire Capital financing (see Note 12), but the Company cannot be sure that additional equity and/or debt financing will be available to the Company as needed on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain required financing when needed, we may be required to reduce the scope of our operations, including our planned product development and marketing efforts, which could materially and adversely affect our financial condition and operating results. If we are unable to secure additional financing, we may be forced to cease our operations.
Backlog
As of April 30, 2022, the Company’s backlog was $0.6 million. As of April 30, 2021, backlog was $0.2 million. Our backlog can include unfilled firm orders for our products and services from commercial or governmental customers. If any of our contracts were to be terminated, our backlog would be reduced by the expected value of the remaining terms of such contract.
The amount of contract backlog is not necessarily indicative of future revenue because modifications to or terminations of present contracts and production delays can provide additional revenue or reduce anticipated revenue. A substantial portion of our revenues is recognized using the input method used to measure completion over time of customer contracts, and changes in estimates from time to time may have a significant effect on revenue and backlog. Our backlog is also typically subject to large variations from time to time due to the timing of new awards.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
To understand our financial statements, it is important to understand our critical accounting policies and estimates. We prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
We believe the following accounting policies require significant judgment and estimates by us in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
A performance obligation is the unit of account for revenue recognition. The Company assesses the goods or services promised in a contract with a customer and identifies as a performance obligation either: a) a good or service (or a bundle of goods or services) that is distinct; or b) a series of distinct goods or services that are substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer to the customer. A contract may contain a single or multiple performance obligations. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the Company allocates the contracted transaction price to each performance obligation based upon the relative standalone selling price, which represents the price the Company would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. The Company determines the standalone selling price based upon the facts and circumstances of each obligated good or service. The majority of the Company’s contracts have no observable standalone selling price since the associated products and services are customized to customer specifications. As such, the standalone selling price generally reflects the Company’s forecast of the total cost to satisfy the performance obligation plus an appropriate profit margin.
The nature of the Company’s contracts may give rise to several types of variable considerations, including unpriced change orders and liquidated damages and penalties. Variable consideration can also arise from modifications to the scope of services. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur once the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include such amounts in the transaction price are based largely on our assessment of legal enforceability, performance and any other information (historical, current, and forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. There was no variable consideration as of April 30, 2022 and 2021.
The Company recognizes revenue when or as it satisfies a performance obligation by transferring a good or service to a customer, either (1) at a point in time or (2) over time. A good or service is transferred when or as the customer obtains control of it. The evaluation of whether control of each performance obligation is transferred at a point in time or over time is made at contract inception. Input measures such as costs or labor hours incurred are utilized to assess progress against specific contractual performance obligations for the Company’s services. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the services to be provided. For the Company, the input method using costs or labor hour incurred best represents the measure of progress against the performance obligations incorporated within the contractual agreements. When the Company’s estimate of total costs to be incurred to satisfy the performance obligations exceeds revenues, the Company recognizes the loss immediately.
Financial Operations Overview
The following table provides information regarding the breakdown of our revenues by customer for fiscal years 2022 and 2021:
We currently focus our sales and marketing efforts globally. The following table shows the percentage of our revenues by geographical location of our customers for fiscal 2022 and 2021:
Foreign exchange loss
We transact business in various countries and have exposure to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. Foreign exchange gains and losses arise in the translation of foreign-denominated assets and liabilities, which may result in realized and unrealized gains or losses from exchange rate fluctuations. Since we conduct our business in U.S. dollars and our functional currency is the U.S. dollar, our main foreign exchange exposure, if any, results from changes in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and other foreign currencies.
We maintain cash accounts that are denominated in British pounds sterling, Euros and Australian dollars in addition to U.S. dollars. These foreign denominated accounts had a balance of $28,000 as of April 30, 2022 and $0.3 million as of April 30, 2021, compared to our total cash, cash equivalents, short term investments, and restricted cash balances of $57.7 million as of April 30, 2022 and $83.6 million as of April 30, 2021.
In addition, a portion of our operations is conducted through our subsidiaries in countries other than the U.S., specifically Ocean Power Technologies Ltd. in the United Kingdom, the functional currency of which is the British pound sterling, and Ocean Power Technologies (Australasia) Pty Ltd. in Australia, the functional currency of which is the Australian dollar. Both of these subsidiaries have foreign exchange exposure that results from changes in the exchange rate between their functional currency and other foreign currencies in which they conduct business. As of April 30, 2022, the Company had liquidated our Australian subsidiary. The unrealized gains or losses resulting from foreign currency balances translation are included in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss within Shareholders’ Equity.
We currently do not hedge our exchange rate exposure. However, we assess the anticipated foreign currency working capital requirements and capital asset acquisitions of our foreign operations and attempt to maintain a portion of our cash and cash equivalents denominated in foreign currencies sufficient to satisfy these anticipated requirements. We also assess the need and cost to utilize financial instruments to hedge currency exposures on an ongoing basis and may hedge against exchange rate exposure in the future.
Results of Operations
This section should be read in conjunction with the discussion below under “- Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Fiscal Years Ended April 30, 2022 and 2021
The following table contains selected Consolidated Statements of Operations information, which serves as the basis of the discussion of our results of operations for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021:
Revenues
Revenues for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021 were approximately $1.8 million and $1.2 million, respectively, representing an increase of approximately $0.6 million, or 46%, from 2021. The $0.6 million increase in revenues for the full year was mainly attributable to increases from MAR of $0.4 million and from 3Dent $0.9 million.
Cost of revenues
Our cost of revenues consists primarily of subcontracts, incurred material, lab and manufacturing overhead expenses, such as engineering expense, equipment depreciation and maintenance and facility related expenses, and includes the cost of equipment to customize the PowerBuoy® and WAM-V®, supplied by third-party suppliers. Cost of revenues also includes PowerBuoy® and WAM-V® system delivery and deployment expenses and may include anticipated losses at completion on certain contracts.
Cost of revenues for the fiscal years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021 were approximately $1.9 million and $2.3 million, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of salaries and other personnel-related costs and the costs of products, materials and outside services used in our product development and unfunded research activities, professional fees, salaries and other personnel-related costs for employees and consultants engaged in sales and marketing and support of our PowerBuoy® systems and costs for executive, accounting and administrative personnel, and other general corporate expenses. Our product development costs relate primarily to our efforts to increase the power output and reliability of our PowerBuoy® system, production of our WAM-Vs®, and to the development of new products, product applications and complementary technologies. We expense all of our engineering and product development costs as incurred.
Operating expenses during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022 were $21.5 million as compared to $12.5 million for fiscal year 2021. The increase of $9.0 million, or 72%, is due to higher spending on product development of $4.4 million, an increase of $0.7 million related to the acquisition of MAR and $0.9 million of additional stock compensation expense relating to January 2022 awards, compared to the same period in fiscal 2021.
Litigation settlement
On May 19, 2021, the Company entered into a Stipulation with Charles F. Dunleavy, former Chief Executive Officer (refer to Item 3. Legal Proceedings above for a description of the case). The Stipulation recounts that the panel of arbitrators in the Action issued two interim awards total $1.2 million. The Company recorded the settlement cost as Litigation Settlement in the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the year ended April 30, 2021.
Interest income, net and other income (loss)
Interest income, net consists of interest received on cash and cash equivalents, investments in money market accounts and short-term investments and is net of interest expense paid on certain obligations to third parties. Total cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term investments was $57.7 million as of April 30, 2022, compared to $83.6 million as of April 30, 2021.
Interest income, net was approximately $124,000 for both fiscal 2022 and 2021. The change was flat year over year due to an increase in interest rates paid, offset by lower interest earning assets.
Other income (loss) includes a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loan in fiscal 2022 of $0.9 million and a loss of $0.2 million on the liquidation of Australian subsidiary.
Foreign exchange (loss)/gain
Foreign exchange loss was approximately ($1,000) for fiscal year 2022 as compared to a foreign exchange gain of $15,000 for fiscal year 2021. The difference was attributable primarily to the relative change in value of the British pound sterling, Euro and Australian dollar compared to the U.S. dollar.
Income tax benefit
During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022, the Company sold New Jersey State net operating losses and research and development credits resulting in the recognition of income tax benefits of $0.4. The Company received the fiscal year 2021 payment of approximately $1.0 million in May, 2021, recognized as an income tax benefit in fiscal 2022. The Company has a full valuation allowance against its deferred tax assets. Also included in the income tax benefit for fiscal year 2022 is a benefit of approximately $0.4 million from the reversal of the valuation allowance resulting from the establishment of a deferred tax liability in connection with the MAR acquisition.
Net cash used in operating activities
During the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022, net cash flows used in operating activities was $21.3 million, an increase of $9.6 million compared to net cash used in operating activities during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021. This increase is mainly driven by increased net operating losses, as well as the gain on forgiveness of our PPP loan, payment of litigation payable, and decreases in accrued expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022 was approximately $54.0 million for fiscal year 2022 versus net cash used in investing activities of approximately $74,000 for fiscal year 2021. The change was primarily the result of the Company investing the majority of its cash into short-term, held to maturity investments of $49.4 million and the acquisition of MAR of $4.1 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022 was approximately $87,000 compared to net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021 of $84.2 million. The decrease in net cash provided by financing activities during the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022 is due to financing activities from prior year of At the Market capital raises of $62.7 million through AGP and ELOC capital raises of $13.4 million with Aspire, $2.8 million from proceeds associated with warrant exercises, $0.2 million proceeds associated with stock option exercises and $0.9 million received from the PPP loan. None of these occurred in the current year.
Effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents
The effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents was a decrease of approximately $32,000 in fiscal year 2022, and an increase of $134,000 for fiscal year 2021, respectively. The effect of exchange rates on cash and cash equivalents results primarily from gains or losses on consolidation of foreign subsidiaries and foreign denominated cash and cash equivalents.
Liquidity Outlook
Since our inception, the cash flows from customer revenues have not been sufficient to fund our operations and provide the capital resources for our business. For the two years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021, our aggregate revenues were $3.0 million, our aggregate net losses were $33.5 million and our aggregate net cash used in operating activities was $33.1 million.
We expect to devote substantial resources to continue our development efforts for our products and to expand our sales, marketing and manufacturing programs associated with the continued commercialization of our products. Our future capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including but not limited to:
● our ability to develop, market and commercialize our products, and achieve and sustain profitability;
● our continued development of our proprietary technologies, and expected continued use of cash from operating activities unless or until we achieve positive cash flow from the commercialization of our products and services;
● our ability to obtain additional funding, as and if needed which will be subject to several factors, including market conditions, and our operating performance;
● the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants on our business, operations, customers, suppliers and manufacturers and personnel as well as their effects on supply chain and inflation;
● our acquisitions and our ability to integrate them into our operations may use significant resources, be unsuccessful or expose us to unforeseen liabilities;
● our ability to meet product development, manufacturing and customer delivery deadlines that may be impacted by disruptions to our supply chain, primarily related to labor shortages and manufacturing and transportation delays both here in the U.S. and abroad;
● our estimates regarding future expenses, revenues, and capital requirements;
● our ability to identify and penetrate markets for our products, services, and solutions;
● our ability to implement our commercialization strategy as planned, or at all;
● our relationships with our strategic partners may not be successful and we may not be successful in establishing additional relationships;
● our ability to maintain the listing of our common stock on the NYSE American;
● the reliability of our technology, products and solutions;
● our ability to improve the power output and survivability of our products;
● the impact of pending and threatened litigation on our business, financial condition and liquidity;
● changes in current legislation, regulations and economic conditions that affect the demand for renewable energy, or restrict the use of our products;
● our ability to attract and retain key personnel, including senior management, to achieve our business objectives;
● our history of operating losses, which we expect to continue for at least the short term and possibly longer; and
● our ability to protect our intellectual property portfolio.
Our business is capital intensive, and up through fiscal 2022, we have been funding our business principally through sales of our securities. As of April 30, 2022, the cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term investments balance was $57.7 million and we expect to fund our business with this amount and, to a limited extent, with our revenues until we generate sufficient cash flow to internally fund our business. Management believes the Company’s current cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments are sufficient to fund its planned expenditures through at least July 31, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet financing activities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting and Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, “Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments.” The amendment in this update replaces the incurred loss impairment methodology in current GAAP with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses on instruments within its scope, including trade receivables. This update is intended to provide financial statement users with more decision-useful information about the expected credit losses. This ASU is effective for annual periods and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of ASU 2016-13 but does not expect it to be material to its consolidated financial statements.