ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the discussion is intended to provide an analysis of significant trends and material changes in our financial position and the operating results of our business during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains numerous forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this filing, particularly in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
See below for a discussion on the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Corporate Overview
Orgenesis Inc., a Nevada corporation, is a global biotech company working to unlock the potential of cell and gene therapies (“CGTs”) in an affordable and accessible format.
CGTs can be centered on autologous (using the patient’s own cells) or allogenic (using master banked donor cells) and are part of a class of medicines referred to as advanced therapy medicinal products (“ATMP”). We are mostly focused on autologous therapies, with processes and systems that are developed for each therapy using a closed and automated processing system approach that is validated for compliant production near the patient for treatment of the patient at the point of care (“POCare”). This approach has the potential to overcome the limitations of traditional commercial manufacturing methods that do not translate well to commercial production of advanced therapies due to their cost prohibitive nature and complex logistics to deliver such treatments to patients (ultimately limiting the number of patients that can have access to, or can afford, these therapies).
To achieve these goals, we have developed a Point of Care Platform (“POCare Platform”) comprised of three enabling components: (i) a pipeline of licensed POCare advanced therapies that are designed to be processed and produced, (ii) automated closed POCare technology systems, and (iii) a collaborative worldwide network of POCare research institutes and hospitals (“POCare Network”).
The POCare Platform relies in particular on the development of its own production capacity, known as “POCare Services”, whose goal is to ensure that therapies are accessible at the point of treatment (the “POCare Center”). POCare Services, which have been expanding worldwide, are based on a global approach and local adaptation that allows replication and expansion. Global harmonization of the POCare Services is ensured by a central quality system, replicability of infrastructure and equipment and centralized monitoring and data management.
POCare Centers are the decentralised hubs that provide harmonized services to customers and partners. We are working to provide a more efficient and scalable pathway for advanced therapies to reach patients more rapidly at lowered costs. The workflow of a POCare Center is designed to allow rapid capacities expansion while integrating new technologies. We also draw on extensive medical expertise to identify promising new autologous therapies to leverage within the POCare Platform either via ownership or licensing.
The POCare Network brings together patients, doctors and industry partners with a goal of achieving harmonized, regulated clinical development and production of POCare advanced therapies.
We have worked to develop and validate POCare technologies that can be combined within mobile production units for advanced therapies. We have made significant investments in the development of several types of Orgenesis Mobile Processing Units and Labs (“OMPULs”) with the expectation of use and/or distribution through our POCare Network and/or partners, collaborators, and regional distributors. As of the date of this report, the OMPULs have been adapted for processing of CAR-T, TILS and MSC based products and are in the qualification stage for clinical use in various locations. Additional OMPULs are still in the development stage.
OMPULs are designed for the purpose of validation, development, performance of clinical trials, manufacturing and/or processing of potential or approved advanced therapy products in a safe, reliable, and cost-effective manner at the point of care, as well as the manufacturing of such CGTs in a consistent and standardized manner in all locations. The OMPUL design delivers a potential industrial solution for us to deliver CGTs to practically any clinical institution at the point of care.
The Chief Executive Officer is our chief operating decision-maker who reviews financial information prepared on a consolidated basis. All of our operations are in one segment, being the point-of-care business via our POCare Platform. Therefore, no segment information has been presented.
POCare Platform Operations via Subsidiaries
We currently conduct our core business operations ourselves and through our subsidiaries which are all wholly owned except as otherwise stated below (collectively, the “Subsidiaries”). The Subsidiaries are listed in this annual report in Item 8.
Discontinued Operations
Until December 31, 2019, we operated the POCare Platform as one of two business separate business segments.
The second separate business segment was operated as a Contract Development and Manufacturing Organization (“CDMO”) platform, providing third party contract manufacturing and development services for biopharmaceutical companies (the “CDMO Business”). The CDMO platform was historically operated mainly through majority owned Masthercell Global Inc.
In February 2020, we and GPP-II Masthercell LLC (“GPP”) sold 100% of the outstanding equity interests of Masthercell (the “Masthercell Business”), which comprised the majority of our CDMO Business, to Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc. for an aggregate nominal purchase price of $315 million, subject to customary adjustments (the “Masthercell Sale”).
We determined that the Masthercell Business (“Discontinued Operations” or “Discontinued Operation”) meets the criteria to be classified as a discontinued operation as of the first quarter of 2020. The Discontinued Operation includes the vast majority of the previous CDMO Business, including majority owned Masthercell, including MaSTherCell, Masthercell U.S. and all of the Masthercell Global Subsidiaries.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to present substantial public health and economic challenges around the world, and to date has led to the implementation of various responses, including government-imposed quarantines, stay-at-home orders, travel restrictions, mandated business closures and other public health safety measures.
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it has and will continue to impact our operations and the operations of our suppliers, vendors and business partners, and may take further precautionary and preemptive actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities. In addition, we have taken steps to minimize the current environment’s impact on our business and strategy, including devising contingency plans and securing additional resources from third party service providers. For the safety of our employees and families, we have introduced enhanced safety measures in our facilities.
Beyond the impact on our product development efforts, the extent to which COVID-19 ultimately impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which remain highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak, the emergence of new variants, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 or the effectiveness of actions taken to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, including vaccination campaigns, among others. If we or any of the third parties with whom we engage, however, were to experience any additional shutdowns or other prolonged business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially or negatively affected, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Although to date, our business has not been materially impacted by COVID-19, it is possible that our clinical development timelines could be negatively affected by COVID-19, which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. See “Risk Factors” for additional discussion of the potential adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Developments During Fiscal 2021
License, Collaboration and Joint Venture Agreements
During 2021, we executed several license, collaboration and joint venture agreements, the most significant of which are summarized below. For a more complete description, see notes 11 and 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this annual report on Form 10-K.
Description
Field / Territory
Neuro-immunotherapy exclusive license agreement
Neuro-immunotherapy.
Savicell Collaboration Agreement
Evaluation, continued development, validation, and use of Savicell’s platform designed for the early detection and diagnosis of diseases and conditions and for quality control and monitoring purposes, in conjunction with our systems.
Stromatis Pharma Inc. Collaboration and Sublicense Agreement
Collaboration in refining methods for GMP manufacturing of CAR-T/CAR-NK CT109 and the development and validation of the Stromatis technology as it relates to the CAR-T/CAR-NK CT109 antibody up to and inclusive of filing of Investigational New Drug Application relating to Stromatis’ CAR-T/CAR-NK CT109 antibody.
Helmholtz Zentrum München Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH) Exclusive License
Exclusive license to us in the field of human stem cells.
Celleska LTD Joint Venture Agreement
POCare in Australia.
Johns Hopkins University Sublease and Construction Agreement
Establishment of a clinical therapeutic development and point of care center in Maryland.
Deep Med IO Ltd Joint Venture Agreement
Development and commercialization of an AI-powered system to be used in the manufacturing and/or quality control of CGTs.
Theracell Laboratories Grant
In November 2021, Theracell Laboratories (“Theracell”), our joint venture entity in Greece, was designated as a “Priority Investment of Strategic National Importance” by Enterprise Greece, the official Greek national investment and trade promotion agency, which is responsible for the allocation of Greek government funding. As a result of this designation, Theracell will be inducted into Greece’s fast-track licensing and approval process. This is expected to help advance development and clinical use of Theracell’s CGT at POCare, subject to regulatory requirements.
Theracell has been approved to receive a grant of up to €32 million from the Greek government subject to compliance with budgetary conditions, spread over five years. The proceeds are expected to be used for:
● Installation of OMPULs throughout Greece (Point of Care Mode), which includes the completion of industrial research for the operation and automation of OMPULs intended for mass production of cell and gene therapies and experimental development of novel therapies through clinical trials towards regulatory approval.
● Clinical development, production and distribution of novel cell and gene therapies such as immunological therapies, CAR-T genetic modification therapies and Mesenchymal Stem Cells (MSCs) based therapies.
Revacel Joint Venture
During 2021, we, together with our joint venture partner, Revitas SA, incorporated our joint venture entity Revacel Srl in Belgium. Revacel will develop products in the field of muscle-derived mesenchymal stem/progenitor cells.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
Our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 are summarized as follows in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2020:
Revenues
The following table shows our revenues by major revenue streams:
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $35,502 thousand, as compared to $7,652 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 364%. The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to the increase in point-of-care services revenue as a result of increased activity under master service agreements with our customers.
POC services are mainly the result of agreements between us and our joint venture partners (See note 11 in Item 8). Pursuant to the agreements, we provide certain services in support of our joint venture partners’ activity.
Of such $32,819 thousand of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $3,856 thousand of point-of-care development service revenue from a related party as compared to $1,475 thousand during the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 161%. The increase is attributable to expanded activities and additional services provided in the territory.
A breakdown of the revenues per customer that constituted at least 10% of revenues is as follows:
Cost of services and other research and development expenses
Cost of services and other research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $36,644 thousand, as compared to $83,986 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of 56%.
The changes contributing to the net decrease were mainly attributable to the following:
● We experienced a significant decrease (in the amount of $45.3 million) in other research and development expenses during 2021. In 2020, we made significant investments in the development of several types of OMPULs, accounted for in other research and development expenses, with the expectation of use and/or distribution through our POCare Network of partners, collaborators, and joint ventures. The majority of our OMPUL development work was completed in 2021 and we expect that such OMPULs will be placed into service during 2022.
● Salaries and related expenses increased by $5,802 thousand, as a result of additional staff hired to continue the development of our CGT product pipeline as we expand our POC operations globally. We continue to invest in the development of automated processing units and processes, owned and licensed advanced therapies to enable commercial production, and additional work with partners that address POCare needs.
● We experienced an increase in subcontracting, professional and consulting services of $9,333 thousand. As indicated above, we continue to invest in the development of automated processing units and processes, owned and licensed advanced therapies to enable commercial production, and additional work with partners that address POCare needs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $14,710 thousand, as compared to $18,973 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of 22%. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily attributable to:
● A decrease in accounting and legal fees as a result of decreased corporate investment activities in 2021 compared to 2020; and
● A decrease in business development of $2,900 thousand as a result of reduced business development expenditures in 2021
Such decreases were countered by an increase in salaries and related expenses of $2,898 thousand, mainly as a result of a discretionary bonus to our Chief Executive Officer, Vered Caplan, in the amount of $3.6 million pursuant to the discretionary bonus provisions of the Personal Employment Agreement between Ms. Caplan and Orgenesis Services Sàrl
Financial Expenses, net
Financial expenses, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,292 thousand, as compared to $1,061 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 22%.
Tax expense (income)
Tax expenses (income), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $108 thousand, as compared to $1,609 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 107%. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily attributable due to the release of a tax asset up to the amount of Koligo’s net tax liability in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Discontinued Operations
Discontinued operations relate to the Masthercell Business. The following table presents the financial results associated with the Masthercell Business operation as reflected in our Consolidated Comprehensive loss:
Revenues are attributable to the extension of existing customer service contracts with biotechnology clients and from revenues generated from existing manufacturing agreements. Cost of revenues were in line with the growth in revenues and employment of additional operational staff. Selling, general and administrative expenses included additional managerial appointments, increased professional fees, additional rental space including in the U.S., and an increase of business development expenses.
Working Capital
Current assets decreased by $24,319 thousand between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to a decrease in cash and cash equivalents as the we continued to invest in the expansion of our POC operations globally and in the development of our CGT product pipeline and development of automated processing units and processes, and owned and licensed advanced therapies to enable commercial production; and an increase in accounts receivable as a result of increased POC revenues.
Current liabilities decreased by $920 thousand between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to the following: (i) an decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to the reduction of certain expenses; and (ii) an increase in current maturities of convertible loans.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
During year ended December 31, 2021, we funded our operations from existing funds.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $27 million, as compared to net cash used in operating activities of approximately $78 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Since the Masthercell Sale, and particularly in the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into new joint venture agreements with new partners in various jurisdictions that allowed us to grow our infrastructure and expand our processing sites into new markets and jurisdictions. In addition, we engaged some of these joint venture partners to perform research and development services to further develop and adapt our systems and devices for specific purposes. We invested manpower and financial resources to focus on developing, manufacturing and rolling out several types of OMPULs to be used and/or distributed through our POCare Network of partners, collaborators, and joint ventures.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $12 million, as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of approximately $106 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash provided in the year ended December 31, 2020 was mainly attributable to the Masthercell Sale.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Outlook
Through December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $106.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and negative operating cashflows of $26.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company’s activities have been funded by generating revenue, through offerings of the Company’s securities and selling its Contract Development and Manufacturing Organization (“CDMO”) business. There is no assurance that the Company’s business will generate sustainable positive cash flows to fund its business. See also note 21 with respect to an investment agreement in the amount of approximately $14.8 million (before deducting related offering expenses), which has been entered into subsequent to December 31, 2021.
Based on its current cash resources and commitments, including such investment agreement discussed in note 21, the Company believes it will be able to maintain its current planned development activities and expected level of expenditures for at least 12 months from the date of the issuance of these financial statements, although no assurance can be given that it will not need additional funds prior to such time.
If there are further increases in operating costs for facilities expansion, research and development, commercial and clinical activity or decreases in revenues from customers, the Company will need to use mitigating actions as to seek additional financing or postpone expenses that are not based on firm commitments. In addition, in order to fund the Company’s operations until such time that the Company can generate sustainable positive cash flows, the Company may need to raise additional funds.
In December 2018, we entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or Sales Agreement, with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time through Cantor, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $25.0 million. We will pay Cantor a commission rate equal to 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale. Shares sold under the Sales Agreement will be offered and sold pursuant to our Shelf Registration Statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-223777) that was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 28, 2018, or the Shelf Registration Statement, and a prospectus supplement and accompanying base prospectus that we filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on December 20, 2018. We have not yet sold any shares of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. We believe that the accounting policies below are critical for one to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. Income tax expense is the tax payable or refundable for the period plus or minus the change during the period in deferred tax assets and liabilities.
In addition, our management performs an evaluation of all uncertain income tax positions taken or expected to be taken in the course of preparing our income tax returns to determine whether the income tax positions meet a “more likely than not” standard of being sustained under examination by the applicable taxing authorities. This evaluation is required to be performed for all open tax years, as defined by the various statutes of limitations, for federal and state purposes.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Our agreements are primarily service contracts that range in duration. We recognize revenue when control of these services is transferred to the customer for an amount, referred to as the transaction price, which reflects the consideration to which we are expected to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
A contract with a customer exists only when:
● the parties to the contract have approved it and are committed to perform their respective obligations;
● we can identify each party’s rights regarding the distinct goods or services to be transferred (“performance obligations”);
● we can determine the transaction price for the goods or services to be transferred; and
● the contract has commercial substance and it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which it will be entitled in exchange for the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer.
Nature of Revenue Streams
We have two main revenue streams being POC development services which includes hospital supplies, and cell process development services.
POC Development Services
Revenue recognized under contracts for POC development services may, in some contracts, represent multiple performance obligations (where promises to the customers are distinct) in circumstances in which the work packages are not interrelated or the customer is able to complete the services performed.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices.
We recognize revenue when, or as, it satisfies a performance obligation. At contract inception, we determine whether the services are transferred over time or at a point in time. Performance obligations that have no alternative use and that we have the right to payment for performance completed to date, at all times during the contract term, are recognized over time. All other Performance obligations are recognized as revenues by us at point of time (upon completion).
Included in POC development services is hospital supplies revenue which is derived principally from the sale or lease of products and the performance of services to hospitals or other medical providers. Revenue is earned and recognized when product and services are received by the customer.
Significant Judgement and Estimates
Significant judgment is required to identifying the distinct performance obligations and estimating the standalone selling price of each distinct performance obligation, and identifying which performance obligations create assets with alternative use to us, which results in revenue recognized upon completion, and which performance obligations are transferred to the customer over time.
Cell Process Development Services
Revenue recognized under contracts for cell process development services may, in some contracts, represent multiple performance obligations (where promises to the customers are distinct) in circumstances in which the work packages and milestones are not interrelated or the customer is able to complete the services performed independently or by using our competitors. In other contracts when the above circumstances are not met, the promises are not considered distinct and the contract represents one performance obligation. All performance obligations are satisfied over time, as there is no alternative use to the services it performs, since, in nature, those services are unique to the customer, which retain the ownership of the intellectual property created through the process.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the identified performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. For these contracts, the standalone selling prices are based on our normal pricing practices when sold separately with consideration of market conditions and other factors, including customer demographics and geographic location.
We measure the revenue to be recognized over time on a contract by contract basis, determining the use of either a cost-based input method or output method, depending on whichever best depicts the transfer of control over the life of the performance obligation.