Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
In Management’s Discussion and Analysis, we provide a historical and prospective narrative of our general financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results, including
● an overview of the key drivers and other influences to of the automotive aftermarket industry;
● key events and recent developments within our Company;
● our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020;
● our liquidity and capital resources;
● our critical accounting estimates; and
● recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our Company.
The review of Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be made in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, related notes and other financial information, forward-looking statements and other risk factors included elsewhere in this annual report.
OVERVIEW
We are a specialty retailer of automotive aftermarket parts, tools, supplies, equipment and accessories in the United States and Mexico. We are one of the largest U.S. automotive aftermarket specialty retailers, selling our products to both DIY customers and professional service providers - our “dual market strategy.” Our stores carry an extensive product line consisting of new and remanufactured automotive hard parts, maintenance items, accessories, a complete line of auto body paint and related materials, automotive tools and professional service provider service equipment.
Our extensive product line includes an assortment of products that are differentiated by quality and price for most of the product lines we offer. For many of our product offerings, this quality differentiation reflects “good,” “better,” and “best” alternatives. Our sales and total gross profit dollars are, generally, highest for the “best” quality category of products. Consumers’ willingness to select products at a higher point on the value spectrum is a driver of enhanced sales and profitability in our industry. We have ongoing initiatives focused on marketing and training to educate customers on the advantages of ongoing vehicle maintenance, as well as “purchasing up” on the value spectrum.
Our stores also offer enhanced services and programs to our customers, including used oil, oil filter and battery recycling; battery, wiper and bulb replacement; battery diagnostic testing; electrical and module testing; check engine light code extraction; loaner tool program; drum and rotor resurfacing; custom hydraulic hoses; professional paint shop mixing and related materials; and machine shops. As of December 31, 2021, we operated 5,759 stores in 47 U.S. states and 25 stores in Mexico.
We are influenced by a number of general macroeconomic factors that impact both our industry and our consumers, including, but not limited to, fuel costs, unemployment trends, interest rates and other economic factors. Macroeconomic factors, such as total U.S. unemployment, and demand drivers specific to the automotive aftermarket, such as U.S. miles driven, have been pressured as a result of responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including stay at home orders, work from home arrangements and reduced travel. However, government stimulus and additional unemployment benefits, the ongoing gradual reopening processes across markets we operate in and increased miles driven have positively impacted our performance. Due to the nature of these macroeconomic factors, we are unable to determine how long current conditions, including the pandemic, will persist and the degree of impact future changes may have on our business, industry or broader economic conditions.
We believe the key drivers of current and future long-term demand for the products sold within the automotive aftermarket include the number of U.S. miles driven, number of U.S. registered vehicles, new light vehicle registrations and average vehicle age.
Number of Miles Driven
The number of total miles driven in the U.S. influences the demand for repair and maintenance products sold within the automotive aftermarket. In total, vehicles in the U.S. are driven approximately three trillion miles per year, resulting in ongoing wear and tear and a corresponding continued demand for the repair and maintenance products necessary to keep these vehicles in operation. According to the U.S. Department of Transportation, the number of total miles driven in the U.S. decreased 13.2% in 2020, as a result of responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, however for 2021, miles driven improved and increased 11.2%. Government measures or consumer and business behavior in response to the COVID-19 pandemic could again have a negative impact on miles driven, but we are unable to predict the duration and severity of the impact to our business.
Size and Age of the Vehicle Fleet
The total number of vehicles on the road and the average age of the vehicle population heavily influence the demand for products sold within the automotive aftermarket industry. As reported by The Auto Care Association, the total number of registered vehicles increased 12.7% from 2010 to 2020, bringing the number of light vehicles on the road to 281 million by the end of 2020. Although the rate of new vehicle sales has been pressured due to supply chain constraints experienced by manufacturers, the outlook for the seasonally adjusted annual rate of light vehicle sales in the U.S. (“SAAR”) was approximately 12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The annual changes to the vehicle population resulting from new vehicle sales and the fluctuation in vehicle scrappage rates in any given year represent a small percentage of the total light vehicle population and have a muted impact on the total number and average age of vehicles on the road over the short term. From 2010 to 2020, vehicle scrappage rates have remained relatively stable, ranging from 4.1% to 5.7% annually. As a result, over the past decade, the average age of the U.S. vehicle population has increased, growing 12.3%, from 10.6 years in 2010 to 11.9 years in 2020.
We believe the increase in average vehicle age can be attributed to better engineered and manufactured vehicles, which can be reliably driven at higher mileages due to better quality power trains, interiors and exteriors, and the consumer’s willingness to invest in maintaining these higher-mileage, better built vehicles. The increase in average vehicle age also benefits from an environment of a new vehicle scarcity and higher than typical used vehicle prices, as consumers are more willing to continue to invest in their current vehicle. As the average age of vehicles on the road increases, a larger percentage of miles are being driven by vehicles that are outside of a manufacturer warranty. These out-of-warranty, older vehicles generate strong demand for automotive aftermarket products as they go through more routine maintenance cycles, have more frequent mechanical failures and generally require more maintenance than newer vehicles. We believe consumers will continue to invest in these reliable, higher-quality, higher-mileage vehicles and these investments, along with an increasing total light vehicle fleet, will support continued demand for automotive aftermarket products.
We remain confident in our ability to gain market share in our existing markets and grow our business in new markets by focusing on our dual market strategy and the core O’Reilly values of hard work and excellent customer service.
KEY EVENTS AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
A key event that has had a significant impact on our operations is the COVID-19 pandemic. As we navigate the ongoing challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to place additional emphasis on the safety and wellness of our Team Members and our customers. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the increased level of vaccinations, the ongoing reopening processes across markets we operate in, government stimulus payments and enhanced unemployment benefits positively impacted demand for the products we sell. We continue to keep our stores open and operating to meet our customers’ critical needs, while also ensuring the safety of our Team Members and customers through strict adherence to safety protocols. However, we cannot predict how long the current crisis will last or the extent of its future impacts on our customers, our Team Members, our supply chain and overall industry demand.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The table below compares the Company’s selected financial data over a ten-year period:
(a)
Represents O’Reilly’s U.S. operations only.
(b)
Comparable store sales are calculated based on the change in sales of U.S. stores open at least one year and excludes sales of specialty machinery, sales to independent parts stores, sales to Team Members, sales from Leap Day during the years ended December 31, 2020, 2016 and 2012. Online sales, resulting from ship-to-home orders and pick-up-in-store orders, for U.S. stores open at least one year, are included in the comparable store sales calculation.
(c)
During the year ended December 31, 2017, the Company adopted a new accounting standard that requires excess tax benefits related to share-based compensation payments to be recorded through the income statement. In compliance with the standard, the Company did not restate prior period amounts to conform to current period presentation. The Company recorded a cumulative effect adjustment to opening retained earnings, due to the adoption of the new accounting standard. See Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017, for more information.
(d)
Following the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in December of 2017, the Company revalued its deferred income tax liabilities, which resulted in a one-time benefit to the Company’s Consolidated Statement of Income for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017. See Note 13 “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018, for more information.
(e)
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to current period presentation, due to the Company’s adoption of new accounting standards during the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2015. See Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015, for more information.
(f)
Inventory turnover is calculated as cost of goods sold for the last 12 months divided by average inventory. Average inventory is calculated as the average of inventory for the trailing four quarters used in determining the denominator.
(g)
Accounts payable to inventory is calculated as accounts payable divided by inventory.
(h)
Certain prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform to current period presentation, due to the Company’s adoption of a new accounting standard during the first quarter ended March 31, 2017. See Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements of the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017, for more information.
(i)
Free cash flow is calculated as net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures, excess tax benefit from share-based compensation payments and investment in tax credit equity investments for the period.
(j)
In 2012, 2016 and 2018, the Company acquired materially all assets of VIP Parts, Tires & Service (“VIP”), Bond Auto Parts (“Bond”) and Bennett Auto Supply, Inc. (“Bennett”), respectively. The 2012 VIP acquisition added 56 stores, and the 2016 Bond acquisition added 48 stores to the O’Reilly store count. After the close of business on December 31, 2018, the Company acquired substantially all of the non-real estate assets of Bennett, including 33 stores that were not included in the 2018 store count and were not operated by the Company in 2018, but beginning January 1, 2019, the operations of the acquired Bennett locations were included in the Company’s store count, and during the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company merged 13 of these acquired Bennett stores into existing O’Reilly locations and rebranded the remaining 20 Bennett stores as O’Reilly stores. Financial results for these acquired companies have been included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements from the dates of the acquisitions forward.
(k)
In 2019, the Company acquired Mayoreo de Autopartes y Aceites, S.A. de C.V. (“Mayasa”), which added 21 stores to the O’Reilly store count. Financial results for this acquired company have been included in the Company’s consolidated financial statements beginning from the date of the acquisition.
(l)
Square footage includes normal selling, office, stockroom and receiving space.
(m)
Sales per weighted-average store are weighted to consider the approximate dates of store openings, acquisitions or closures.
(n)
Sales per weighted-average square foot are weighted to consider the approximate dates of domestic store openings, acquisitions, expansions or closures.
The following table includes income statement data as a percentage of sales, which is computed independently and may not compute to presented totals due to rounding differences, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) Each percentage of sales amount is computed independently and may not compute to presented totals.
2021 Compared to 2020
Sales:
Sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $1.72 billion, or 15%, to $13.33 billion from $11.60 billion for the same period in 2020. Comparable store sales for stores open at least one year increased 13.3% and 10.9% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Comparable store sales are calculated based on changes in sales for U.S. domestic stores open at least one year and exclude sales of specialty machinery, sales to independent parts stores and sales to Team Members, as well as sales from Leap Day in the year ended December 31, 2020. Online sales, resulting from ship-to-home orders and pickup in-store orders, for stores open at least one year, are included in the comparable store sales calculation.
The following table presents the components of the increase in sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 (in millions):
We believe the increased sales are the result of store growth, the high levels of customer service provided by our well-trained and technically proficient Team Members, superior inventory availability, including same day and over-night access to inventory from our regional distribution centers and hub store network, enhanced services and programs offered in our stores, a broader selection of product offerings in most stores with a dynamic catalog system to identify and source parts, a targeted promotional and advertising effort through a variety of media and localized promotional events, continued improvement in the merchandising and store layouts of our stores, compensation programs for all store Team Members that provide incentives for performance and our continued focus on serving both DIY and professional service provider customers. The government stimulus payments, enhanced unemployment benefits, and general economic recovery, including lifting of stay at home orders and associated ongoing market reopenings, when combined with positive industry dynamics, such as consumers investing in existing vehicles and favorable weather, contributed to strong demand in the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, despite the global supply chain disruptions that created inventory availability challenges for our industry during the year ended December 31, 2021, the strength of our distribution network and our strong supplier relationships allowed us to maintain better in-stock inventory positions than the broader market and contributed to our sales growth.
Our comparable store sales increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, was driven by increases in average ticket and transaction counts for both professional service provider and DIY customers. Average ticket values continue to be positively impacted by the increasing complexity and cost of replacement parts necessary to maintain the current population of better-engineered and more technically advanced vehicles. These better-engineered, more technically advanced vehicles require less frequent repairs, as the component parts are more durable and last for longer periods of time. The resulting decrease in repair frequency creates pressure on customer transaction counts; however, when repairs are needed, the cost of replacement parts is, on average, greater, which is a benefit to average ticket values. Average ticket values continue to benefit from consumers spending additional time and money repairing and maintaining their vehicles in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the economic environment and the new and used vehicle scarcity. Average ticket values also benefited from increases in average selling prices, on a same-SKU basis, as compared to the same period in 2020, driven by increases in acquisition costs of inventory, which were passed on in market prices. 2021 transaction counts improved due to prior year headwinds to traffic from the initial COVID-19 stay at home orders in 2020 and business restrictions, which resulted in immediate pressure to transaction counts for both DIY and professional service provider customers, combined with continued market reopening and recovery activity, ongoing government stimulus, favorable winter and spring weather conditions and a benefit from new and used vehicle scarcity positively impacting our customers’ willingness to perform or invest in maintenance on their vehicles.
We opened 165 net, new U.S. stores and three new stores in Mexico during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to opening 155 net, new U.S. stores and one new store in Mexico during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we operated 5,759 stores in 47 U.S. states and 25 stores in Mexico compared to 5,594 U.S. stores in 47 states and 22 stores in Mexico at December 31, 2020. We anticipate new store growth will be 175 to 185 net, new store openings in 2022.
Gross profit:
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 15% to $7.02 billion (or 52.7% of sales) from $6.09 billion (or 52.4% of sales) for the same period in 2020. The increase in gross profit dollars for the year ended December 31, 2021, was primarily the result of new store sales and the increase in comparable store sales at existing stores, partially offset by prior year gross profit dollars generated from one additional day due to Leap Day. The increase in gross profit as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, was due to a benefit from selling through inventory purchased prior to recent acquisition cost increases and corresponding selling price increases, partially offset by increased distribution costs. We determine inventory cost using the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method but had, over time, seen our LIFO reserve balance exhausted, resulting in a LIFO inventory value above replacement cost prior to the third
quarter ended September 30, 2021. Our policy is to not write up inventory in excess of replacement cost, and accordingly, we had effectively valued our inventory at replacement cost, resulting in a benefit when selling prices increase as we sold through this lower cost inventory. During 2021, our LIFO reserve reverted back to a more typical credit balance due to recent, significant inflation in acquisition costs; as a result, we anticipate a diminishing benefit moving forward from the final sell through of inventory valued at older, lower replacement cost. Increased distribution system costs were driven by the significant increase in volumes over the past year, challenging labor markets and ongoing global logistical supply chain pressures.
Selling, general and administrative expenses:
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 12% to $4.10 billion (or 30.8% of sales) from $3.67 billion (or 31.6% of sales) for the same period in 2020. The increase in total SG&A dollars for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the result of additional Team Members, facilities and vehicles to support our increased sales and store count, increased incentive compensation for Team Members resulting from our increased sales and operating profits and prior year strict expense control measures in response to the onset of the pandemic environment. The decrease in SG&A as a percentage of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, was principally due to strong leverage of fixed store operating costs on strong comparable store sales growth and higher average store sales volumes.
Operating income:
As a result of the impacts discussed above, operating income for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 21% to $2.92 billion (or 21.9% of sales) from $2.42 billion (or 20.8% of sales) for the same period in 2020.
Other income and expense:
Total other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased 12% to $135 million (or 1.0% of sales), from $153 million (or 1.3% of sales) for the same period in 2020. The decrease in total other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the result of decreased interest expense on lower average outstanding borrowings and lower average cost of borrowings.
Income taxes:
Our provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 20% to $617 million (22.2% effective tax rate) from $514 million (22.7% effective tax rate) for the same period in 2020. The increase in our provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the result of higher taxable income, partially offset by higher excess tax benefits from share-based compensation and a greater benefit from tax credit equity investments. The decrease in our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, was the result of the higher excess tax benefits from share-based compensation and a greater benefit from tax credit equity investments.
Net income:
As a result of the impacts discussed above, net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 24% to $2.16 billion (or 16.2% of sales), from $1.75 billion (or 15.1% of sales) for the same period in 2020.
Earnings per share:
Our diluted earnings per common share for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased 32% to $31.10 on 70 million shares from $23.53 on 74 million shares for the same period in 2020.
2020 Compared to 2019
A discussion of the changes in our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, has been omitted from this Form 10-K but may be found in Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 26, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov by searching with our ticker symbol “ORLY” or at our internet address, www.OReillyAuto.com, by clicking “Investor Relations” located at the bottom of the page.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our long-term business strategy requires capital to open new stores, fund strategic acquisitions, expand distribution infrastructure, operate and maintain our existing stores and may include the opportunistic repurchase of shares of our common stock through our Board-approved share repurchase program. Our material cash requirements necessary to maintain the current operations of our long-term business strategy include, but are not limited to, inventory purchases, human capital obligations, including payroll and benefits,
contractual obligations, including debt and interest obligations, capital expenditures, payment of income taxes and other operational priorities. We expect to fund our short- and long-term cash and capital requirements with our primary sources of liquidity, which include funds generated from the normal course of our business operations and borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility. However, there can be no assurance that we will continue to generate cash flows or maintain liquidity at or above recent levels, as we are unable to predict decreased demand for our products, changes in customer buying patterns or the impact of the uncertainty and disruption cause by the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, these factors could also impact our ability to meet the debt covenants of our credit agreement and, therefore, negatively impact the funds available under our unsecured revolving credit facility.
Our material contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2021, included commitments for short and long-term debt arrangements and interest payments related to long-term debt, future minimum payments under non-cancelable lease arrangements, self-insurance reserves, projected obligations related to future payments under the Company’s nonqualified deferred compensation plan, purchase obligations for construction contract commitments, uncertain tax positions and associated estimated interest and penalties, payments for certain deferred income taxes and commitments for the purchase of inventory, all of which are included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. We expect to fund these various commitments and obligations primarily with operating cash flows expected to be generated in the normal course of business or through borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility. See Note 5 “Leases,” Note 12 “Share-Based Compensation and Benefit Plans,” Note 13 “Commitments” and Note 15 “Income Taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our leasing arrangements, share-based compensation payments, construction commitments and uncertain tax positions, respectively, which are not reflected in the table below.
The following table identifies the estimated payments for each of the next five years, and in the aggregate thereafter, of the Company’s debt instruments and related interest payments and self-insurance reserves as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)
See Note 7 “Financing” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our debt instruments and related interest payments.
(2)
See Note 13 “Commitments” and Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our self-insurance reserves.
Due to the absence of scheduled maturities, the nature of the account or the commitment’s cancellation terms, the timing of payments for certain deferred income taxes, uncertain tax positions and commitments related to future payments under the Company’s nonqualified compensation plan cannot be determined and are therefore excluded from the above table, except for amounts estimated to be payable in 2022, which are included in “Current liabilities” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Off-balance sheet arrangements are transactions, agreements, or other contractual arrangements with an unconsolidated entity, for which we have an obligation to the entity that is not recorded in our consolidated financial statements. We have entered into an agreement to make capital contributions to certain tax credit equity investments for the purpose of receiving renewable energy tax credits. We are required to make capital contributions totaling $5.7 million upon achievement of project milestones by the solar or wind energy farms, the timing of which is variable and outside of the Company’s control. See Note 7 “Financing” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our stand-by letters of credit.
We do not have any off-balance sheet financing that has, or is reasonably likely to have, a material, current or future effect on our financial condition, cash flows, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
The following table identifies cash provided by/(used in) our operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
(1) Calculated as net cash provided by operating activities, less capital expenditures, excess tax benefit from share-based compensation payments and investment in tax credit equity investments for the period.
Cash and cash equivalents balances held outside of the U.S. were $7.5 million and $11.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which was generally utilized to support the liquidity needs of foreign operations in Mexico.
Operating activities:
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to an increase in net income and a larger decrease in net inventory investment, partially offset by a decrease in accrued benefits and withholdings. The larger decrease in net inventory investment in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to the strong comparable store sales growth and the resulting benefit to inventory turns. The decrease in accrued benefits and withholdings is primarily due to the deferral of payroll tax payments under the CARES Act in 2020.
Investing activities:
Cash used in investing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was relatively flat, with the slight change due primarily to entering into more renewable energy tax credit investments in 2021, as compared to 2020, primarily for the purpose of receiving renewable energy tax credits.
We opened 168 and 155 net, new stores in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We plan to open 175 to 185 net, new stores in 2022. The current costs associated with the opening of a new store, including the cost of land acquisition, building improvements, fixtures, vehicles, net inventory investment and computer equipment, are estimated to average approximately $1.5 million to $1.8 million; however, such costs may be significantly reduced where we lease, rather than purchase, the store site.
Financing activities:
The increase in net cash used in financing activities in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to debt repayments of $300 million in 2021, compared to net, borrowings of $236 million in 2020, and an increase in repurchases of our common stock.
2020 Compared to 2019:
A discussion of the changes in our operating activities, liquidity activities and financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, has been omitted from this Form 10-K but may be found in Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 26, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov by searching with our ticker symbol “ORLY” or at our internet address, www.OReillyAuto.com, by clicking “Investor Relations” located at the bottom of the page.
Debt instruments:
See Note 7 “Financing” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information concerning the Company’s credit agreement, unsecured revolving credit facility, outstanding letters of credit and unsecured senior notes.
Debt covenants:
The indentures governing our senior notes contain covenants that limit our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to, among other things, create certain liens on assets to secure certain debt and enter into certain sale and leaseback transactions, and limit our
ability to merge or consolidate with another company or transfer all or substantially all of our property, in each case as set forth in the indentures. These covenants are, however, subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants applicable to our senior notes.
The Credit Agreement contains certain covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 2.50:1.00 and a maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 3.50:1.00. The consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio includes a calculation of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, rent and non-cash share-based compensation expense to fixed charges. Fixed charges include interest expense, capitalized interest and rent expense. The consolidated leverage ratio includes a calculation of adjusted debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, rent and non-cash share-based compensation expense. Adjusted debt includes outstanding debt, outstanding stand-by letters of credit and similar instruments and five-times rent expense and excludes any premium or discount recorded in conjunction with the issuance of long-term debt. In the event that we should default on any covenant contained within the Credit Agreement, certain actions may be taken, including, but not limited to, possible termination of commitments, immediate payment of outstanding principal amounts plus accrued interest and other amounts payable under the Credit Agreement and litigation from our lenders.
We had a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 6.97 times and 5.93 times as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and a consolidated leverage ratio of 1.59 times and 1.92 times as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, remaining in compliance with all covenants related to the borrowing arrangements.
The table below outlines the calculations of the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and consolidated leverage ratio covenants, as defined in the Credit Agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(1)
The table below outlines the calculation of Rent expense and reconciles Rent expense to Total lease cost, per Accounting Standard Codification 842 (“ASC 842”), the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The table below outlines the calculation of Free cash flow and reconciles Free cash flow to Net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Free cash flow, the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and the consolidated leverage ratio discussed and presented in the tables above are not derived in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We do not, nor do we suggest investors should, consider such non-GAAP financial measures in isolation from, or as a substitute for, GAAP financial
information. We believe that the presentation of our free cash flow, consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and consolidated leverage ratio provides meaningful supplemental information to both management and investors and reflects the required covenants under the Credit Agreement. We include these items in judging our performance and believe this non-GAAP information is useful to investors as well. Material limitations of these non-GAAP measures are that such measures do not reflect actual GAAP amounts. We compensate for such limitations by presenting, in the tables above, a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
Share repurchase program:
See Note 9 “Share Repurchase Program” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our share repurchase program.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires the application of certain estimates and judgments by management. Management bases its assumptions, estimates and adjustments on historical experience, current trends and other factors believed to be relevant at the time the consolidated financial statements are prepared. Management believes that the following policies are critical due to the inherent uncertainty of these matters and the complex and subjective judgments required in establishing these estimates. Management continues to review these critical accounting estimates and assumptions to ensure that the consolidated financial statements are presented fairly in accordance with GAAP. However, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates and such differences could be material.
Self-Insurance Reserves:
We use a combination of insurance and self-insurance mechanisms to provide for potential liabilities from workers’ compensation, general liability, vehicle liability, property loss and Team Member health care benefits. With the exception of certain Team Member health care benefit liabilities, employment related claims and litigation, certain commercial litigation and certain regulatory matters, we obtain third-party insurance coverage to limit our exposure for any individual workers’ compensation, general liability, vehicle liability or property loss claim.
When estimating our self-insurance liabilities, we consider a number of factors, including historical claims experience and trend-lines, projected medical and legal inflation, growth patterns and exposure forecasts. The assumptions made by management as they relate to each of these factors represent our judgment as to the most probable cumulative impact of each factor to our future obligations. Certain of the self-insurance liabilities are determined at an estimate of their net present value, using a credit-adjusted discount rate. Our calculation of self-insurance liabilities requires management to apply a significant amount of subjective judgment to estimate the ultimate cost to settle reported claims and claims incurred but not yet reported as of the balance sheet date. The application of alternative assumptions could result in a different estimate of these liabilities. Management believes the assumptions developed and used to determine the estimate for our self-insurance reserve are reasonable. Actual claim activity or development may vary from our assumptions and estimates, which may result in material losses or gains.
As we obtain additional information that affects the assumptions and estimates we used to recognize liabilities for claims incurred in prior accounting periods, we adjust our self-insurance liabilities to reflect the revised estimates based on this additional information. These liabilities are recorded at our estimate of their net present value. These liabilities do not have scheduled maturities, but we can estimate the timing of future payments based upon historical patterns. We could apply alternative assumptions regarding the timing of payments that could result in materially different estimates of the net present value of the liabilities.
Our self-insurance reserve estimate included on our Consolidated Balance Sheets increased $19.8 million from 2020 to 2021, which is primarily due to our growing operations, including inflation, increases in healthcare costs, the number of vehicles and the number of hours worked, as well as our historical claims experience. If the underlying assumptions in management’s estimate changed self-insurance reserves 10% from our estimated reserves at December 31, 2021, the financial impact would have been approximately $22 million or 0.8% of pretax income for the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our self-insurance reserves.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets:
We evaluate the carrying value of finite and indefinite long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of these assets might exceed their current fair values. As a component of the finite long-lived assets evaluation, we review performance at the store level to identify any stores with current period operating losses that should be considered for impairment. A potential impairment has occurred if the projected future undiscounted cash flows realized from the best possible use of the asset are less than the carrying value of the asset. The estimate of cash flows includes management’s assumptions of cash inflows and outflows directly resulting from the use of that asset in operations. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future
cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the assets.
As a component of the indefinite long-lived assets evaluation, we perform a qualitative assessment to determine if events or circumstances that could affect the inputs used to determine the fair value of the intangible asset have occurred, as well as if they continue to support an indefinite useful life. Areas evaluated include changes in cost factors such as raw materials or labor, financial performance including declining revenues or cash flows, the legal, regulatory and political environment, and other industry and market considerations, including the competitive environment and changes in product demand. If events or market conditions exist that would more likely than not indicate that impairment may be necessary, a detailed quantitative assessment would be performed.
Based on our qualitative assessment, we do not believe there has been a change of events or circumstances that would indicate that a calculation of fair value of indefinite long-lived assets is required as of December 31, 2021. Our impairment analyses contain estimates due to the inherently judgmental nature of forecasting long-term estimated cash flows and determining the ultimate useful lives and fair values of the assets. Actual results could differ from these estimates, which could materially impact our impairment assessment. See Note 6 “Goodwill and Other Intangibles” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our finite and indefinite long-lived assets.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information about recent accounting pronouncements.