ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Overview
One Stop Systems, Inc. (“OSS”) designs, manufactures, and markets specialized high-performance computing modules and systems, which are designed to target edge deployments. These specialized modules and systems consist of computers and storage products that incorporate the latest state-of-the art components with our embedded proprietary software. Such modules and systems allow our customers to offer high-end computing capabilities (often integrated within their equipment) to their target markets and applications. Edge computing is a form of computing that is done on site, near a particular data source or the user (rather than in the cloud), minimizing the need for data to be processed in a remote data center. The global increase in load on the cloud infrastructure and increase in artificial intelligence (“AI”) applications, are the primary factors driving the growth of the edge computing market. We market our products to manufacturers of automated equipment used for media and entertainment, medical, industrial, and military applications. Our customer applications often require connection to a wide array of data sources and sensors, ultra-fast processing power, and the ability to quickly access and store large and ever-growing data sets at their physical location (rather than in the cloud). This equipment requires datacenter class performance optimized for deployment at the edge in challenging environments. Many of these edge applications have unique requirements, including special and compact form factors ruggedized for harsh conditions, which cannot be accommodated by traditional controlled air-conditioned data centers. We believe that we are uniquely positioned as a specialized provider to address the needs of this this market, providing custom servers, data acquisition platforms, compute accelerators, solid-state storage arrays, system I/O expansion systems, as well as edge optimized industrial and panel PCs, tablets, and handheld compute devices. Our systems also offer industry leading capabilities that occupy less physical space and require less power consumption. We deliver this high-end technology to our customers through the sale of equipment and embedded software.
One Stop Systems, Inc. was originally incorporated as a California corporation in 1999, after initially being formed as a California limited liability company in 1998. On December 14, 2017, the Company was reincorporated as a Delaware corporation in connection with its initial public offering of its securities.
During the year ended December 31, 2015, the Company formed a wholly owned subsidiary in Germany, One Stop Systems, GmbH (“OSS GmbH”). In July 2016, the Company acquired Mission Technologies Group, Inc. (“Magma”) and its operations.
On August 31, 2018, the Company acquired Concept Development Inc. (“CDI”) located in Irvine, California. CDI specializes in the design and manufacture of custom high-performance computing systems for airborne in-flight entertainment and networking systems. CDI has been fully integrated into the core operations of OSS as of June 1, 2020.
On October 31, 2018, OSS GmbH acquired 100% of the outstanding stock of Bressner Technology GmbH, a Germany limited liability company located near Munich, Germany (“Bressner”). Bressner designs and manufactures standard and customized servers, panel PCs, and PCIe expansion systems. Bressner also provides manufacturing, test, sales, and marketing services for customers throughout Europe.
Recent Developments
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of Coronavirus, or COVID-19, a global pandemic and the United States federal government declared it a national emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact worldwide economic activity. A public health pandemic, including COVID-19, poses the risk that we or our employees, contractors, customers, suppliers, manufacturers, distribution partners, and other partners may be prevented from conducting business activities for an indefinite period, including due to restriction or shutdowns that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities.
Despite global efforts to slow the spread of the COVID-19 and to mitigate its effects, COVID-19 continues to impact worldwide economic activity, and the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted, and may continue to adversely impact, many aspects of our business. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, many state, local, and foreign governments have put in place restrictions to control the spread of the disease. Such restrictions, or the perception that further restrictions could occur, have resulted in business closures, work stoppages, slowdowns, delays, work-from-home policies, travel restrictions, and cancellation or postponement of events, among other effects that have impacted productivity and disrupted our operations and those of our partners, manufacturers, suppliers, contractors, and customers.
One way that COVID-19 has directly affected our operations is that we have experienced increased pricing and/or shortages of certain parts and supplies that are necessary components to the products and services we offer to our customers, and as a result, are experiencing longer lead-times. COVID-19 has indirectly affected our operations as well. For instance, some of our customers experienced downturns or uncertainty in their own business operations and revenue, and as a result, these customers have (and may continue to) decreased or delayed their technology spending, requested pricing concessions or payment extensions, or sought to renegotiate their contracts.
During the pandemic, as state, local, and foreign governments implemented (and may continue to implement) preventative measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of COVID-19, the usage of our products and services fluctuated, and we cannot predict how usage levels will continue to be impacted by these preventative measures. There is no assurance that customers will continue to use our products and services, or to the same extent, as the COVID-19 pandemic begins to taper off or after it ends. As a result, it has been difficult to accurately forecast our revenues or financial results, especially given that the near and long term impact of the pandemic remains uncertain. In addition, while the potential impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our business may be difficult to assess or predict, the pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, and may reduce our ability to access additional capital, which could negatively affect our liquidity in the future. Our results of operations could be materially below our forecasts as well, which could adversely affect our results of operations, disappoint analysts and investors, or cause our stock price to decline.
Furthermore, a decrease in orders in a given period could negatively affect our revenues in future periods. The COVID-19 pandemic may also have the effect of heightening many of the other risks described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, including risks associated with our customers and supply chain. We may take further actions that alter our operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities from time to time, or which we determine are in our best interests. While much of our operations can be performed remotely, certain activities often require personnel to be on-site, and our ability to carry out these activities has been, and may continue to be negatively impacted if our employees or local personnel are not able to travel. In addition, for activities that may be conducted remotely, there is no guarantee that we will be as effective while working remotely because our team is dispersed and many employees and their families have been negatively affected, mentally or physically, by the COVID-19 pandemic. Decreased effectiveness and availability of our team could harm our business. In addition, we may decide to postpone or cancel planned investments in our business in response to changes in our business as a result of the spread of COVID-19, which may impact our ability to attract and retain customers and our rate of innovation, either of which could harm our business.
We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business, operations, or the global economy. Although our business continued to be negatively impacted by the pandemic in 2021, our results of operations predominantly improved as compared to 2020. Currently, we are experiencing unavailability of product and limited supplies, protracted delivery dates for componentry, increasing product costs, and changes in minimum order quantities to secure product. As a result, we are carrying increased inventory balances to ensure availability of necessary products and to secure pricing. Additionally, products that are in the “work-in-process” stage and our inventory of finished goods have increased due to timing and availability of certain componentry necessary to complete our products.
While there have recently been vaccines developed and administered, and certain government orders and restrictions in particular cities, counties, and states have been lifted as the spread of COVID-19 starts to be contained and mitigated, we cannot predict the timing of the vaccine roll-out globally or the efficacy of such vaccines, including against variants of the virus, and we do not yet know how businesses, customers, contractors, suppliers, or our partners will operate in a post COVID-19 environment, especially if additional or supplemental governmental orders, limitations, and restrictions are reinstated. There may be additional costs or impacts to our business and operations, including when we are able to resume in-person activities, travel, and events. In addition, there is no guarantee that a future outbreak of this or any other widespread epidemics will not occur, or that the global economy will recover, either of which could harm our business.
On March 1, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with an accredited investor, pursuant to which we issued and sold, in a registered direct offering, 1,497,006 shares of Company common stock to the purchaser at an offering price of $6.68 per share. The registered offering was conducted pursuant to our effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-231513), discussed above. As compensation for their services, we paid to the placement agents a fee equal to 7.0% of the gross proceeds received by us as a result of the registered offering, and reimbursed the placement agents for certain expenses incurred in connection with such offering. The net proceeds to us from the registered offering were approximately $9.2 million, after deducting certain fees payable to the placement agents and our transaction expenses.
On May 19, 2021, our stockholders approved, by a majority of votes cast, a proposal to increase the number of shares of commons stock authorized for issuance under our 2017 Plan from 1,500,000 shares to 3,000,000 shares of common stock pursuant to the terms and conditions of the 2017 Plan. The amendment took effect upon receipt of stockholder approval.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
The Company recognizes revenue under accounting standard ASC 606. Revenue is primarily generated from the sale of computer hardware and engineering services, and, to a minimal extent, revenue is also generated from the sale of software and sales of software maintenance and support contracts. The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied over time as work is performed or at a specific point in time. The majority of the Company’s revenue is recognized at that point in time when products ship and control is deemed to be transferred to the customer. The Company determines revenue recognition through the following steps: (1) identification of the contract with a customer; (2) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determination of the transaction price; (4) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (5) recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of costs of materials, costs paid to third-party contract manufacturers (which may include the costs of components), and personnel costs associated with manufacturing and support operations. Personnel costs consist of wages, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation expenses. Cost of revenue also includes freight, allocated overhead costs and inventory write-offs and changes to our inventory and warranty reserves. Allocated overhead costs consist of certain facilities and utility costs. We expect cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars with an improvement in margin, as product revenue increases.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative, sales and marketing and research and development expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense, are the most significant components of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for facilities and utility costs.
General and Administrative - General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources, and fees for third-party professional services, as well as allocated overhead. We expect our general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in growing the business.
Marketing and Selling - Marketing and Selling expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel, and entertainment expenses as well as allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, tradeshows, events, corporate communications, and brand-building activities. We expect marketing and selling expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales force, increase marketing resources, and further develop sales channels.
Research and Development - Research and development expense consists primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, prototype expenses, depreciation associated with assets acquired for research and development, third-party engineering, and contractor support costs, as well as allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in new and existing products.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income consists of miscellaneous income and income received for activities outside of our core business. Other expense includes expenses for activities outside of our core business.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of estimated income taxes due to the United States and German governments as well as state tax authorities in jurisdictions in which we conduct business, along with the change in our deferred income tax assets and liabilities.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, presented in dollars and as a percentage of revenue.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our total revenue increased $10,086,716, or 19.4%, as compared to the same period in 2020. OSS saw an increase in revenue of $4,841,985, or 14.4%, as compared to the prior year in 2020. The majority of this increase is primarily attributable to an increase in orders and shipments of product by and to our media and entertainment customers and government OEM suppliers, resulting in a change in the mix of our product sales and distribution as compared to the prior year, which was more severely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Bressner experienced an increase of $5,244,731, or 28.7%, as compared to the prior year in 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to general economic improvements in Europe resulting from the diminishing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the business environment and procuring large, one-time orders.
Cost of revenue and gross profit
Cost of revenue increased $6,882,041, or 19.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year in 2020. The increase in cost of revenue is mainly attributable to an increase in our sales to both our media and entertainment customers, as well as product sales to OEMs engaged in government contracts. OSS saw an increase in cost of revenue of $3,190,505, or 15.1%, as compared to the prior year period in 2020. Bressner’s cost of revenue increased $3,691,536, or 25.7%, as compared to the prior year in 2020, which increase primarily resulted from increased sales and changes in product mix.
The overall gross margin percentage was unchanged from the prior year, at 31.7%. OSS’ gross margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 36.9%, a decrease of 0.4 percentage points as compared to the prior year period in 2020 of 37.4%, which slight decrease was attributable to changes in product mix and increased material costs. Bressner contributed gross margin at a rate of 23.1%, as compared to the same prior year period in 2020 of 21.2%, an increase of 1.9 percentage points, which was attributable to improved pricing and change in product mix.
Operating expenses
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense decreased $759,940, or 9.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same prior year period in 2020. OSS experienced a decrease of $709,200, or 11.1%. Bressner had a decrease of $50,740, or 2.4%. The decrease in general and administrative expense is primarily attributable to our cost containment efforts and a reduction in force initially implemented in April 2020. Overall, total general and administrative expense decreased as a percentage of revenue to 12.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 16.2% during the same period in 2020.
Marketing and selling expense
Marketing and selling expense increased $2,080,450, or 50.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same prior year period in 2020. OSS had an increase of $2,056,333, or 71.2%, which was mainly attributable to the addition of personnel for the product marketing and project management team to drive market studies and customer feedback, product strategy, new product implementation, and to analyze incoming orders for pricing and costing to optimize gross margins. Bressner had an increase of $24,117, or 2.0%, primarily resulting from the addition of new marketing personnel and sales collateral material. Generally, both OSS and Bressner experienced additional marketing costs due to the fact that markets began to open again after a reduction in restrictions that were imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, total marketing and selling expense increased as a percentage of revenue to 10.0% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 7.9% during the same period in 2020.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense decreased $287,143, or 6.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same prior year period in 2020. OSS saw a decrease of $296,301, or 7.6%. The decrease was largely driven by engineering resources being deployed on billable projects for which their costs are reclassified as cost of revenue or classified as work in process labor. This reduction was offset by a modest increase of $9,158, or 2.3%, at Bressner. Overall, total research and development expense as a percentage of revenue decreased as a percentage of revenue to 6.5% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 8.3% during the same period in 2020.
Interest income
Interest income decreased $173,997 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same prior year period in 2020. The decrease is attributable to reduced finance charges on outstanding accounts receivable balances from our largest customer in the media and entertainment industry, which account has been brought current.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $23,635 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020 as a result of the April 2021 maturity and repayment in full of certain outstanding OSS notes and related party notes payable. The interest and the professional fees incurred on securing debt are being amortized on an effective interest rate basis to interest expense.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulted in net other income of $1,474,178, as compared to net other expense of $53,612 in the same prior year period in 2020, for a net change of $1,527,790. The most significant contribution of the change is attributable to forgiveness of the principal and interest in the amount of $1,514,354 of the Company’s PPP loan.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
We have recorded an income tax provision (benefit) of $605,675 and $(603,744), respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 differed from the statutory rate mainly due to permanent non-deductible goodwill amortization for Bressner Technology GmbH, deductions related to expenses of OSS stock options, research and development credits, forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan, and changes in reserves for uncertain tax positions, as well as projecting federal, foreign and state tax liabilities for the year. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021, is 20.6%, as compared to 98.9% in the prior year 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources
On April 24, 2020, we sold $3,000,000 of Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Notes at a 10% original issue discount to an institutional investor through a registered direct offering which notes are scheduled to mature on April 1,2022. On April 28, 2020, we received approximately $1,500,000 of government funding under the Paycheck Protection Program, which was forgiven in full in May 2021. On March 3, 2021, we sold and issued 1,497,006 shares of Company common stock to an accredited investor pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement through a registered direct offering, resulting in net proceeds of $9,188,673 to us.
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have been provided by public and private offerings of our securities and revenues generated from our business operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $5,101,174, with short-term investments of $14,535,750, and working capital of $27,953,529. Cash and cash equivalents held by Bressner totaled US$754,544 on December 31, 2021. Bressner’s debt covenants do not permit the use of those funds by its parent company.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had income from operations of $1,747,027, with cash generated by operating activities of $5,622,596. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we experienced a loss from operations of $424,281, with cash used in operating activities of $250,173.
Our sources of liquidity and cash flows are used to fund ongoing operations, research and development projects for new products and technologies, and provide ongoing support services for our customers. Over the next year, we anticipate that we will use our liquidity and cash flows from our operations to fund our growth. In addition, as part of our business strategy, we occasionally evaluate potential acquisitions of businesses and products and technologies. Accordingly, a portion of our available cash may be used at any time for the acquisition of complementary products or businesses. Such potential transactions may require substantial capital resources, which may require us to seek additional debt or equity financing. We cannot assure you that we will be able to successfully identify suitable acquisition candidates, complete acquisitions, successfully integrate acquired businesses into our current operations, or expand into new markets. Furthermore, we cannot provide assurances that additional financing will be available to us in any required time frame and on commercially reasonable terms, if at all.
Our revenue growth during 2020 slowed due to the effects of COVID-19, and, although it rebounded somewhat in 2021, it has not yet fully recovered due to, amongst other things, venue constraints on large group gatherings, which affected our media and entertainment business. However, through a reduction in force and strict cost containment, we have been able to mitigate the effects, to some degree, of the reduced revenue. For a further description and risk factors associated with COVID-19, please see Part 1A of this Annual Report.
Management’s plans are to continue its efforts towards responding to the changing economic landscape by continuing to control hiring and costs, conserve cash, strengthen margins, and improve company-wide execution.
While management expects these actions to result in prospective cost containment, and our 2021 results of operations improved partially as a result of such actions, management is also committed to conserving cash and securing debt and/or equity financing as required for liquidity to meet our cash requirements through at least a period of the next twelve months. Management believes potential sources of liquidity include at least the following:
•
In May 2019, we filed a registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-231513) with the SEC, which became effective on June 19, 2019, and allows us to offer and sell up to an aggregate of $100,000,000 of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants to purchase our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities, subscription rights to purchase our common stock, preferred stock or debt securities and\or units consisting of some or all of these securities, in any combination, together or separately, in one or more offerings,
in amounts, at prices and on the terms that we will determine at the time of the offering and which will be set forth in a prospectus supplement and any related free writing prospectus.
As a result of management’s implementation of our cost reduction plans, our potential sources of liquidity and management’s most recent cash flow forecasts, management believes that we has sufficient liquidity to satisfy our anticipated working capital requirements for our ongoing operations and obligations for at least the next twelve months. However, there can be no assurance that management’s cost reduction efforts will be effective or the forecasted cash flows will be achieved. Furthermore, we will continue to evaluate our capital expenditure needs based upon factors including but not limited to, our sales from operations, growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of our sales and marketing efforts, the timing of new product introductions, and the continuing market acceptance of our products and services.
If cash generated from operations is insufficient to satisfy our capital requirements, we may open a revolving line of credit with a bank, may have to sell additional equity or debt securities, or may obtain expanded credit facilities to fund our operating expenses, pay our obligations, diversify our geographical reach, and grow the Company. In the event such financing is needed in the future, there can be no assurance that such financing will be available to us, or, if available, that it will be in amounts and on terms acceptable to us. If we cannot raise additional funds when we need or wants them, our operations and prospects could be negatively affected. However, if cash flows from operations become insufficient to continue operations at the current level, and if no additional financing were obtained, then management would consider restructuring the Company in a way to preserve its business while maintaining expenses within operating cash flows.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $5,622,596 in cash from operating activities, an improvement of $5,872,769 when compared to the cash used in operating activities of $250,173 during the year 2020. This improvement in operating cash flow is mainly attributable to better earnings resulting from increased sales and a reduction in working capital requirements, resulting in better collections from customers and improvement in payment terms on vendor invoices and timing of payments.
Cash generated by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, is primarily a result of the improvement in profitability from a net loss of $6,544 in the prior year to net income of $2,332,773 in the current year, an improvement of $2,339,317. Net adjustments for net non-cash items of $(146,430) are comprised of $702,873 in favorable non-cash items, which were offset by $(849,304) in items that did not generate operating cash flow and reduction in the use of operating cash for working capital of $3,379,882.
Net working capital requirements for the year ended December 31, 2021, improved $822,094, as compared to the prior year period use of working capital of $2,857,788, an improvement of $3,679,882. The sources of working capital of $6,464,951 were attributable to changes in prepaid and other current assets, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and other liabilities for the comparable period. These sources were offset by uses of working capital of $2,785,069 being applied to changes in accounts receivables and inventory levels.
Our ability to generate cash from operations in future periods will depend in large part on our profitability, the rate and timing of collections of our accounts receivable, our inventory turns and our ability to manage other areas of working capital, including accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used cash of $15,110,625 in investing activities, as compared to $818,794 used during the prior year period in 2020, an increase of $14,291,831. This significant increase is mainly
attributable to investing cash received from the registered direct offering which was completed in March 2021 and from cash balances that were not considered necessary for business operations.
Additionally, we continue to enhance the capabilities of our ERP system and purchase development and test equipment for our engineering department. We currently anticipate that purchases of equipment will continue at current levels and we will provide for the ongoing improvement of our ERP system functionality, which includes the integration of certain sales functions and an uplift to the most recent version of software.
Financing Activities
Given the economic and financial hardships operating in a COVID-19 environment, we believe it is imperative to maintain opportunities for additional financial resources to ensure financial stability during trying economic times. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $8,430,712 in cash from financing activities, as compared to the cash provided by financing activities of $2,109,235 during the prior year 2020. The increase is mainly attributable to proceeds received from a $10,000,000 registered direct offering that was completed in March 2021, which resulted in net proceeds to us of $9,188,673. We also received $401,897 from the exercise of stock options and warrants during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received net proceeds, after expenses, of $2,383,726 from a senior secured convertible debt offering of $3,000,000, and $1,499,360 from a PPP loan, which was subsequently forgiven in full in May 2021.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following table sets forth our non-cancellable contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
We have made certain indemnities, under which we may be required to make payments to an indemnified party, in relation to certain transactions. We indemnify our directors, officers, employees, and agents to the maximum extent permitted under the laws of the State of Delaware. In connection with our facilities leases, we indemnify our lessors for certain claims arising from the use of our facilities. The duration of the indemnities varies, and in many cases is indefinite. These indemnities do not provide for any limitation of the maximum potential future payments we could be obligated to make. Historically, we have not been obligated to make any payments for these obligations and no liabilities have been recorded for these indemnities.
Known trends or uncertainties
Although we have not seen any significant reduction in revenues to date due to consolidations, we have seen some consolidation in our industry during economic downturns. These consolidations have not had a negative effect on our total sales; however, should consolidations and downsizing in the industry continue to occur, those events could adversely impact our revenues and earnings going forward.
As discussed in this Annual Report, the world has been affected due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic has negatively impacted our business in various ways over the last two years; however, the negative impact on our results of operations in 2021 was less severe than the impact in 2020. Until the pandemic has passed, there remains uncertainty as to the effect of COVID-19 on our business in both the short and long-term.
We believe that the need for improved productivity in the research and development activities directed toward developing new products and/or software will continue to result in increasing adoption of high-performance computers and interconnect technologies in the industries that we serve. New product and/or software developments in the specialized compute business segment could result in increased revenues and earnings if they are accepted by our markets; however, there can be no assurances that new products and/or software will result in significant improvements to our revenues or earnings. For competitive reasons, we do not disclose all of our new product development activities.
Also, the potential for growth in new markets is uncertain. We will continue to explore these opportunities until such time as we either generate sales or determine that resources would be more efficiently used elsewhere.
Inflation
Inflation has increased during the periods covered by this Annual Report, and is expected to continue to increase for the near future. Inflationary factors, such as increases in the cost of our products (and components thereof), interest rates, overhead costs and transportation costs may adversely affect our operating results. Although we do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our financial position or results of operations to date, we may experience some effect in the near future (especially if inflation rates continue to rise) due to supply chain constraints, consequences associated with COVID-19 and the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine, employee availability and wage increases, trade tariffs imposed on certain products from China and increased product pricing due to semiconductor product shortages.
Off balance sheet arrangements
Other than lease commitments incurred in the normal course of business and certain indemnification provisions, we do not have any off-balance sheet financing arrangements or liabilities, guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests in transferred assets, or any obligation arising out of a material variable interest in an unconsolidated entity.
We do not have any majority-owned subsidiaries that are not consolidated in the financial statements. Additionally, we do not have an interest in, or relationships with, any special purpose entities.
Stockholder transactions
In April 2019, certain members of our board of directors executed definitive agreements to commit funds of up to $4,000,000 as a credit facility. We initially borrowed an aggregate of $1,150,000 from members of the board of directors and an aggregate of $350,000 from other shareholders for a two-year period at an interest rate of 9.5%, which require us to make monthly principal and interest payments of $69,000 per month. In connection with these loans, we issued to the note holders warrants to purchase an aggregate of 69,766 shares of our common stock (which amount is equal to 10% of the original principal or such notes), which warrants have an exercise price of $2.15 per share. The relative fair value of the warrants issued was $60,158. The remaining unfunded loan commitments expired as of April 1, 2020, and the Company has not received any additional funding commitments from members of the board of directors. These loans were fully repaid as of April 2021.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
In preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, management must make a variety of decisions which impact the reported amounts and the related disclosures. These decisions include the selection of the appropriate accounting principles to be applied and the assumptions on which to base accounting estimates. In making these decisions, management applies its judgment based on its understanding and analysis of the relevant circumstances and our historical experience.
Our accounting policies and estimates that are most critical to the presentation of our results of operations and financial condition, and which require the greatest use of judgments and estimates by management, are designated as our critical accounting policies. See further discussion of our critical accounting policies under Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” in our Annual Report. We periodically re-evaluate and adjust our critical accounting policies as circumstances change.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which superseded nearly all existing revenue recognition guidance under GAAP, to all contracts using the modified retrospective method. The comparative information has not been restated and continues to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied over time as work is performed or at a point in time. The majority of the Company’s revenue is recognized at a point in time when products ship and control is transferred to the customer. The Company determines revenue recognition through the following steps: (i) identification of the contract with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as, a performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company’s contracts are executed through a combination of written agreements along with purchase orders with all customers including certain general terms and conditions. Generally, purchase orders entail products, quantities and prices, which define the performance obligations of each party and are approved and accepted by the Company. The Company’s contracts with customers do not include extended payment terms. Payment terms vary by contract type and type of customer and generally range from 30 to 60 days from invoice. Additionally, taxes assessed by a governmental authority that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue-producing transaction, that are collected by the Company from a customer and deposited with the relevant government authority, are excluded from revenue.
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which the Company will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer adjusted for estimated variable consideration, if any. Variable consideration may include discounts, rights of return, refunds, and other similar obligations. The Company allocates the transaction price to each distinct product and service based on its relative standalone selling price. The standalone selling price for products primarily involves the cost to produce the deliverable plus the anticipated margin and for services is estimated based on the Company’s approved list price.
In the normal course of business, the Company does not accept product returns unless the items are defective as manufactured. The Company establishes provisions for estimated returns and warranties. In addition, the Company does not typically provide customers with the right to a refund and does not transact for noncash consideration.
Customer agreements include one vendor managed inventory program. The Company recognizes revenue under this arrangement when all of the following criteria are met: (i) the goods have been identified separately as belonging to the customer; (ii) the goods are ready for physical shipment to the customer; (iii) the Company does not have the ability to direct the goods to another customer; and (iv) the arrangement was requested by the customer and that the customer has sufficiently explained a substantial business purpose for the arrangement. Management also considers whether the customer's custodial risks are insured and whether modifications to the Company's normal billing and credit terms were required.
Revenues on certain fixed-price contracts where we provide engineering services, prototypes and completed products are recognized based upon percentage of completion or based upon milestones delivered that are provided during the period and compared to milestone goals to be provided over the entire contract. These services require that we perform significant, extensive, and complex design, development, modification or implementation of our customers’ systems. Performance will often extend over long periods of time, and our right to receive future payment depends on our future performance in accordance with the agreement.
The percentage-of-completion methodology involves recognizing probable and reasonably estimable revenue using the percentage of services completed, on a current cumulative cost to estimated total cost basis, using a reasonably consistent profit margin over the performance period. Due to the long-term nature of these projects, developing the estimates of costs often requires significant judgment. Factors that must be considered in estimating the progress of work completed and ultimate cost of the projects include, but are not limited to, the availability of labor and labor productivity, the nature and complexity of the work to be performed and the impact of delayed performance. If changes occur in delivery, productivity or other factors used in developing the estimates of costs or revenues, we revise our cost and revenue estimates, which may result in increases or decreases in revenues and costs, and such revisions are reflected in earnings in the period in which the revision becomes known.
The Company recognizes contract assets or unbilled receivables related to revenue recognized for services completed but not yet invoiced to the clients. Unbilled receivables are recorded as accounts receivable when the Company has an unconditional right to contract consideration. A contract liability is recognized as deferred revenue when the Company invoices clients in advance of performing the related services under the terms of a contract. Deferred revenue is recognized as revenue when the Company has satisfied the related performance obligation.
On certain contracts with several of the Company’s significant customers, the Company receives payments in advance of manufacturing. Advanced payments are recorded as deferred revenue until the revenue recognition criteria described above has been met. Related billings that are in excess of revenue earned are deferred and recorded as a liability on the consolidated balance sheet until the related services are provided.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to our employees and other service providers, including stock options granted under the 2017 Plan, 2015 and 2011 Stock Option Plans that were approved in December 2015 (the “2015 Plan”) and in December 2011 (the “2011 Plan”), respectively, based on the estimated fair value of the award. We used the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option awards granted under the 2017 Plan and 2015 Plan. We recognize the fair value of stock options granted under the 2017 Plan and 2015 Plan as stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We record expense net of anticipated forfeitures and adjust the annual expense based upon actual experience.
Compensation cost for stock awards, which include restricted stock units (“RSUs”) is measured at the fair value on the grant date and recognized as expense, net of estimated forfeitures, over the related service period. The fair value of stock awards is based on the quoted price of our common stock on the grant date less the present value of expected dividends not received during the vesting period.
Our use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the option, expected volatility of the price of our common stock, risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. The assumptions used in our option pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
These assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•
Fair Value of Common Stock. Since the completion of our IPO, we use the closing quoted price of our common stock on the date of grant.
•
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term assumptions were determined based on the vesting terms and contractual lives of the options, using the simplified method.
•
Expected Volatility. Since we do not have sufficient trading history of our common stock, the expected volatility was determined based on the historical stock volatilities of comparable companies. Comparable companies consist of public companies in our industry that is similar in size, stage of life cycle and financial leverage. We intend to continue to apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own share price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar to us, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be used in the calculation.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options.
•
Dividend Rate. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future, and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may refine our estimation process, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Inventory Valuation
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or its estimated net realizable value. We use the average cost method for purposes of determining cost, which approximates the first-in, first-out method. We write down inventory for excess and obsolescence based upon a review of historical usage and assumptions about future demand, product mix and possible alternative uses. Actual demand, product mix and alternative usage may be lower than those that we project, and this
difference could have a material adverse effect on our gross margin if inventory write-downs beyond those initially recorded become necessary. Alternatively, if actual demand, product mix and alternative usage are more favorable than those we estimated at the time of such a write-down, our gross margin could be favorably impacted in future periods.
Goodwill, Intangible Assets and Long-lived Assets
We evaluate our goodwill, intangible and long-lived assets for impairment when events or circumstances arise that indicate our goodwill, intangible and long-lived assets may be impaired. Indicators of impairment include, but are not limited to, a significant deterioration in overall economic conditions, a decline in our market capitalization, the loss of significant business, significant decreases in funding for our contracts, or other significant adverse changes in industry or market conditions. Regardless, goodwill is tested for potential impairment at least annually.
Income Taxes
The determination of income tax expense requires us to make certain estimates and judgments concerning the calculation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, as well as the deductions and credits that are available to reduce taxable income. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in our consolidated financial statements. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse.
In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our past operating results, our forecast of future earnings, future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. The assumptions utilized in determining future taxable income require significant judgment. We record a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. If it becomes more likely than not that a tax asset will be used for which a reserve has been provided, we reverse the related valuation allowance. If our actual future taxable income by tax jurisdiction differs from estimates, additional allowances or reversals of reserves may be necessary.
We use a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination. If the tax position is deemed more-likely-than-not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate our uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis and any changes to these positions as a result of tax audits, tax laws or other facts and circumstances could result in additional charges to operations.
Business Combinations
We utilize the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations and allocate the purchase price of an acquisition to the various tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. We primarily establish fair value using the income approach based upon a discounted cash flow model. The income approach requires the use of many assumptions and estimates including future revenues and expenses, as well as discount factors and income tax rates. Other estimates include:
•
estimated step-ups or write-downs for fixed assets and inventory;
•
estimated fair values of intangible assets; and
•
estimated income tax assets and liabilities assumed from the target.
While we use our best estimates and assumptions as part of the purchase price allocation process to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the business acquisition date, our estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the purchase price allocation period, which is generally no longer than one year from the business acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
For changes in the valuation of intangible assets between preliminary and final purchase price allocation, the related amortization is adjusted in the period it occurs. Subsequent to the purchase price allocation period any adjustment to assets acquired or liabilities assumed is included in operating results in the period in which the adjustment is determined. Should we issue shares of our common stock in an acquisition, we will be required to estimate the fair value of the shares issued.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Per the Company’s consolidated financial statements Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, we may be implementing a number of changes, as required by FASB. See Note 2 for further details.
Recently implemented accounting pronouncements
Per the Company’s consolidated financial statements Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, we have no new pronouncements that were implemented during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest rate risk
Our exposure to interest rate risk is primarily associated with borrowing on revolving lines of credit denominated in both U.S. dollars and Euros. We are exposed to the impact of interest rate changes primarily through our borrowing activities for our variable rate borrowings.
Concentration of credit risk
Financial instruments that potentially expose us to concentrations of credit risk consist principally of cash, cash equivalents and accounts receivable. We place our cash and cash equivalents with financial institutions with high credit quality. On December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $5,101,174 and $6,316,921, respectively, of cash and cash equivalents on deposit or invested with our financial and lending institutions. In Germany, the deposit insurance is €100,000 per bank, per customer. Bressner has funds on deposit in both Euro and U.S. dollar denominations of €663,248 (US$754,544) with banks in excess of the insurance limits.
We provide credit to our customers in the normal course of business. We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition and limit the amount of credit extended when deemed necessary.
Foreign currency risk
We operate primarily in the United States. Foreign sales of products and services are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. We also conduct business outside the United States through our foreign subsidiary in Germany, where business is largely transacted in non-U.S. dollar currencies, particularly the Euro, which is subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Accordingly, we are subject to exposure from changes in the exchange rates of local currencies. Foreign currency transaction gains and losses are recorded in other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations.
OSS GmbH operates as an extension of OSS’ domestic operations and acquired Bressner in October 2018. The functional currency of OSS GmbH is the Euro. Transactions denominated in currencies other than the functional currency are remeasured to the functional currency at the average exchange rate in effect during the period. At the end of each reporting period, monetary assets and liabilities are translated using exchange rates in effect at the balance sheet date. Non-monetary assets and liabilities are remeasured at historical exchange rates. Consequently, changes in the exchange rates of the currencies may impact the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’ statements of operations into U.S. dollars, which may in turn affect our consolidated statement of operations. The resulting foreign currency translation adjustments are recorded as a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income in the consolidated statement of comprehensive income.
Derivative financial instruments
We may employ derivatives to manage certain currency market risks through the use of foreign exchange forward contracts. We do not use derivatives for trading or speculative purposes. Our derivatives are designated as a hedge of a forecasted transaction or of the variability of cash flows to be received or paid related to a recognized asset or liability (cash flow hedge). We hedge a portion of the exchange risk involved in anticipation of highly probable foreign currency-denominated transactions. In anticipation of these transactions, we enter into foreign exchange contracts to provide currency at a fixed rate.
Non-GAAP financial measures
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that the use of adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or adjusted EBITDA, is helpful for an investor to assess the performance of the Company. The Company defines adjusted EBITDA as income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, acquisition expense, impairment of long-lived assets, financing costs, fair value adjustments from purchase accounting, stock-based compensation expense and expenses related to discontinued operations.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. Because of varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions and the variety of equity instruments that can impact a company’s non-cash operating expenses, we believe that providing a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes non-cash and non-recurring expenses allows for meaningful comparisons between our core business operating results and those of other companies, as well as providing us with an important tool for financial and operational decision making and for evaluating our own core business operating results over different periods of time.
Our adjusted EBITDA measure may not provide information that is directly comparable to that provided by other companies in our industry, as other companies in our industry may calculate non-GAAP financial results differently, particularly related to non-recurring and unusual items. Our adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement of financial performance under GAAP, and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income or as an indication of operating performance or any other measure of performance derived in accordance with GAAP. We do not consider adjusted EBITDA to be a substitute for, or superior to, the information provided by GAAP financial results.
Adjusted EPS
Adjusted EPS excludes the impact of certain items and, therefore, has not been calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that exclusion of certain selected items assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying results and trends and allows for comparability with our peer company index and industry. We use this measure along with the corresponding GAAP financial measures to manage our business and to evaluate our performance compared to prior periods and the marketplace. The Company defines non-GAAP income (loss) as income or (loss) before amortization, stock-based compensation, expenses related to discontinued operations, and acquisition costs. Adjusted EPS expresses adjusted income (loss) on a per share basis using weighted average diluted shares outstanding.
Adjusted EPS is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with GAAP. These non-GAAP financial measures may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies. We expect to continue to incur expenses similar to the adjusted income from continuing operations and adjusted EPS financial adjustments described above, and investors should not infer from our presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures that these costs are unusual, infrequent or non-recurring.
The following table reconciles net income (loss) to adjusted EPS and diluted earnings per share:
Free cash flow, a non-GAAP measure for reporting cash flow, is defined as cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures for property and equipment, which includes capitalized software development costs. We believe free cash flow provides investors with an important perspective on cash available for investments and acquisitions after making capital investments required to support ongoing business operations and long-term value creation. We believe that trends in our free cash flow can be valuable indicators of our operating performance and liquidity.
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information provided in accordance with GAAP. This non-GAAP financial measure may not be computed in the same manner as similarly titled measures used by other companies.
We expect to continue to incur expenditures similar to the free cash flow adjustments described above, and investors should not infer from our presentation of this non-GAAP financial measure that these expenditures reflect all of our obligations which require cash. The following table reconciles cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to free cash flow: