ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements relating to future events or our future financial or operating performance that involve risks and uncertainties, as set forth above under "Special Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements." Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors described in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those set forth above under "Special Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" or in Item 1A under the heading "Risk Factors" or elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, our future results may be significantly different from our historical results.
Financial Reporting Presentation Relating to the Pelion Transaction
Unless otherwise specified, disclosures throughout Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, including disclosures under “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” reflect continuing operations only. See Note 4-Discontinued Operations in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" included in Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Overview
Overstock seeks to provide goods to furnish and accessorize "Dream Homes for All," particularly for our target customers-consumers who seek smart value on quality, stylish merchandise at competitive prices, and who want an easy shopping experience. We believe that the furniture and home furnishings market, which is highly fragmented and has traditionally been served by brick and mortar stores, will continue transitioning to online sales as consumers become increasingly comfortable shopping online. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has expedited consumer migration to online shopping. We regularly update our product assortment to meet the evolving preferences of our customers and current trends. Our products include furniture, décor, area rugs, bedding and bath, home improvement, outdoor, and kitchen and dining items, among others. Our supply chain allows us to ship directly to our customers from our suppliers or from our warehouses. See Item 1 - "Business-Our Business" for an additional overview on our business.
Strategies for our Business
Our business initiatives enable our long-term focus on our three brand pillars, "Product Findability," "Smart Value," and "Easy Delivery and Support." 2021 initiatives for the business included:
•Improve Product Findability - Directly supporting our "Product Findability" brand pillar by improving customer search and navigation through refinement of our search taxonomy and product attribute infrastructure with the goal of enhanced search relevancy and recommendations.
•Grow Canada Market Share - Expanding geographical engagement to grow our Canadian customer base by providing a wholesale change in our Canadian "Smart Value" and "Easy Delivery and Support" customer shopping experience.
•Grow Government Market Share - Improving our Government website with more competitive market features and products that offer an intuitive procurement experience, and provide the flexibility to expand the platform to additional government customers.
•Improve Enterprise Platform - Improving our data strategy to connect high-quality, intuitive data with our business users to enable faster insights. Additionally, embracing the public cloud in order to promote greater resilience for the business in the event of unforeseen circumstances.
Our ability to pursue some or all of the strategies described above, and the extent to which we would be able to pursue some or all of them, will depend on the resources we have available, and may require significantly more capital than we currently have. These costs have been and are expected to continue to be material.
Executive Commentary
This executive commentary is intended to provide investors with a view of our business through the eyes of our management. As an executive commentary, it necessarily focuses on selected aspects of our business. This executive commentary is intended as a supplement to, but not a substitute for, the more detailed discussion of our business included elsewhere herein. Investors are cautioned to read our entire "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," as well as our interim and audited financial statements, and the discussion of our business and risk factors and other information included elsewhere or incorporated in this report. This executive commentary includes forward-looking statements, and investors are cautioned to read "Special Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
Our consolidated cash and cash equivalents balance increased from $495.4 million as of December 31, 2020 to $503.3 million as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $7.9 million, primarily as the result of cash inflows from operating activities of $98.0 million, which was partially offset by contributions for capital calls relating to our limited partnership interest in the Medici Ventures, L.P. fund of $41.1 million, expenditures for property and equipment of $13.6 million, and deconsolidation of discontinued operations cash of $34.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue increased 11% in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased product sales resulting from a 23% increase in average order value driven by a continued product mix shift into home furniture categories, partially offset by a 10% decrease in customer orders. This decreased order activity was largely driven by tapering of the accelerated customer growth and online penetration we experienced during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Gross profit increased 9% in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to increased sales volume, partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. Gross margin decreased to 22.6% in 2021, compared to 22.9% in 2020, primarily due to one-time benefits realized in 2020 such as reduced promotional discounting and fees charged to partners due to unmet contractual service levels, partially offset by lower returns activity in 2021 consistent with order declines.
Sales and marketing expenses as a percentage of revenue increased to 11.0% in 2021 compared to 10.5% in 2020 primarily due to increased spending on paid listing advertisements and keywords to support our customer acquisition strategy, partially offset by less broadcast media spend and gained leverage in staff-related expenses.
Technology expenses increased $6.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to staff-related costs to support strategic initiatives and increased cloud adoption.
General and administrative expenses decreased $10.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily driven by a reduction in staff-related expenses, including accrued bonus and reduced discretionary consulting spend, partially offset by a beneficial $8.6 million reversal of a legal settlement accrual in 2020 and a $2.5 million legal settlement realized in 2020.
Additional commentary related to COVID-19
Overstock has continued to respond to the challenges and opportunities created by the COVID-19 pandemic. In fiscal year 2020, we saw a substantial year-over-year increase in our Website traffic, number of new customers, and customer demand, particularly in our home furniture and furnishings categories. While many of our key metrics remain positive, some have receded from the elevated 2020 levels during 2021. Our online-only platform and partner network with thousands of fulfillment centers have enabled us to meet this increase in demand. Our three warehouses have remained operational based on our sustained implementation of sound safety measures, including staggered shifts and social distancing. These measures are continuously updated based on CDC guidelines. There remain continued challenges throughout the supply chain in factory production capacity, inbound freight delays, as well as carrier delivery constraints and fulfillment performance from some suppliers. We have evaluated and implemented a remote working plan for our employees; most of our corporate employees are continuing to work from home remotely without incident. We cannot predict how the COVID-19 pandemic, including the spread of variants thereof, or the vaccination rate will unfold in the coming months, regionally, nationally and internationally. Nevertheless, the challenges arising from the pandemic have not adversely affected our liquidity, revenues, or capacity to service our debt, nor have these conditions required us to reduce our capital expenditures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents currently on hand and expected cash flows from future operations will be sufficient to continue operations for the next twelve months and beyond. We continue to monitor, evaluate, and manage our operating plans, forecasts, and liquidity in light of our strategic objectives, industry and economic changes, including the most recent developments driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. We proactively seek opportunities to improve the efficiency of our
operations and have in the past and may in the future take steps to realize internal cost savings, including aligning our staffing needs based on our current and expected future levels of operations and process streamlining.
We periodically evaluate opportunities to repurchase our equity securities, obtain credit facilities, or issue additional debt or equity securities which may impact our future operations and cash flows. In addition, we may, from time to time, consider the investment in, or acquisition of, complementary businesses, products, services, or technologies to expand our business, any of which might affect our liquidity requirements or cause us to issue additional debt or equity securities that would be dilutive to shareholders. There can be no assurance that financing arrangements will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Our future results may be significantly different from our historical results for several other reasons as well as the risk factors described in Item 1A. "Risk Factors."
Cash flows from discontinued operations are disclosed on our statement of cash flows as separate line items in the operating, investing, and financing activities sections. We anticipate that the absence of cash flows from discontinued operations will positively affect future liquidity and capital resources.
Current sources of liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents, and accounts receivable, net. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $503.3 million and accounts receivable, net of $21.2 million.
Cash flow information is as follows (in thousands):
At December 31, 2021, we had $150.0 million available under our "at the market" sales program which permits us to conduct "at the market" public offerings of our common stock under a sales agreement, dated June 26, 2020, with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC ("JonesTrading") and D.A. Davidson & Co. ("D.A. Davidson"). We did not sell any shares under our at the market sales program during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash received from customers generally corresponds to our net revenues as our customers primarily use credit cards to buy from us causing our receivables from these sales transactions to settle quickly. We have payment terms with our partners that generally extend beyond the amount of time necessary to collect proceeds from our customers. As a result of increased online shopping migration from the COVID-19 pandemic, we saw our revenue accelerate beginning in the second half of March 2020, as customers turned to online shopping, which caused our cash, cash equivalents, and accounts receivable balances to increase during 2020 compared to balances prior to the pandemic. While many of our key metrics that contribute to positive cash flow remain positive, some have receded from the elevated 2020 levels during 2021. We continue to monitor, evaluate, and manage our operating plans, forecasts, and liquidity in light of the most recent developments driven by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The $98.0 million of net cash provided by continuing operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to income from continuing operations, adjusted for non-cash items, of $141.6 million, offset by cash used by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $43.6 million.
The $226.6 million of net cash provided by continuing operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to income from continuing operations, adjusted for non-cash items, of $129.2 million and cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $97.4 million.
Cash flows from investing activities
The $56.4 million of net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to contributions for capital calls relating to our limited partnership interest in the Medici Ventures, L.P. fund of $41.1 million and expenditures for property and equipment of $13.6 million.
The $15.3 million of net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to expenditures for property and equipment of $14.9 million.
Cash flows from financing activities
The $12.7 million used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted primarily from $8.3 million of payments of taxes withheld upon vesting of restricted stock and $3.0 million of payments on long-term debt.
The $231.4 million provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted primarily from $195.5 million of net proceeds from sales of our common stock, net of offering costs (including commissions), and $47.5 million of proceeds from our long-term debt secured by our building and land, partially offset by $2.6 million of payments on long-term debt and $2.6 million of payments of taxes withheld upon vesting of restricted stock.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effect such obligations and commitments are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flow in future periods (in thousands):
___________________________________________
(1) - Represents the future minimum lease payments under non-cancellable operating leases. For information regarding our operating lease obligations, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 12-Leases contained in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) - Represents future interest and principal payments on our financing agreements. For information regarding our financing agreements, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 11-Borrowings contained in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Tax contingencies
We are involved in various tax matters, the outcomes of which are uncertain. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, tax contingencies were $3.2 million and $900,000, respectively, which are included in our reconciliation of unrecognized tax benefits (see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 20-Income Taxes contained in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K). The increase in tax contingencies in 2021 was primarily a result of COVID-19 tax protections expiring during the year. Changes in state, federal, and foreign tax laws may increase our tax contingencies. The timing of the resolution of income tax contingencies is highly uncertain, and the amounts ultimately paid, if any, upon resolution of issues raised by the taxing authorities may differ from the amounts accrued. It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months we will receive additional assessments by various tax authorities. These assessments may or may not result in changes to our contingencies related to positions on prior years' tax filings.
Results of Operations
Net revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin
The following table reflects our net revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The 11% increase in net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to increased product sales resulting from a 23% increase in average order value driven by a continued product mix shift into home furniture categories, partially offset by a 10% decrease in customer orders. This decreased order activity was largely driven by tapering of the accelerated customer growth and online penetration we experienced during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
We cannot estimate the impact that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the intensity of additional waves of the pandemic or the subsiding of the pandemic and return to prior patterns of economic activity will have on our business in the future due to the unpredictable nature of the ultimate development and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic.
International sales were less than 1% of total net revenues for 2021 and 2020.
Our overall gross margins fluctuate based on changes in supplier cost and/or sales price, including competitive pricing; inventory management decisions; sales coupons and promotions; product mix of sales; and operational and fulfillment costs. Fulfillment costs include all warehousing costs, including fixed overhead and variable handling costs (excluding packaging costs), as well as merchant processing fees associated with customer payments made by credit cards and other payment methods and other variable fees, and customer service costs, all of which we include as costs in calculating gross margin. We believe that some companies in our industry, including some of our competitors, account for fulfillment costs within operating expenses, and therefore exclude fulfillment costs from gross margin. As a result, our gross margin may not be directly comparable to others in our industry.
Fulfillment costs as a percentage of sales may vary due to several factors, such as our ability to manage costs at our warehouses, significant changes in the number of units received and fulfilled, the extent to which we use third-party fulfillment services and warehouses, and our ability to effectively manage customer service costs and merchant fees. Fulfillment and related costs remained relatively consistent as a percentage of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
Gross margins for the past eight quarterly periods and years ending December 31, 2021 and 2020 were:
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 9% compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to increased sales volume, partially offset by a decrease in gross margin. Gross margin decreased to 22.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 22.9% for the same period in 2020, primarily due to one-time benefits realized in 2020 such as reduced promotional discounting and fees charged to partners due to unmet contractual service levels, partially offset by lower returns activity in 2021 consistent with order declines.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing expenses
We use a variety of methods to target our consumer audience, including online campaigns, such as advertising through keywords, product listing ads, display ads, search engines, affiliate marketing programs, social coupon websites, portals, banners, e-mail, direct mail and viral and social media campaigns. We also do brand advertising through television, radio, print ads, and event sponsorships.
The following table reflects our sales and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The 50 basis point increase in sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily due to increased spending on paid listing advertisements and keywords to support our customer acquisition strategy, partially offset by less broadcast media spend and gained leverage in staff-related expenses.
We are also experiencing an increasingly competitive digital marketing landscape. We have competitors who are spending significant amounts on advertising, bidding up the cost of certain marketing channels, such as paid keywords, and expect this trend to continue. While we may not choose to match their levels of spending, this has increased our marketing costs in recent years.
We do not include costs associated with our discounted shipping and other promotions, such as coupons in sales and marketing expense. Rather, we account for them as a reduction of revenue and therefore affect sales and gross margin. We consider promotions, such as coupons, etc. and our policy of free shipping on all orders, as an effective marketing tool, and intend to continue to offer them as we deem appropriate as part of our overall marketing plan.
Technology expenses
We seek to invest efficiently in technology, including web services, customer support solutions, website search, expansion of new and existing product categories, and in investments in technology to enhance the customer experience, improve our process efficiency and support and expand our logistics infrastructure. We expect to continue to increase our technology expenses to support these initiatives and these increases may be material.
The frequency and variety of cyberattacks on our Website, our corporate systems, and on third parties we use to support our technology continues to increase. The impact of such attacks, their costs, and the costs we incur to protect ourselves against future attacks have not been material to date. However, we consider the risk introduced by cyberattacks to be serious and will continue to incur costs related to efforts to protect ourselves against them.
The following table reflects our technology expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Technology expenses increased $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to staff-related costs to support strategic initiatives and increased cloud adoption.
General and administrative expenses
The following table reflects our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The $10.3 million decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was primarily driven by a reduction in staff-related expenses, including accrued bonus and reduced discretionary consulting spend, partially offset by a beneficial $8.6 million reversal of a legal settlement accrual in 2020 and a $2.5 million legal settlement realized in 2020.
Other income (expense), net
The $11.9 million increase in other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, is primarily due to the $12.6 million income from our equity interests in Medici Ventures, L.P. and tZERO.
Income taxes
Our effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was (39.6)% and 1.4%, respectively. Our effective tax rate is affected by recurring items such as research tax credits and non-recurring items such as changes in valuation allowances. We record valuation allowances against deferred tax assets when there is uncertainty about our ability to generate future income in relevant jurisdictions, and the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business make estimates of future income more challenging due to the unpredictable nature of the ultimate scope and duration of the pandemic. It is also affected to a lesser extent by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amount of income we earn in those jurisdictions, which we expect to be fairly consistent in the near term. Our high effective tax rate is primarily attributable to the valuation allowance release for certain federal and state deferred tax assets in the current year.
We have indefinitely reinvested foreign earnings of $5.7 million at December 31, 2021. We would need to accrue and pay various taxes on this amount if repatriated. We do not intend to repatriate these earnings.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin
The following table reflects our net revenue, costs of goods sold, gross profit and gross margin for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The 74% increase in net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to increased retail product sales resulting from a 71% increase in customer orders, 111% new customer growth, and strong repeat customer behavior, largely due to a consumer migration toward online shopping in response to COVID-19.
International sales were less than 1% of total net revenues for 2020 and less than 2% of total net revenues for 2019.
Gross margins for the past eight quarterly periods and years ending December 31, 2020 and 2019 were:
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased 98% compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to an increase in retail product sales and an increase in gross margin. Gross margin increased to 22.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 20.1% for the same period in 2019, primarily due to our new partner marketing allowance program that was fully rolled out in the second quarter of 2020, which requires all of our partners to participate and allows us to advertise more strategically to our customers. Gross margin also benefited from reduced promotional discounting as we balanced spend to support new customer acquisition efforts, gained leverage in our fixed warehouse infrastructure, an increase in fees charged to partners due to unmet contractual service levels, and lower customer service costs due to slower growth in our staffing relative to sales.
Operating expenses
Sales and marketing expenses
The following table reflects our sales and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The 70 basis point increase in sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, was primarily due to increased spending to support our customer acquisition strategy, resulting in a 111% increase in new customers compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Technology expenses
The following table reflects our technology expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Technology expenses increased $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to staff-related costs, including accrued bonuses.
General and administrative expenses
The following table reflects our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
The $1.0 million increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019, primarily due to an increase in staff-related costs, including accrued bonuses, partially offset by an $8.6 million reversal of a legal settlement accrual, a $2.5 million legal settlement, a $1.9 million decrease in consulting expenses, and a reduction in discretionary spending due to adjustments related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other income, net
Other income, net had a $1.3 million increase for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the same period in 2019.
Income taxes
Our effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was 1.4% and (1.7%), respectively. Our effective tax rate is affected by recurring items such as research tax credits and non-recurring items such as changes in valuation allowances. Our low effective tax rate is primarily attributable to the valuation allowance we are maintaining on our net deferred assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The SEC has defined a company's critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company's financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies, estimates and judgments addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results. For additional information, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 2-Accounting Policies and Supplemental Disclosures. We believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates. Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
•estimate of unearned product revenue on undelivered product;
•assessment of control under the VIE model for retained noncontrolling interests; and
•initial valuation of retained noncontrolling interest in former subsidiaries.
Estimate of unearned product revenue on undelivered product
Revenue is recognized when control of the product passes to the customer, typically at the date of delivery of the merchandise to the customer or the date a service is provided and is recognized in an amount that reflects the expected consideration to be received in exchange for such goods or services. As such, customer orders are recorded as unearned revenue prior to delivery of products or services ordered. As we ship high volumes of packages through multiple carriers, we use estimates to determine which shipments are delivered and, therefore, recognized as revenue at the end of the period. Our delivery date estimates are based on average shipping transit times based on historical data. However, actual shipping times may differ from our estimates.
The following table shows the effect that hypothetical changes in the estimate of average shipping transit times would have had on the reported amount of revenue and income before taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Assessment of control under the VIE model for retained noncontrolling interests
On April 23, 2021, we entered into a Limited Partnership Agreement (the "Limited Partnership Agreement") with Pelion MV GP, L.L.C. ("Pelion"), in connection with the closing (the "Medici Closing") of the Transaction Agreement dated January 25, 2021 between the Company, Medici Ventures, Inc. ("Medici Ventures"), Pelion, and Pelion, Inc. (the "Transaction Agreement"). In connection with the execution of the Limited Partnership Agreement, Pelion acquired control over Medici Ventures and its blockchain assets. As a result of this transaction, we performed an assessment of control under the variable interest entity ("VIE") model and determined that effective as of the Medici Closing, we held a variable interest in both Medici Ventures and tZERO Group, Inc. ("tZERO") (collectively, the "Disposal Group"), both of which meet the definition of variable interest entities; however, we are not the primary beneficiary of either entity for purposes of consolidation. Accordingly, we deconsolidated the Disposal Group's consolidated net assets and noncontrolling interest from our consolidated financial statements and results beginning on April 23, 2021, the date that control ceased.
Initial valuation of retained noncontrolling interest in former subsidiaries
We measured our retained noncontrolling interest in former subsidiaries at fair value at the date of deconsolidation. In the absence of quoted market prices (e.g., a privately held entity), the fair value was determined in good faith under our valuation policy and process using generally accepted valuation approaches. We utilized an independent third party valuation firm to assist us in determining the fair values of our retained noncontrolling interest in former subsidiaries using a combination of a market approach and income approach. The market approach relied upon a comparison with guideline public companies or guideline transactions and entails selecting relevant financial information of the subject company, and capitalizing those amounts using valuation multiples that are based on empirical market observations. The income approach relied upon an analysis of its projected economic earnings discounted to present value (discounted cash flows). The fair value determination of our retained noncontrolling interest required the use of significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 inputs) as shown in the table within Note 4-Discontinued Operations. Due to the inherent uncertainty of determining the fair value of Level 3 securities that do not have a readily available market value, the determination of fair value required significant judgment or estimation and changes in the estimates and assumptions used in the valuation models could materially affect the determination of fair value for these assets. See Note 4-Discontinued Operations for further information.
For information about recent accounting pronouncements, see Item 8 of Part II, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data"-Note 2-Accounting Policies and Supplemental Disclosures.