Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including, without limitation, statements under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” includes forward-looking statements. Our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our or our management team’s expectations, hopes, beliefs, intentions or strategies regarding the future. In addition, any statements that refer to projections, forecasts or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intends,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements, but the absence of these words does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking. The forward-looking statements contained in this report are based on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those factors described herein under the headings “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors”. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should any of our assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary in material respects from those projected in these forward-looking statements. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, we disclaim any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a recently incorporated blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not identified any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our IPO and the Private Placements, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $673,940 and working capital deficit of approximately $229,067. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We did not commence operations until after the closing of our IPO in January 2021, and we have not engaged in any significant operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We have generated and will continue to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $7,959,366 which consisted of $13,905 in interest income and a non-cash $9,402,000 decrease in fair value of warrant liabilities. These gains were partially offset by transaction expenses of $672,964 related to offering costs related to issuance of warrants, $588,457 in general and administrative expenses and $195,118 in franchise tax expenses. General and administrative expenses of $588,457 were primarily comprised of legal and accounting fees.
For the period from October 22, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $21,000, which consists of operating costs of $21,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The funds in the Trust Account have been or will be invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds that meet certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act and that invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Under the authorized shares method, each share is taxed at a graduated rate based on the number of authorized shares with a maximum aggregate tax of $200,000 per year. Under the assumed par value capital method, Delaware taxes each $1,000,000 of assumed par value capital at the rate of $400; where assumed par value would be (1) our total gross assets, divided by (2) our total issued shares of common stock, multiplied by (3) the number of our authorized shares. Our annual franchise tax obligation is expected to be capped at the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation of $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the Trust Account will be income and franchise taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of March 18, 2022 we held $345,251 outside the Trust Account. We expect to use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
As of March 18, 2022, we had working capital of approximately $217,000. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor, Alden Global, any other affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers or directors may, but none of them is obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. These warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor, Alden Global or another affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors, if any, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
On December 30, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note to our sponsor, which provides for borrowings from time to time of up to an aggregate of $1,500,000 (“Working Capital Loans”), and we borrowed $500,000 under the sponsor Working Capital Loan on the same date. The proceeds of the sponsor Working Capital Loan will be used for working capital purposes. The sponsor Working Capital Loan does not bear interest and is repayable in full upon consummation of the Company’s initial business combination. If we do not complete our initial business combination, the sponsor Working Capital Loan shall not be repaid and all amounts owed under it will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to us outside of our Trust Account established in connection with the Company’s IPO.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements over the next 12 months will include approximately $350,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses in connection with any business combinations; $100,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $75,000 for Nasdaq continued listing fees; and approximately $350,000 for working capital to cover miscellaneous expenses (including franchise taxes net of anticipated interest income).
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds held outside the Trust Account to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement
where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we may target businesses with enterprise values that are greater than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our IPO and the Private Placements, and, as a result, if the cash portion of the purchase price exceeds the amount available from the Trust Account, net of amounts needed to satisfy redemptions by public stockholders, we may be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. We may also obtain financing prior to the closing of our initial business combination to fund our working capital needs and transaction costs in connection with our search for and completion of our initial business combination. There is no limitation on our ability to raise funds through the issuance of equity or equity-linked securities or through loans, advances or other indebtedness in connection with our initial business combination, including pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop arrangements we may enter into. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
We have until January 22, 2023 to consummate a business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 22, 2023.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of founder shares and private placement warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion of such shares to shares of Class A common stock) pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period for the securities to be registered. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the closing date of the IPO to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the public offering price less underwriting discounts. Any units issued or sold under the option will be issued and sold on the same terms and conditions as the other units in the IPO. On January 28, 2021, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,000,000 units at the IPO price of $10.00 per unit pursuant to the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option.
We paid an underwriting discount of 2% of the per unit offering price to the underwriters at the closing of the IPO. An additional fee of 3.5%, or $8,050,000, of the gross offering proceeds will be payable to the underwriters upon the completion of an initial business combination, from the amounts held in the Trust Account.
In connection with the consummation of the sale of the additional units pursuant to the underwriters’ full exercise of the over-allotment option, on January 28, 2021, the underwriters were entitled to an aggregate of $0.6 million in fees payable upon closing and an additional deferred underwriting commissions of approximately $1.1 million.
Related Party Loan
On December 30, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note to our sponsor, which provides for borrowings from time to time of up to an aggregate of $1,500,000, and we borrowed $500,000 under the Working Capital Loans on the same date. The proceeds of the Working Capital Loans will be used for working capital purposes. If we complete the initial business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that the initial business combination is not completed, we may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Up to $1.5 million of the Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, $500,000 was drawn on the Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2020, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of March 18, 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation
S-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Financial Instruments
We record the warrant liabilities and Working Capital Loan at estimated fair value. As of December 31, 2021, the public warrants and private placement warrants were valued using the public warrant’s publicly listed trading price as of the balance sheet date. The fair value of the Working Capital Loans approximates the value out the outstanding principal due to the short-term nature and presumption that the sponsor would cash settle the working capital notes. See “Note 9. Fair Value Measurement” to our financial statements for additional information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”). Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, 23,000,000 and no shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Earnings Per Share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption amount approximates fair value. The Class A feature to redeem at fair value means that there is effectively only one class of stock. Changes in fair value are not considered a dividend of the purposes of the numerator in the earnings per share calculation. Net loss per common share is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between the Class A common shares and the Class B common shares by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The Company has not considered the effect of the public warrants and private placement warrants sold in the IPO purchase 18,050,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of such warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for our outstanding public warrants and private placement warrants in accordance with authoritative guidance in ASC 480 and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). We determined that the outstanding public warrants and private placement warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder. As such, each public warrant and private placement warrant must be recorded as a liability and is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value is recorded in our statement of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a significant effect on our financial statements.