Item 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to OceanTech Acquisitions I Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s (the “SEC’s”) website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on February 3, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, are subject to all the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is OceanTech Acquisitions I Sponsors LLC (the “Sponsor”), a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the initial public offering (“Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on May 27, 2021. On June 2, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 10,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units, the “Common Stock”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $100 million, and incurring offering costs (inclusive of the partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option on June 17, 2021) of approximately $7.4 million, inclusive of $2.1 million of underwriting discount and $3.6 million in deferred underwriting commissions. The underwriter was granted a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 1,500,000 additional Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) to cover over-allotments, if any, at $10.00 per Unit. On June 17, 2021, the underwriter partially exercised their over-allotment option to purchase an additional 326,000 Units, resulting in incremental gross proceeds of approximately $3.3 million. The underwriter waived its right to exercise the remaining over-allotment option on June 21, 2021.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 4,571,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), of which 3,871,000 Private Placement Warrants were purchased by our Sponsor and 700,000 Private Placement Warrants were purchased by Maxim Group LLC (and/or its designees) (“Maxim”), each exercisable to purchase one share of Common Stock at $11.50 per share, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $4.6 million.
In connection with the partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, we sold an additional 97,800 Private Placement Warrants, of which 74,980 Private Placement Warrants were purchased by our Sponsor and 22,820 Private Placement Warrants were purchased by Maxim, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of $0.1 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement (including the additional Units and additional Private Placement Warrants sold in connection with the partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option), $104,292,600 ($10.10 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in the Trust Account.
If we are unable to complete an initial Business Combination within 12 months (or up to 18 months if the Company extends the period of time to consummate a Business Combination by up to six months by resolution adopted by a majority of our board of directors) from
the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or June 2, 2022 (or December 2, 2022), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the shares of Common Stock, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding shares of Common Stock, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $322,128 and working capital of $20,835.
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from February 3, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We have generated and expected to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We have incurred and expect to incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
The Company’s liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 were satisfied through the proceeds of $25,000 from the sale of the Founder Shares (Note 5), a loan of $163,039 under an unsecured and noninterest bearing promissory note - related party (Note 5), and from the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement held outside of the trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States at JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash in the Trust Account of $104.3 million. The Company intends to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions) to complete its initial Business Combination. The Company may withdraw interest to pay taxes. To the extent that the Company’s capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete its initial Business Combination.
Until the consummation of a Business Combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination. We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. The Company’s Sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses.
We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, June 2, 2022. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception was in preparation for our Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest.
For the period from February 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,866,217 from $2,805,647 in formation and operating costs and $690,542 offering costs allocated to warrants offset by $3,348 in interest income and $6,359,058 in change in fair value of warrants.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares (as defined below), Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any (and any shares of Common Stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares), are entitled to certain registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $2,065,200 in the aggregate (reflecting the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option), paid at the closing of the Initial Public Offering. $3,614,100 in the aggregate (reflecting the partial exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option), will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting and other costs incurred that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating expenses in the statements of operations. Offering costs associated with the issuance of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were charged to temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. The Company classifies deferred underwriting commissions as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities. Accordingly, for the period from February 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, offering costs in the aggregate of $7,482,451 (consisting of $2,065,200 of underwriting commissions, $3,614,100 of deferred underwriter’s commission, $1,033,633 in fair value of representative shares issued, and $769,518 of other cash offering costs) have been incurred, of which $690,542 were allocated to warrants and expensed and $6,791,909 were charged to temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value on the grant date and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Net Income Per Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income per common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period. The calculation of diluted net income does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 14,994,800 shares
of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in the calculation of diluted income per share because they are contingent on future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the period from February 3, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Redeemable Share Classification
All of the 10,326,000 Class A Common Stock sold as part of the Units in the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Given that the Class A Common Stock was issued with other freestanding instruments (i.e., public warrants), the initial carrying value of Class A Common Stock classified as temporary equity is the allocated proceeds based on the guidance in FASB ASC Topic 470-20, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options.”
Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which approximates fair value. The change in the carrying value of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit and Class A common stock.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.