ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Annual Report” or “Report”) includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect management’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward-looking statements are projections in respect of future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. Those statements include statements regarding the intent, belief or current expectations of us and members of our management team, as well as the assumptions on which such statements are based. For a more detailed discussion on our forward-looking statements, kindly refer to “Forward Looking Statements” prior to Item 1: Part I: Business contained in this Annual Report.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, or performance. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors. Some of these risks are included in the section entitled “Risk Factors” set forth in this Annual Report and in other reports that we file with the SEC. The occurrence of any of these risks, or others of which we are currently unaware, may cause our company’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks include, by way of example and without limitation:
● our ability to successfully commercialize our products and services on a large enough scale to generate profitable operations;
● our ability to maintain and develop relationships with customers and suppliers;
● our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses or new products, or to realize anticipated synergies in connection with acquisitions of businesses or products;
● expectations concerning our ability to raise additional funding and to continue as a going concern;
● our ability to successfully implement our business plan;
● our ability to successfully form a joint venture with Golden Mountain Partners to develop our product portfolio;
● our ability to avoid, or to adequately address any intellectual property claims brought by third parties; and
● the anticipated impact of any changes in industry regulation.
Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us in this Annual Report and in our other reports filed with the SEC. We undertake no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in the future operating results over time except as required by law. We believe that our assumptions are based upon reasonable data derived from and known about our business and operations. No assurances are made that the actual results of operations or the results of our future activities will not differ materially from our assumptions.
Corporate History
Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc. (f/k/a Mateon Therapeutics, Inc.) (“Oncotelic”), was formed in the State of New York in 1988 as OXiGENE, Inc., was reincorporated in the State of Delaware in 1992, and changed its name to Mateon Therapeutics, Inc. in 2016, and Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc. in November 2020. Oncotelic conducts business activities through Oncotelic and its wholly-owned subsidiaries, Oncotelic, Inc., a Delaware corporation, PointR Data, Inc. (“PointR”), a Delaware corporation, and EdgePoint AI, Inc. (“Edgepoint”), a Delaware Corporation for which there are non-controlling interests, (Oncotelic, Oncotelic Inc., PointR and Edgepoint are collectively called the “Company” or “We”). The Company is currently developing OT-101 for various cancers and COVID-19, Artemisinin for COVID-19 and AI technologies for clinical development and manufacturing. The Company has acquired apomorphine for Parkinson’s Disease, erectile dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction. In addition, the Company is evaluating the further development of its product candidates OXi4503 as a treatment for acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes and CA4P in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor for the treatment of advanced metastatic melanoma.
Amendments to Certificate of Incorporation
In November 2020 the Company filed an amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware changing its name from “Mateon Therapeutics, Inc.” to “Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc.” A notice of corporate action had been filed with the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), requesting confirmation to change its name and approval for a new ticker symbol. On March 29, 2021, the Company received approval from FINRA on its notice of corporate action, and effective March 30, 2021, the Company’s ticker symbol has changed from “MATN” to “OTLC”.
In January 2021, the Company filed an additional amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation with the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware which went effective immediately upon acceptance by the Secretary of State for the State of Delaware. As approved by the Company’s stockholders by written consent on August 10, 2020, the amendment also increased the number of authorized shares of Common Stock from 150,000,000 shares to 750,000,000 shares.
In addition, the Company registered an additional total of 20,000,000 shares of its Common Stock, which may be issued pursuant to the Company’s Amended and Restated 2015 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Plan”). Such additional shares were approved by the shareholders of the Company on August 10, 2020 and as reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) vide a Current Report on Form 8-K on August 14, 2020. As such, the total number of shares of the Company’s Common Stock available for issuance under the 2015 plan is 27,250,000.
Merger Agreement with Oncotelic, Inc.
In April 2019, the Company completed a merger with Oncotelic Inc. (the “Merger”), a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the treatment of cancer using TGF-β RNA). Oncotelic and Oncotelic Inc. entered into the Merger in order to create a publicly traded company with a pipeline of immunotherapies that target several cancer markets which currently lack adequate treatment options. For a more detailed discussion on the Merger, please refer to our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on April 15, 2021.
Merger Agreement with PointR Data, Inc.
In November 2019, the Company consummated a merger with PointR Data, Inc. (the “PointR Merger”). The PointR Merger was intended to create a publicly traded AI driven immuno-oncology company with a robust pipeline of first in class TGF-β immunotherapies for late-stage cancers such as gliomas, pancreatic cancer and melanoma. For a more detailed discussion on the Merger, please refer to our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on April 15, 2021.
Company Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company developing drugs for the treatment of orphan oncology indications, developing antisense and small molecule injectable drugs for the treatment of cancer. After the acquisition of Mateon Therapeutics, Inc through a reverse merger in 2019, we realigned the company pipeline to focus on rare pediatric cancers. The United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) has granted us Rare Pediatric Designations (“RPD”) for pediatric Diffuse Intrinsic Pontine Glioma (“DIPG”) for OT-101, pediatric melanoma for CAP4 and acute myeloid leukemia (“AML”) for Oxi4503. This strategy aims to capitalize on a voucher program in the United States (“US”). By focusing on RPD we anticipate: 1) reducing the cost of clinical development by way of a smaller and faster clinical trial, 2) acceleration of the approval process and final approval, 3) obtaining regulatory/ marketing exclusivity for up to 12 years as a biologic, and 4) obtaining vouchers worth a significantly large value on regulatory approval, which can be upwards of several million dollars. Approval in US would allow for approval in the rest of the world (“ROW”) using the US dossier. Phase 3 clinical trials for approval in adult indications will be conducted following the positive interim read of the pediatric trials. This approach maximize return on investment for the shareholders.
Concurrently we also explore opportunity to create values for shareholders by forming strategic alliances and/or licensing our product portfolio. As of August 2021, we have been working on the formation of a joint venture (“JV”) with Golden Mountain Partners (“GMP”). The Company entered into a JV with Dragon Overseas and GMP Bio, affiliates of GMP on March 31, 2022. GMP Bio to transfer the developmental cost of our product(s) onto the JV, while still participating in potential upside through ownership of the JV. GMP Bio and the Company are also looking to take the JV into an initial public offering (“IPO”) of the JV and which is anticipated to be a liquidity event for Company, especially if the IPO is successful. While we believe that the IPO can be achieved and would be successful, we cannot provide assurance for either the IPO or the success therof.
As a result of the reverse merger of Oncotelic and Oncotelic Inc.in April 2019 and the acquisition of PointR in November 2019, respectively, we believe we are well positioned as a biotech company with: (1) Oncotelic Inc.’s antisense platform with our drug candidate OT-101- targeting high value TGF-β2 target for various cancers and COVID-19, (2) PointR artificial intelligence (“AI”) for clinical trials, research and development, (3) Edgepoint for developing technologies for manufacturing and for developing technologies for supporting our COVID-19 programs, (4) Artemisinin for COVID-19, (5) the Company’s vascular disruptor proven safe in more than 500 patients capable of causing massive antigen release which would stimulate immune response against the cancerous tumor and (6) apomorphine, which we in-licensed in 2021, for developing against Parkinson’s Disease (“PD”), erectile disfunction (“ED”) and female sexual disfunction (“FSD”). Since the JV is formed with Dragon Overseas Capital Limited (“Dragon Overseas”) and GMP Biotechnology Limited (“GMP Bio’), we plan to accelerate the development of apomorphine as our flagship drug candidate.
We are also developing OT-101, an antisense against TGF-β2 - for the treatment of various viruses, including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (“SARS”) and the current coronavirus (“COVID-19”), on its own and in conjunction with other compounds. Viral replication cannot occur without TGF-β; and TGF-β surge and a cytokine storm cannot occur without TGF-β. A Phase 2 trial was completed for OT-101 in South America. Based on the final results of the trial, the trial can expand into a Phase 3 trial if the data supports the safety of the drug. This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 2 study is intended to evaluate the safety and efficacy of OT-101 in adult patients hospitalized with positive COVID-19 and pneumonia.
In addition, during 2020 and 2021, the Company was developing Artemisinin as a potential therapy for the virus causing COVID-19 (“SARS-CoV-2”). Artemisinin, purified from a plant Artemisia annua. It can inhibit TGF-β activity and is able to neutralize COVID-19. The Company initially conducted a study and the test results during an in vitro study at Utah State University showed Artemisinin having an EC50 of 0.45 ug/ml, and a Safety Index of 140. Artemisinin can target multiple viral threats, including COVID-19, by suppressing both viral replication and clinical symptoms that arise from viral infection. Viral replication cannot occur without TGF-β. In a clinical study undertaken in India called ARTI-19, clinical consequences related to the TGF-β surge, including ARDS and cytokine storm, were suppressed by targeting TGF-β with Artemisinin. The ARTI-19 trials were conducted in India by Windlas Biotech Limited (“Windlas”), the Company’s business partner in India. Windlas had applied for regulatory approval for it’s Artemisinin based product, ArtiShieldTM, but has not been able to obtain regulatory approval for use of ArtiShieldTM as a COVID-19 therapy and as such, no significant revenues have been reported by Windlas nor have we accrued any royalties on Artemisinin due from Windlas. We intend to focus future development on Artemisinin against other respiratory viruses with unmet needs.
In September 2021, Oncotelic entered into an exclusive License Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Autotelic, Inc. (“Autotelic”), pursuant to which Autotelic granted Oncotelic, among other things: (i) the exclusive right and license to certain Autotelic Patents (as defined in the Agreement) and Autotelic Know-How (as defined in the Agreement); and (ii) a right of first refusal to acquire at least a majority of the outstanding capital stock of Autotelic prior to Autotelic entering into any transaction that is a financing collaboration, distribution revenues, earn-outs, sales, out-licensing, purchases, debt, royalties, merger acquisition, change of control, transfer of cash or non-cash assets, disposition of capital stock by way of tender or exchange offer, partnership or any other joint or collaborative venture, research collaboration, material transfer, sponsored research or similar transaction or agreements. In exchange for the rights granted to Oncotelic, Autotelic will be entitled to earn the milestone payments. This transaction brings in AL-101 - an intranasal apomorphine asset with clear 505(b)2 pathway to approval for PD as well unique mechanism of action for treatment of ED and FSD.
Research Service Agreement between GMP and the Company.
When COVID-19 emerged in China, the Company and GMP contemplated a collaboration to develop drug candidates for COVID-19. Oncotelic Inc. and GMP entered into a research and services agreement (the “GMP Research Agreement”) in February 2020 memorializing their collaborative efforts to develop and test COVID-19 antisense therapeutics (the “GMP Agreement Product”). In March 2020, the Company reported the anti-viral activity of OT-101 - its lead drug candidate currently in phase 3 testing in pancreatic cancer and glioblastoma. In an in vitro antiviral testing performed by an independent laboratory, OT-101 had an 50% effective concentration (EC50) of 7.6 µg/mL and is not toxic at the highest dose of 1000 µg/mL giving a safety index (SI) value of >130, which is considered highly active. Further in March 2020, the Company and GMP entered into a supplement to the GMP Research Agreement (the “GMP Research Supplement”) to confirm the inclusion of OT-101 within the scope of the GMP Research Agreement as a GMP Agreement Product, pending positive confirmatory testing against COVID-19. In April 2020, the Company announced that it had delivered the requisite testing results to GMP confirming the applicability and potential use of OT-101 for the treatment of COVID-19. OT-101 exhibited potent activity against both COVID-19 and SARS with a robust safety index of >500. Also, the Company has submitted a Pre-Investigational New Drug application package to the Food and Drug Administration. GMP paid the Company fees of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 for the services rendered under the agreement. The Company also recorded approximately $40,000 for reimbursement of actual costs incurred.
In consideration for the financial support provided by GMP for the research, pursuant to the terms of the GMP Research Agreement (as amended by the GMP Research Supplement) GMP is entitled to obtain certain exclusive rights to the use of the GMP Agreement Product in the COVID Field on a global basis, and an economic interest in the use of the GMP Agreement Product in the COVID-19 Field including profit sharing to be decided. As described in the GMP Research Supplement, the Company intends to license or assign intellectual property rights, including the 2020 Patent Application and any other intellectual property rights owned or controlled by the Company relating to the GMP Agreement Product, with an option to the intellectual property rights to OXi4503 and CA4P at a future time, assuming GMP or their designee wishes to include those assets as well, to a joint venture company (the “Joint Venture Transaction”) to be established jointly between Oncotelic Inc. and GMP (or its designee), as well as providing management services and other expertise to the joint venture company. GMP intends that it (or its designee, as the case may be) shall provide funding to the joint venture company to support its development and commercial activities in the joint venture company’s territories, and in each case, on terms to be agreed by the parties. GMP shall be entitled to use its governmental relations and local expertise in Greater China to assist with coordinating the research, development and commercialization of (i) the GMP Agreement Products in the COVID Field, (ii) the GMP Agreement Products in the OT-101 Oncology Field, and if GMP decided to include (iii) OXi4503; and (iv) CA4P, in each case in Greater China. The Company entered into a JV with Dragon Overseas Capital Limited (“Dragon Overseas”) and GMP Biotechnology Limited (“GMP Bio”), affiliates of GMP on March 31, 2022. GMP Bio and the Company will own the join venture company in a 45/55 ratio, and its principal activities shall be to research, develop, bring to market and commercialize: (i) the GMP Agreement Products in the COVID-19 Field on a global basis, (ii) the GMP Agreement Products in the OT-101 Oncology Field in the territory set forth above, and if GMP so decides to include (iii) OXi4503 in the territory set forth above; and (iv) CA4P in the territory set forth above.
In June 2020, the Company secured $2 million in debt financing, evidenced by a one-year secured convertible note (the “GMP Note”) from GMP, to conduct a clinical trial evaluating OT-101 against COVID-19 bearing 2% annual interest, and is personally guaranteed by Dr. Vuong Trieu, the Chief Executive Officer of the Company. The GMP Note is convertible into the Company’s Common Stock upon the GMP Note’s maturity one year from the date of the GMP Note, at the Company’s Common Stock price on the date of conversion with no discount. GMP does not have the option to convert prior to the GMP Note’s maturity at the end of one year. GMP has extended the maturity of the GMP Note to June 30, 2022 with no concessions granted to GMP for such extension. Such financing was utilized solely to fund the clinical trial.
In September 2021, the Company secured a further $1.5 million in debt financing, evidenced by a one-year convertible note (the “GMP Note 2”) from GMP, to fund the same clinical trial evaluating OT-101 against COVID-19 bearing 2% annual interest. The GMP Note is convertible into the Company’s Common Stock upon the GMP Note 2’s maturity one year from the date of the GMP Note 2, at the Company’s Common Stock price on the date of conversion with no discount. GMP does not have the option to convert prior to the GMP Note 2’s maturity at the end of one year. Such financing will be utilized solely to fund the clinical trial. As of December 31, 2021, GMP was invoiced by the clinical research organization for $1.0 million. GMP paid the clinical trial organization the first tranche of $0.5 million in October 2021 and the second tranche of $0.5 million in February 2022.
In October 2021, the Company entered into an Unsecured Convertible Note Purchase Agreement (the “October Purchase Agreement”) with GMP, pursuant to which the Company issued a convertible promissory note in the aggregate principal amount of $0.5 million (the “October 2021 Note”), which October 2021 Note is convertible into shares of the Company’s Common Stock. The terms of the note are identical to the GMP Note 2.
License Agreement with Autotelic, Inc.
On September 30, 2021, Oncotelic Therapeutics, Inc. (the “Company”) entered into an exclusive License Agreement (the “License Agreement”) with Autotelic, Inc. (“Autotelic”), pursuant to which Autotelic granted Oncotelic, among other things: (i) the exclusive right and license to certain Autotelic Patents (as defined in the Agreement) and Autotelic Know-How (as defined in the License Agreement); and (ii) a right of first refusal to acquire at least a majority of the outstanding capital stock of Autotelic prior to Autotelic entering into any transaction that is a financing collaboration, distribution revenues, earn-outs, sales, out-licensing, purchases, debt, royalties, merger acquisition, change of control, transfer of cash or non-cash assets, disposition of capital stock by way of tender or exchange offer, partnership or any other joint or collaborative venture, research collaboration, material transfer, sponsored research or similar transaction or agreements. In exchange for the rights granted to Oncotelic, Autotelic will be entitled to earn certain milestone payments (collectively, the “Milestone Payments”). In addition to the Milestone Payments, Autotelic will be entitled to royalties equal to 15% of the net sales of any products that incorporate the Autotelic Patents or Autotelic Know-How.
Entry into MOU and Agreement with Windlas
In August 2020 the Company executed a memorandum of understanding (the “MOU”) with Windlas for the development and commercialization of Artemisinin as a therapeutic pharmaceutical, nutraceutical and herbal supplement against COVID-19. The development of Artemisinin against COVID-19 was dependent on the successful completion of ARTI-19 clinical trial, which was being initiated globally in Africa, India, and South America. Windlas will be our manufacturing partner for the clinical trial batches as well as commercial batches. In September 2020 the Company executed the final MOU with Windlas regarding the development and commercialization of Artemisinin as therapeutic pharmaceutical, nutraceutical and herbal supplement against COVID-19. Windlas had applied for regulatory approval for it’s Artemisinin based product, ArtiShieldTM, but has not been able to obtain regulatory approval for use of ArtiShieldTM as a COVID-19 therapy and as such, no significant revenues have been reported by Windlas nor have we accrued any royalties on Artemisinin due from Windlas. We intend to focus future development on Artemisinin against other respiratory viruses with unmet needs.
The Company’s ARTI-19 in India was conducted in partnership by Windlas, the Company’s business partner in India, as part of the Company’s effort at deploying ArtiShieldTM across India, and a variation of that in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. No adverse events were reported that required discontinuation of treatment. When ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™ was added to the SOC, more patients recovered faster than SOC alone.31 of 39 (79.5%) of patients taking became asymptomatic after 5-day of therapy. In comparison, only 12 of 21 control patients (57.1%) treated with SOC alone became asymptomatic on day 5. For the sicklier patients (WHO scale 4), the median time to becoming asymptomatic was only 5 days for the ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™ + SOC group, as compared to 14 days for the SOC alone group. These data sets provided clinical support that targeting the TGF-β pathway with ARTIVeda™ / PulmoHeal™ may contribute to a faster recovery of patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 patients. The Company has published the results of the trial in certain renowned publications. The Company is intending to continue developing Artemisinin as pharmaceutical for tropical viral diseases
Agreement with Autotelic BIO
In February 2018, Oncotelic Inc. had entered into a license agreement (the “ATB Agreement”) with Autotelic BIO (“ATB”), a non-affiliated Korean Company. The ATB Agreement licensed the use of OT-101, in combination with Interleukin-2 (the “Combined Product”), and granted to ATB an exclusive license under the Oncotelic Inc. technology to develop, make, have made, use, sell, offer for sale, import and export the Combined Product, and the Combined Product only, in the field, throughout the entire world (excluding the United States of America and Canada) as the territory, on the terms and subject to the conditions of the ATB Agreement. The ATB Agreement requires ATB to be responsible for the development of the Combined Product. Oncotelic Inc. was responsible to provide to ATB the technical know-how and other pertinent information on the development of the Combined Product. ATB paid Oncotelic Inc. a non-refundable milestone payment in consideration for the rights and licenses granted to ATB under the ATB Agreement, and ATB was to pay Oncotelic Inc. $500,000 within sixty days from the successful completion of the in vivo efficacy studies. This payment was made in June 2020 after the successful completion of the in-vivo study and the Company recorded the revenue during the three months ended June 30, 2020. In addition, ATB is to pay Oncotelic Inc.: (i) $500,000 upon Oncotelic Inc.’s completion of the technology know how and Oncotelic’s technical assistance and regulatory consultation to ATB, as determined by the preparation of a Current Good Regulation Practices audit or certification by the Food and Drug Administration, with a mutual goal to obtain marketing approval of the Combined Product in the aforementioned territory; (ii) $1,000,000 upon receiving marketing approval of the Combined Product in Japan, China, Brazil, Mexico, Russia, or Korea; and (iii) $2,000,000 from receiving marketing approval of the Combined Product in Germany, France, Spain, Italy, or the United Kingdom. ATB paid the Company fees of $0.5 million during the three months ended June 30, 2020 for the successful completion of the in-vivo efficacy studies.
Private Placement through JH Darbie & Co., Inc.
Between July 2020 and March 2021, the Company offered and sold certain units (“Units”) in a private placement through JH Darbie & Co., Inc. (“JH Darbie”), with each unit consisting of: (i) 25,000 shares of Edgepoint common stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Edgepoint Common Stock”), for a price of $1.00 per share of Edgepoint Common Stock; (ii) one convertible promissory note issued by the Company (the “Unit Note”), convertible into up to 25,000 shares of EdgePoint Common Stock at a conversion price of $1.00 per share, or up to 138,889 shares of the Company’s Common Stock, at a conversion price of $0.18 per share; and (iii) 100,000 warrants (the “Warrants”), consisting of (a) 50,000 warrants to purchase an equivalent number of shares of EdgePoint Common Stock at $1.00 per share (“Edgepoint Warrant”), and (b) 50,000 warrants to purchase an equivalent number of shares of Company Common Stock at $0.20 per share (“Oncotelic Warrant”) (the sale of Units is hereinafter, the “JH Darbie Financing”). In total, as of December 31, 2021, the Company had issued and sold a total of 100 Units. JH Darbie earned an 10 Units as fees.
The JH Darbie Financing resulted in gross proceeds of $5 million to the Company. Placement agent fees of $0.65 million were paid to JH Darbie pursuant to that certain Placement Agent Agreement, dated February 25, 2020 between the Company and JH Darbie (the “Darbie Placement Agreement”). In addition, the Company paid approximately $39,000 as legal costs for the transaction. Under the Darbie Placement Agreement, JH Darbie had the right to sell a minimum of 40 Units and a maximum of 100 Units on a best-efforts basis.
In June 2021, the Company and the Investors agreed to extend the maturity date of the Notes from June 30, 2021, to March 31, 2022. In addition, the Company and JHDarbie identified an error in the Oncotelic Warrants and JH Darbie Financing documents which intended to have the investors to purchase $50,000 of shares of Common Stock or Edgepoint Common Stock. However, the Company only issued 50,000 Oncotelic Warrants, with an aggregate exercise price of $10,000. The error was corrected by the Company and the Company issued to the Investors an aggregate of 20.0 million additional Oncotelic Warrants, and 2.0 million additional Oncotelic Warrants to J.H. Darbie, as placement agent. Each Investor was entitled to receive 200,000 additional Oncotelic Warrants for each Unit purchased.
Peak One Equity Purchase Agreement
In May 2021, the Company entered into an Equity Purchase Agreement (the “EPL”) and Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Peak One Opportunity Fund, L.P. (“Peak One”), pursuant to which the Company shall have the right, but not the obligation, to direct Peak One, to purchase up to $10.0 million (the “Maximum Commitment Amount”) in shares of the Company’s Common Stock. Under the EPL and subject to the Maximum Commitment Amount, the Company has the right, but not the obligation, to submit Put Notices (as defined in the EPL) to Peak One (i) in a minimum amount not less than $20,000.00, and (ii) in a maximum amount up to the lesser of (a) $1.0 million or (b) 250% of the Average Daily Trading Value (as defined in the EPL). In exchange for Peak One entering into the EPL, the Company agreed, among other things, to (A) issue Peak One and Peak One Investments, LLC, an aggregate of 250,000 shares of Common Stock, and (B) file a registration statement registering the Common Stock issued or issuable to Peak One under the EPL for resale (the “Registration Statement”) with the SEC within 60 calendar days of the date of the EPL, as more specifically set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement. The obligation of Peak One to purchase the Company’s Common Stock shall begin on the date of the EPL, and ending on the earlier of (i) the date on which Peak One shall have purchased Common Stock pursuant to the EPL equal to the Maximum Commitment Amount, (ii) twenty four (24) months after the initial effectiveness of the Registration Statement, (iii) written notice of termination by the Company to Peak One (subject to certain restrictions set forth in the EPL), (iv) the Registration Statement is no longer effective after the initial effective date of the Registration Statement, or (v) the date that the Company commences a voluntary case or any person commences a proceeding against the Company, a custodian is appointed for the Company or for all or substantially all of its property or the Company makes a general assignment for the benefit of its creditors (the “Commitment Period”). During the Commitment Period, the purchase price to be paid by Peak One for the Common Stock under the EPL shall be 91% of the Market Price, which is defined as the lesser of the (i) closing bid price of the Common Stock on the trading day immediately preceding the respective Put Date (as defined in the EPL), or (ii) lowest closing bid price of the Common Stock during the Valuation Period (as defined in the EPL), in each case as reported by Bloomberg Finance L.P or other reputable source designated by Peak One.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold a total of 3,435,000 shares of Common Stock at prices ranging from $0.09 and $0.23 for total net proceeds of approximately $420,000.
Paycheck Protection Program
In April 2020, the Company received loan proceeds in the amount of $250,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program (“1st PPP”) which was established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act and is administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”). The 1st PPP provides loans to qualifying businesses in amounts up to 2.5 times the average monthly payroll expenses and was designed to provide direct financial incentive to qualifying businesses to keep their workforce employed during the Coronavirus crisis. The Payment Protection Plan loans (“PPP Loans”) are uncollateralized and guaranteed by the SBA and forgivable after a “covered period” (8 weeks or 24 weeks) as long as the borrower maintained its payroll levels and uses the loan proceeds for eligible expenses, including payroll, benefits, mortgage interest, rent and utilities. The forgiveness amount would be reduced if the borrower terminated employees or reduced salaries and wages more than 25% during the covered period. Any unforgiven portion was payable over 2 years if issued before, or 5 years if issued after, June 5, 2020 at an interest rate of 1% with payments deferred until the SBA remits the borrowers loan forgiveness amount to the lender, or if the borrower did not apply for forgiveness, 10 months after the covered period. PPP loans provide for customary events of default, including payment defaults, breach of representations and warranties, and insolvency events and may be accelerated upon occurrence of one or more of these events of default. Additionally, the PPP Loans do not include prepayment penalties.
The Company met the 1st PPP loan forgiveness requirements and on August 7, 2021 applied for forgiveness. On Aug 17, 2021, the Company received the 1st PPP loan forgiveness approval from the lender and wrote off the loan outstanding amount inclusive of interest accrued, in the amount of $253,347. The Company recorded the amount forgiven as forgiveness income within the other income (expense) section of its statement of operations. The balance outstanding on 1st PPP loan, inclusive of accrued interest, was $0 and $251,733 on December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
In July 2021, the Company’s wholly owned subsidiary, PointR, received loan proceeds in the amount of $92,995 under the PPP (“2nd PPP”). The 2nd PPP was at terms similar to the 1st PPP. The Company met the 2nd PPP loan forgiveness requirements and received the 2nd PPP loan forgiveness approval from the lender on December 8, 2021 and wrote off the loan outstanding amount inclusive of interest accrued, in the amount of $93,413. The Company recorded the amount forgiven as forgiveness income within the other income (expense) section of its statement of operations. The balance outstanding on the 2nd PPP loan was $0 and $0 on December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively
The SBA reserves the right to audit any PPP loan, regardless of size. These audits may occur after the forgiveness has been granted. In accordance with the CARES Act, all borrowers are required to maintain their PPP loan documentation for six years after the loan was forgiven or repaid in full and to provide that documentation to the SBA upon request.
Geneva Roth Remark Notes
In May and June 2021, the Company entered into Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Geneva Agreement”) with Geneva Roth Remark Holdings Inc. (“Geneva”), whereby the Company issued two convertible notes (collectively, the “Geneva Notes”) in the aggregate principal amount of $307,500, convertible into shares of Common Stock. Under the terms of the Geneva Agreement, the Company will receive additional tranches of convertible note financing of up to $1.2 million throughout the term of the Geneva Agreement. The Geneva Notes have an interest rate of six percent (6%), which increases to twenty-two percent (22%) in the event of a default under each respective Note, and both mature one year from issuance (the “Maturity Date”). Geneva has the right from time to time, and at any time during the period beginning on the date which is one hundred eighty (180) days following issuance date and ending on the Maturity Date to convert all or any part of the outstanding and unpaid amount of the applicable Geneva Note into the Company’s Common Stock at a conversion price established at sixty five (65%) percent multiplied by the lowest two (2) daily volume weighted average price over the fifteen (15) consecutive trading days. The Geneva Notes include a clause accelerating the Company’s payment obligations upon the occurrence of certain events of default whereby, at the option of Geneva, the Company will become immediately obligated to repay Geneva in an amount equal to the principal of the applicable Geneva Loan plus both accrued but unpaid interest and default interest, in cash, with premium.
The total amount outstanding under the Geneva Notes, including accrued interest thereon, as of September 30, 2021, and December 31, 2020, was $313,472 and $0, respectively.
Unsecured convertible notes
In August 2021, the Company entered into Note Purchase Agreements with Autotelic, the CFO, and certain other accredited investors. Under the terms of the Note Purchase Agreements, the Company issued an aggregate of $698,500 (the “Principal Amount”) in debt in the form of unsecured convertible promissory notes (collectively, the “August 2021 Notes”). The August 2021 Notes are unsecured and provide for interest at the rate of 5% per annum. Such August 2021 Notes were issued against some of the short-term debt due as of June 30, 2021. All amounts outstanding under the August 2021 Notes become due and payable at such time as determined by the holders of a majority of the Principal Amount of the August 2021 Notes (the “Majority Holders”), on or after (a) the one year anniversary of the August 2021 Notes, or (b) the occurrence of an Event of Default (as defined in the Note Purchase Agreements) (the “Maturity Date”). The Company may prepay the August 2021 Notes at any time. Events of Default under the August 2021 Notes include, without limitation, (i) failure to make payments under the August 2021 Notes within thirty (30) days of the Maturity Date, (ii) breaches of the Note Purchase Agreement or August 2021 Notes by the Company which is not cured within thirty (30) days of notice of the breach, (iii) bankruptcy, or (iv) a change in control of the Company (as defined in the Note Purchase Agreements). The Majority Holders have the right, at any time not more than five days following the Maturity Date, to elect to convert all, and not less than all, of the outstanding accrued and unpaid interest and principal on the August 2021 Notes. The August 2021 Notes may be converted, at the election of the Majority Holders, into shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, at a fixed conversion price of $0.18 per share.
November - December 2021 Financing
In November and December 2021, the Company entered into securities purchase agreement with five institutional investors, whereby the Company issued five convertible notes in the aggregate principal amount of $1,250,000 convertible into shares of common stock of the Company. The convertible notes carry a twelve (12%) percent coupon and a default coupon of 16% and mature at the earliest of one year from issuance or upon event of default. Investors has the right at any time following issuance date to convert all or any part of the outstanding and unpaid amount of the note into the Company’s common stock at a conversion price established at a fixed rate of $0.07. The Company granted a total number of 9,615,385 warrants convertible into an equivalent number of the Company common shares at a strike price of $0.13 up to five years after issuance. The Placement agent was also granted a total amount of 125,000 as part of a finder’s fee agreement.
Short-term loans
The Company’s CEO had provided a short-term loan of $70,000 to the Company during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which $50,000 was repaid during the three months ended March 31, 2021. As such, $20,000 was outstanding at December 31, 2021. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, Autotelic Inc. provided a short-term funding of $120,000 to the Company, which was repaid shortly after the three months ended March 31, 2021. In May 2021, Autotelic provided an additional short-term funding of $250,000 to the Company, which was converted into a promissory note in the August 2021 Notes. Autotelic provided an additional $20,000 short-term loan to the Company, and as such, $20,000 was outstanding and payable to Autotelic at December 31, 2021.
During the fourth quarter of the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company’s CFO and the Bridge Investor provided short term loans of $25,000 and $50,000, respectively to the Company. Such loans were repaid as of March 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the CFO provided a total of approximately $120,000, of which $75,000 was converted into the August 2021 Notes. As such, a balance of approximately $45,000 remained outstanding as a short-term loan as of December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received approximately $630,000 primarily from two bridge investors, of which $373,500 was converted into the August 2021 Notes, and approximately $360,000 was outstanding as short-term advances as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expense during the reporting periods. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time we make such estimates. Actual results and outcomes may differ materially from our estimates, judgments and assumptions. We periodically review our estimates considering changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates are reflected in the financial statements prospectively from the date of the change in estimate. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. We believe the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments are the following:
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews long-lived assets, including definite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined by comparing the forecasted undiscounted net cash flows of the operation to which the assets relate to the carrying amount. If the operation is determined to be unable to recover the carrying amount of its assets, then these assets are written down first, followed by other long-lived assets of the operation to fair value. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows or appraised values, depending on the nature of the assets. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no impairment losses recognized for long-lived assets.
Intangible Assets
The Company records its intangible assets at cost in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other. The Company reviews the intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis or if events or changes in circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that they are impaired. These events could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, a decline in operating performance, competition, sale or disposition of a significant portion of the business, or other factors.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price of acquired business over the estimated fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least once annually, at the reporting unit level or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The goodwill impairment test is applied by performing a qualitative assessment before calculating the fair value of the reporting unit. If, on the basis of qualitative factors, it is considered not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying amount, further testing of goodwill for impairment would not be required. Otherwise, goodwill impairment is tested using a two-step approach.
The first step involves comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. If the fair value of the reporting unit is determined to be greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount is determined to be greater than the fair value, the second step must be completed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. The second step involves calculating the implied fair value of goodwill by deducting the fair value of all tangible and intangible assets, excluding goodwill, of the reporting unit from the fair value of the reporting unit as determined in step one. The implied fair value of the goodwill in this step is compared to the carrying value of goodwill. If the implied fair value of the goodwill is less than the carrying value of the goodwill, an impairment loss equivalent to the difference is recorded.
Convertible Instruments
The Company evaluates and accounts for conversion options embedded in its convertible instruments in accordance with ASC 815 “Derivatives and Hedging”.
ASC 815 generally provides three criteria that, if met, require companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free standing derivative financial instruments. These three criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable generally accepted accounting principles with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur, and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument. Professional standards also provide an exception to this rule when the host instrument is deemed to be conventional as defined under professional standards.
The Company accounts for convertible instruments (when it has determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments) in accordance with ASC 470-20 “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options.” Accordingly, the Company records, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Original issue discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt to their earliest date of redemption. The Company also records when necessary deemed dividends for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in preferred shares based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying common stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note.
ASC 815-40 “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” provides that, among other things, generally, if an event is not within the entity’s control could or require net cash settlement, then the contract shall be classified as an asset or a liability.
Derivative Financial Instruments Indexed to the Company’s Common Stock
We have generally issued derivative financial instruments, such as warrants, in connection with our equity offerings. We evaluate the terms of these derivative financial instruments in order to determine their accounting treatment in our financial statements. Key considerations include whether the financial instruments are freestanding and whether they contain conditional obligations. If the warrants are freestanding, do not contain conditional obligations and meet other classification criteria, we account for the warrants as an equity instrument. However, if the warrants contain conditional obligations, then we account for the warrants as a liability until the conditional obligations are met or are no longer relevant. Because no established market prices exist for the warrants that we issue in connection with our equity offerings, we must estimate the fair value of the warrants, which is as inherently subjective as it is for stock options, and for similar reasons as noted in the stock-based compensation section above. For financial instruments which are accounted for as a liability, we report any changes in their estimated fair values as gains or losses in our Consolidated Statement of Income.
Variable Interest Entity (VIE) Accounting
We evaluate our ownership, contractual relationships and other interests in entities to determine the nature and extent of the interests, whether such interests are variable interests and whether the entities are VIEs in accordance with ASC 810, Consolidations. These evaluations can be complex and involve Management judgment as well as the use of estimates and assumptions based on available historical information, among other factors. Based on these evaluations, if the Company determines that it is the primary beneficiary of a VIE, the entity is consolidated into the financial statements.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense consists of costs we incur for the development of our investigational drugs and, to a lesser extent, for preclinical research activities. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expense includes clinical trial costs, salaries and benefits of employees, including associated stock-based compensation, payments to clinical investigators, drug manufacturing costs, laboratory supplies and facility costs. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of our research and development expense, and these can be difficult to accurately estimate. Included in clinical trial costs are fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf, such as clinical research organizations, or CROs. We estimate clinical trial expense based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions such as CROs and the actual clinical investigators. These estimates are based on actual time and expenses incurred by the CRO and the clinical investigators. Also included in clinical trial expense are costs based on the level of patient enrollment into the clinical trial and the actual services performed under the related clinical trial agreement. Changes in clinical trial assumptions, such as the length of time estimated to enroll all patients, rate of screening failures, patient drop-out rates, number and nature of adverse event reports and the total number of patients enrolled can impact the average and expected cost per patient and the overall cost of the clinical trial. Based on patient enrollment reports and services provided, we may periodically adjust estimates for the clinical trial costs. If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed, the length of time for these services or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Share-Based Compensation
We record the estimated fair value of all share-based payments issued to employees and other service providers. Our share-based payments consist primarily of stock options. The valuation of stock options is an inherently subjective process, since market values are not available for any stock options in our equity securities. Market values are also not available on long-term, non-transferable stock options in other equity securities. With no market values on options to trade in our common stock and no comparable market values on any long-term non-transferable stock options, the process of valuing our stock options is even more uncertain and subjective. Accordingly, we use a Black-Scholes option pricing model to derive an estimated fair value of the stock options which we issue. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires certain input assumptions, including the expected term of the options and the expected volatility of our common stock. Changes in these assumptions could have a material impact on the estimated fair value that we record for share-based payments that we issue. We determine the term of the options based on the simplified method, which averages the vesting period and the contractual life of the stock option. We determine the expected volatility based on the historical volatility of our common stock over a period commensurate with the option’s expected term. The Black-Scholes option pricing model also requires assumptions for risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock, but we feel that these values are more objective and note that changes in these values do not have a significant impact on the estimated value of the options when compared to the volatility and term assumptions.
We are also required to estimate the level of award forfeitures expected to occur and record compensation expense only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Accordingly, we perform a historical analysis of option awards that are forfeited prior to vesting, and record total stock option expense that reflects this estimated forfeiture rate.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
A comparison of the Company’s operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, is as follows.
Net Loss
We recorded a net loss of approximately $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net loss of approximately $10 million for the same period in 2020. The increased loss was primarily in connection with lower loss from operations due to the reduced revenues of approximately $1.7 million, generated during the year ended December 31, 2020 as against no revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021, offset by operational expenses of approximately $0.2 million. In addition, the net loss of $0.5 million was due to loss from operations of $1.5 million, offset by the recording of approximately $0.3 million for the PPP loan forgiveness, approximately $0.3 million of a lower loss on conversion of debt by TFK during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, and approximately $0.3 million for change in value of derivatives during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020.
Revenue
We recorded services revenue of $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to approximately $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The services revenue recorded in 2020 primarily comprised of $1.2 million from services provided to GMP in connection with the development of OT-101 for COVID-19 and included reimbursement of costs incurred of approximately $41 thousand. We also recorded $0.5 million of revenues from ATB upon the successful completion of the in-vivo efficacy studies based on the ATB Agreement.
Research and Development Expense
Research and Development (“R&D”) expense decreased by approximately $0.6 million, from approximately $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to approximately $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease of approximately $0.6 million in the R&D activities is primarily due to reduced clinical trial costs of $0.3 million for the trials for OT-101 and Artemisinin, and $0.4 million for lower operational costs.
Now that we have formed a joint venture with GMP Bio, whereby we are able to transfer the responsibility of our drug development program to the joint venture, we expect to increase research and development activities for apomorphine, including the initiation of new clinical trials for our other oncology indications as well continuing or expanding on the trials and development of AI based tools and applications for OT-101 and Artemisinin for COVID-19 and other epidemics, and therefore believe that research and development expense may increase in the future, subject to our continuing ability to secure sufficient funding to continue planned operations.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative (“G&A”) expense increased by approximately $0.4 million, from approximately $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $5.0 for the same period of 2020. The increase in G&A expenses by approximately $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to same period of 2020 was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1 million of non-cash equity-based expenses, partially offset by lower compensation costs of approximately $0.3 million, lower legal and professional costs of approximately $0.2 million and lower other operational costs of approximately $0.1 million.
Now that we have formed a joint venture with GMP Bio, we may be able to transfer the responsibility of some or most of our G&A expenses to the joint venture, we may see an increase in G&A expenses, subject to our continuing ability to secure sufficient funding to continue planned operations.
Loss on Conversion of Debt
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a loss on conversion of debt by TFK of approximately $28 thousand related to the difference in fair value to the price at which the debt was converted. We had recorded a similar loss of $0.3 million for the debt conversion by Peak One and TFK in 2020.
Change in value of derivatives
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain of $0.3 million due to the change in value of derivatives on the notes issued to our CEO and the bridge investors. Correspondingly, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a nominal loss due to the change in value of derivatives of $45 thousand on the 2019 Peak One note, the TFK note and the notes issued to our CEO and the bridge investors (collectively, the “Convertible Notes”).
Interest Expense
We recorded interest expense, including amortization of debt costs, of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 in connection with debt raised from the various convertible notes and a private placement memorandum as compared to $2.0 million on convertible notes and a portion of the private placement memorandum for the same period of 2020.
Liquidity, Financial Condition and Capital Resources ($s in ‘000’s)
The Company has experienced net losses every year since inception and as of December 31, 2021 had an accumulated deficit of approximately $31 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $0.6 million in cash and current liabilities of approximately $15.5 million, of which approximately $1.3 million are net assumed liabilities of the Company as part of the Oncotelic Inc. reverse merger, $4.1 million of debt related to debt for conducting clinical trials for OT-101 from GMP and $2.6 million is contingent liability to issue common shares of the Company to PointR shareholders upon achievement of certain milestones. The Company does not expect to generate any meaningful revenue from product sales or licensing in the near future, and expects to incur additional operating losses over the next several years, primarily as a result of the Company’s plans to continue clinical trials for its investigational drugs, if the Company is unable to form a joint venture with GMP. Since the Company successfully formed the joint venture with Dragon Overseas and GMP Bio, then all costs associated with developing the assets licensed to the JV and a substantial portion of the G&A expenses will shift over to the JV and hence the Company may be able to reduce its expenses. The Company’s limited capital resources, history of recurring losses and uncertainties as to whether the Company’s operations will become profitable raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements contained in this report do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability of assets or classifications of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The principal source of the Company’s working capital deficit to date has been the issuance of convertible notes, a substantial part of which has been provided by officers and certain insiders. The Company will need to raise additional capital in order to fund its operations and continue development of product candidates. The Company is evaluating the options to further the development of the Company’s lead product candidate, Apomorphine for Parkinsons Disease, erectile dysfunction and female sexual dysfunction; OT-101 for both cancer and COVID-19, Artemisinin for COVID-19, developing AI technologies to support the COVID-19 therapies; in addition to evaluating the development pathway of its product candidates; OXi4503 and/or CA4P.
The Company anticipates raising substantial additional capital through the sale of equity securities and/or debt, but no new financing arrangements are in place at this time.
If the Company is unable to access additional funds when needed, it may not be able to continue the development of these investigational drugs and the Company could be required to delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of its development programs and operations. Any additional equity financing, if available, would be dilutive to the current stockholders and may not be available on favorable terms. Additional debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants and could also be dilutive. The Company’s ability to access capital is not assured and, if access is not achieved on a timely basis, would materially harm the Company’s financial condition, the value of its common stock and its business prospects.
Cash Flows ($s in ‘000s)
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was due to the net loss of approximately $10.5 million, which was partially offset by a $1.5 million of R&D cost paid through debt from GMP, non-cash amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs of $1.4 million, non-cash stock-based compensation of $0.8 million, amortization and depreciation of intangibles and development equipment of $0.1 million, non-cash gain on conversion of debt and change in fair value of derivatives of $0.3 million, forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $0.3 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.2 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was due to the net loss of approximately $10.0 million, which was partially offset by a $2.0 million of R&D cost paid through debt, non-cash amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs of $1.7 million, non-cash stock-based compensation of $2.1 million, amortization and depreciation of intangibles and development equipment of $0.3 million, non-cash loss on conversion of debt and change in fair value of derivatives of $0.3 million and changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.5 million.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $4.4 million. Net cash provided was due to approximately $1.6 million raised from the JH Darbie Financing, $0.1 million received under the Payroll Protection Plan, $0.4 million raised from sale of common stock under the equity purchase agreement with Peak One, $2.8 million raised through issuance of convertible debt, repayment of $0.4 million of convertible debt due to Geneva and repayment of $0.2 million of other notes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $3.2 million. Net cash provided was due to approximately $2.9 million raised from a private placement memorandum, $0.25 million received under the Payroll Protection Plan, $20 thousand received from our CEO, net of repayment of $50 thousand, $75 thousand of short term loans from the CFO and a bridge investor and repayment of $50,000 to one of our Fall 2019 investors.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Effects of Inflation
We do not believe that inflation has had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the periods presented.
Contractual Obligations
Our current drug development programs are based on a series of compounds called combretastatins, which we have exclusively licensed from Arizona State University, or ASU. If our current drug candidates are approved, we will be required to pay low to mid-single-digit royalties on future net sales of products associated with the ASU patent rights until these patent rights expire.
We also have an exclusive license from Bristol-Myers Squibb, or BMS, for certain patent rights to particular combretastatins, including CA4P. If CA4P is approved, we will be required to pay low-single-digit royalties on future net sales of products associated with the BMS patent rights until these patent rights expire.