ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 with respect to the financial condition, results of operations, business strategies, operating efficiencies or synergies, competitive positions, growth opportunities for existing products, plans and objectives of management, markets for our stock and other matters. Statements in this report that are not historical facts are hereby identified as “forward-looking statements” for the purpose of the safe harbor provided by Section 21E of the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”) and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Such forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, those relating to the future business prospects, our revenue and income, wherever they occur, are necessarily estimates reflecting the best judgment of our senior management as of the date on which they were made, or if no date is stated, as of the date of this report. These forward-looking statements are subject to a variety of risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including those described in the “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”), that may affect the operations, performance, development and results of our business. Because the factors discussed in this report could cause actual results or outcomes to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us or on our behalf, you should not place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for us to predict which factors will arise. In addition, we cannot assess the impact of each factor on our business or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. We assume no obligation and do not intend to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by law.
All references to “Ontrak,” “Ontrak, Inc.,” “we,” “us,” “our” or the “Company” mean Ontrak, Inc., its wholly-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities, except where it is made clear that the term means only the parent company.
OVERVIEW
General
Ontrak, Inc. (“Ontrak,” “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”) is an AI-powered and telehealth-enabled, virtualized healthcare company, whose mission is to help improve the health and save the lives of as many people as possible. Our technology-enabled platform provides claim-based analytics and predictive modeling to provide analytic insights throughout the delivery of our personalized treatment program. Our program predicts people whose chronic disease will improve with behavior change, recommends effective care pathways that people are willing to follow, and engages and guides them to and through the care they need. By combining predictive analytics with human engagement, we deliver improved member health and validated outcomes and savings to healthcare payors.
Our integrated, technology-enabled OntrakTM programs are designed to provide healthcare solutions to members with behavioral conditions that cause or exacerbate chronic medical conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and congestive heart failure, which result in high medical costs. Ontrak has a unique ability to engage these members, who do not otherwise seek behavioral healthcare, leveraging proprietary enrollment capabilities built on deep insights into the drivers of care avoidance. Ontrak integrates evidence-based psychosocial and medical interventions delivered either in-person or via telehealth, along with care coaching and in-market community care coordinators who address the social and environmental determinants of health, including loneliness. Our programs seek to improve member health and deliver validated cost savings to healthcare payors.
We operate as one segment in the United States and we have contracted with leading national and regional health plans to make the Ontrak program available to eligible members.
Recent Developments
Keep Well Agreement
On April 15, 2022, we entered into a Master Note Purchase Agreement with Acuitas Capital, LLC ("Acuitas"), an entity indirectly wholly owned and controlled by Terren S. Peizer, the Company's Executive Chairman and largest stockholder (the “Keep Well Agreement”), pursuant to which, subject to specified conditions, we may borrow up to $25.0 million (the “Available Amount”) from time to time through the earlier of (a) the date on which we file a report with the SEC that states there is substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern during the twelve month period following such filing and (b) September 1, 2023. In connection with each borrowing under the Keep Well Agreement, we will issue a senior secured note for the amount borrowed (each such note a "Keep Well Note") to Acuitas or an entity affiliated with it, which will accrue interest based on the Secured Overnight Financing Rate plus a corresponding applicable margin, for an all-in interest rate equating to 16.25% as of the closing date of the Keep Well Agreement, and will be due on September 1, 2023, subject to acceleration for customary events of default (each such note, a “Keep Well Note”). In addition to customary conditions precedent, Acuitas' obligation to loan funds to us and to purchase a Keep Well Note is subject to the condition that (x) we used best efforts to obtain sufficient financing from a third party for us to pay our obligations, (y) we were unable despite our best efforts to obtain such financing from a third party on reasonably acceptable terms, as determined by a majority of our independent directors, such determination to be made as if the financing available to us under Keep Well Agreement was not available; and (z) (1) absent obtaining the funds requested, we will not have sufficient unrestricted cash to pay all our obligations then due or scheduled to become due within the 30 days following the date of the request, and (2) there are no conditions or events that, when considered in the aggregate, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through August 15, 2023, after giving effect to the receipt of the funds requested and the remaining Available Amount. As of the date hereof, we have borrowed no funds under the Keep Well Agreement. If a Keep Well Note is issued, our obligations under the Keep Well Agreement will be unconditionally guaranteed by certain of our subsidiaries and will be secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of the present and future property and assets of the Company and such subsidiaries, in each case, subject to customary exceptions and exclusions.
The Keep Well Agreement was evaluated by, and negotiated at the direction of, a special committee of independent and disinterested directors of our board of directors. Our board of directors approved the Keep Well Agreement upon the recommendation for such approval by such committee.
For additional information regarding the Keep Well Agreement and the transactions related thereto, please see the discussion under “Keep Well Agreement” in Item 9B. Other Information, below.
Amendment to the 2024 Note Agreement
On February 14, 2022, the Company repaid $9.0 million of the outstanding balance of the 2024 Notes. This prepayment met the requirements as prescribed in the terms of the note agreement such that no yield maintenance premium and no prepayment fee were applicable. On March 8, 2022, the Company entered into an Eight Amendment to Note Purchase Agreement with the Holders (the "Eighth Amendment"), which among other things, amended certain financial covenants intended to increase the Company's financial flexibility, a required prepayment of $11.0 million of the outstanding loan balance without the incurrence of a yield maintenance premium or prepayment fee, which prepayment was made by the Company on March 8, 2022, restrictions on the declaration and payment of dividends on the Company's Series A Preferred Stock until after December 31, 2022, and elimination of LIBOR as a reference rate such that the 2024 Notes only bear interest at the Base Rate, as defined in the Note Agreement, going forward.
In connection with entering into the Eighth Amendment, the Company issued to Special Situations Investing Group II, LLC (the “Holder”), a Purchase Warrant for Common Shares (the “Amendment Warrant”) pursuant to which the Holder may purchase shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Common Shares”) in an aggregate amount of up 111,680 shares. Also, the Company agreed to issue to the Holder, beginning March 31, 2022 and until the earlier of (i) date the 2024 Notes have been paid in full and (ii) October 31, 2022, additional warrants (the “Ticking Warrants” and together with the Amendment Warrant, the “Warrants”), having the same terms as the Amendment Warrant, to purchase a number of Common Shares of the Company equal to $47,500, to be calculated based on the volume weighted average trading price of the Company’s shares during the five (5) trading day period immediately preceding the date such Ticking Warrants are issued, not to exceed 7% of the outstanding Common Shares on the date of the Eighth Amendment. The Warrants were offered and sold to the Holder in a private placement exempt from registration under the Securities Act. The Warrants may be exercised by the Holder at an exercise
price equal to $0.01 per share and will expire on September 24, 2026. As of March 31, 2022, Ticking Warrant for 19,984 shares of the Company's common stock was issued to the Holder.
Common Stock Offering
In November 2021, we entered into an at-the market ("ATM") agreement with a designated broker under which we may, from time to time, sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $70 million. During November and December 2021, we sold 1,324,185 shares of our common stock under the ATM agreement, resulting in total gross proceeds of $11.1 million ($10.8 million, net of commission and fees). The $10.8 million of net proceeds from this ATM offering of our common stock was used to pay down a portion of the outstanding loan balance of our 2024 Notes.
Customer Notifications, Reduction in Workforce and Restructuring
On February 26, 2021, we were notified by our then largest customer that the participation status with this customer will be terminated. As a result of this termination notice, our management assessed various options and deemed it prudent to initiate a workforce reduction plan to effectively align its resources and manage its operating costs, resulting in reduction of 35% of full time positions. In addition, on August 18, 2021, we received a termination notice from another customer of their intent not to continue the program past December 31, 2021. We believe the notification was for reasons specific to the customer’s corporate shift in strategic direction. Each of these customers' members have completed their participation in our program as of December 31, 2021. For information regarding concentration of our customers, refer to Note 4 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In November 2021, our management approved a restructuring plan as part of management's cost saving measures in order to reduce its operating costs, optimize its business model and help align with its previously stated strategic initiatives. The restructuring plan included reductions in workforce, a strategic change in our technology enhancement plan to purchase an alternative third-party software product for implementation and abandon internally-developed software as it would provide a significant amount of functionality needed in a more cost effective and timely manner, and identification and write-off of obsolete assets, including computers, equipment and other capitalized contract costs. For information regarding restructuring, severance and related costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, refer to Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Acquisition
On October 28, 2020, we completed the acquisition of LifeDojo Inc. (“LifeDojo”), a comprehensive, science-backed behavior change platform based in San Francisco, California, for total consideration of approximately $8.9 million, including $3.4 million in cash payment, 75,000 shares of our common stock (of which 74,984 shares were issued and 16 fractional shares were settled in cash) worth approximately $5.0 million at close, as well as certain contingent consideration based on a computation, as defined in the merger agreement, in the event the daily closing price per share of our common stock falls below a specified target price of $60 on two consecutive trading days during a six month period beginning on the sixth month anniversary to the twelfth month anniversary of the closing date of the acquisition (measurement period). On October 28, 2021, which was the completion date of the measurement period, we determined that the fair value of the contingent consideration was $1.8 million. As provided in the LifeDojo merger agreement, we elected the option to pay the $1.8 million contingent consideration in our common stock, which was 205,741 shares of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, 40,843 shares of common stock remain to be issued, pending stockholder response to receive payment. As such, $0.4 million of contingent liability remained as part of "Other accrued liabilities" on our consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
Preferred Stock Offering
In 2020, we completed the offering of a total of 3,770,265 shares of 9.50% Series A Cumulative Perpetual Preferred Stock (the "Series A Preferred Stock"), resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $93.8 million to the Company (or $86.6 million net of underwriting fees and other offering expenses). The Series A Preferred Stock is listed on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol "OTRKP." We generally may not redeem the Series A Preferred Stock until August 25, 2025, except upon the occurrence of a Delisting Event or Change of Control (as defined in the Certificate of Designations establishing the Series A Preferred Stock), and on and after August 25, 2025, we may, at our option, redeem the Series A Preferred Stock, in whole, at any time, or in part, from time to time, for cash at a redemption price of $25.00 per share, plus any accrued and unpaid dividends. The Series A Preferred Stock has no maturity date and will remain outstanding indefinitely unless redeemed by us or exchanged for shares of common stock in connection with a Delisting Event or Change of Control. Holders of Series A Preferred Stock generally have no
voting rights, but will have limited voting rights if we fail to pay dividends for six or more quarters, whether or not declared or consecutive) and in certain other events.
We used a portion of the net proceeds of the initial offering to fund a segregated dividend account for the payments of the first eight quarterly dividend payments on the Series A Preferred Stock and intends to use the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, M&A and investments in technology.
Holders of Series A Preferred Stock of record at the close of business of each respective record date (February 15, May 15, August 15 and November 15) are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared by our Board of Directors, out of funds legally available for the payment of dividends, cumulative cash dividends at the rate of 9.50% per annum of the $25.00 per share liquidation preference (equivalent to $2.375 per annum per share). Dividends, if and when declared by our Board of Directors, are payable quarterly in arrears, every February 28, May 30, August 31, and November 30, as applicable, beginning on or about November 30, 2020.
On November 11, 2020, our Board of Directors declared the first quarterly dividend on the Company's Series A Preferred Stock for shareholders of record as of the close of business on November 15, 2020. The first quarterly cash dividend equaled $0.6333333 per share, representing more than a full quarter as it covered the period from, and including, the first date the Company issued the Series A Preferred Shares. In 2021, our Board of Directors declared each of the four quarterly dividends on the Company's Series A Preferred Stock for shareholders of record on each record date of 2021. Each quarterly cash dividend paid equaled $0.593750 per share, at 9.50% per annum of liquidation preference of $25.00 per share. At December 31, 2021, we had undeclared dividends of $0.7 million.
Company Name and Ticker Symbol Change
On July 6, 2020, we changed our corporate name from Catasys, Inc. to Ontrak, Inc. and changed our NASDAQ ticker symbol from CATS to OTRK effective July 7, 2020. We believe the change in our name leverages our national brand recognition of the Company's Ontrak solutions among our health plan members, health plan customers and network of behavioral health providers.
Metrics
The following table sets forth our key metrics that we use to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions:
•Revenue. Our revenues are mostly generated from fees charged to health plan customers related to health plan members enrolled in our Ontrak program. Our contracts are generally designed to provide cash fees to us on a monthly basis, an upfront case rate, or fee for service based on enrolled members and achievement of certain member specified metrics that drive clinical engagement. Our performance obligation is satisfied over the length of the Ontrak program as our services our delivered.
•Cash flow from operations. Our business activities generally have resulted in an outflow of cash flow from operations as we invest strategically into our business to help the growth of our operations.
•Effective Outreach Pool. Our Effective Outreach Pool represents individuals insured by our health plan customers who have been identified through our advanced data analytics and predictive modeling with untreated behavioral health conditions that may be impacted through enrollment in the Ontrak program.
Our revenue for 2021 was $84.1 million compared to $82.8 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in our revenue in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to the increase in revenue on a per member basis, partially offset by the loss of our two largest customers as previously announced and a decrease in total average enrolled members.
Our cash flow from operations for 2021 was $(26.2) million compared to $(6.3) million for 2020. The year over year decrease in our cash flow from operations during 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in our deferred revenue related to the second largest customer's notice of its intention to not continue the program past December 31, 2021 as discussed above, and our continued investment in the growth of our sales and marketing initiatives, research and development and general and administrative departments.
Our effective outreach pool at December 31, 2021 was 5,415 compared to 152,000 the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the reduced outreach pool associated with the loss of our customers as discussed above and budgetary constraints limiting our enrollment at certain other customers. As we work with our remaining customers in maximizing return on their investment, optimizing our enrollment process, and enhancing our offering, the effective outreach pool could continue to fluctuate in the near term.
Key Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue from contracts with customers is recognized when, or as, we satisfy our performance obligations by transferring the promised goods or services to the customers. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied over time is recognized by measuring our progress in satisfying the performance obligation in a manner that depicts the transfer of the goods or services to the customer. Revenue related to health plan customers whose health plan members are enrolled in our program is recognized over the enrollment period of the program.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of healthcare services consists primarily of salaries related to our care coaches, member engagement specialists and other staff directly involved in member care, healthcare provider claims payments and related processing fees, and other direct costs incurred to serve our health plan customers. All costs are recognized in the period in which an eligible member receives services.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of our sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and commissions, and costs of marketing and promotional events, corporate communications, online marketing, product marketing and other brand-building activities. All advertising related costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our engineers and software development staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, and the cost of certain third-party service providers. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for administrative, legal, finance and human resource staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation, professional fees, insurance premiums, and other corporate expenses.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense from our note agreements, accretion of debt discount, amortization of debt issuance costs and finance leases.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income (expense) consists of gains (losses) associated with changes in fair value of contingent consideration and warrant liabilities and other miscellaneous income (expense) items.
Results of Operations
The table below and the discussion that follows summarize our results of operations for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Revenue
The mix of our revenues between commercial and government insured members can fluctuate year over year. The following table sets forth our sources of revenue for each of the periods indicated:
Revenue increased $1.3 million, or 2%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. This increase in revenue was primarily due to the increase in revenue on a per member basis, partially offset by the loss of our largest customer as previously announced and a decrease in total average enrolled members.
The mix of our revenues from government customers increased to 60% in 2021 compared to 42% in 2020. This increase in mix of revenues from government customers was mainly due to our expansion of health plan customers with Medicare and Medicaid members, partially offset by a decrease relating to the loss of our customer as discussed above.
We currently expect our revenues in 2022 to decline year over year primarily as a result of the lost customers discussed above and pricing and volume updates with certain other customers.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Profit Margin
Cost of revenue decreased $12.4 million, or 28%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease in cost of revenue was primarily due to headcount efficiencies gained and cost optimization initiatives as we improve the operations for our member facing organization.
Gross profit and gross profit margin increased by $13.7 million and 16%, respectively, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in both gross profit and gross profit margin was primarily due to the increase in our revenue on a per member enrolled basis, as well as headcount efficiencies gained as a result of the restructuring plan and cost optimization initiatives as we improve the operations for our member facing organization.
We expect our cost of revenue to decline year over year in line with the decrease in revenue and as we optimize the efficiency of our operations and continue to scale our business.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expense increased $26.7 million, or 49%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in operating expenses was primarily due to the following:
•$5.4 million increase in our research and development costs, which was primarily related to an increase of $2.6 million in employee-related costs, $1.8 million increase in professional consulting and software costs, as we invest in continued enhancement of our technology and related tools to support the growth of our business and $1.7 million of amortization expense primarily relating to acquired software technology.
•$5.4 million increase in our sales and marketing costs, which was primarily related to an increase of $2.9 million of professional service and promotional costs related to marketing initiatives, $2.1 million increase in employee-related costs and $0.3 million increase in professional consulting fees.
•$7.1 million increase in our general and administrative costs, which was primarily related to $4.6 million increase in employee-related costs, $2.7 million increase in insurance costs, partially offset by $1.0 million decrease in professional, consulting and legal fees.
•$9.0 million of restructuring, severance and related costs in 2021 related to management's restructuring plan implemented in the fourth quarter of 2021 to reduce its operating costs, optimize its business model and help align with its previously stated strategic initiatives. For more information, refer to Note 6 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our operating expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of our operating and strategic initiatives.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net decreased $0.2 million, or 16%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease in other expense, net was primarily due to $1.3 million loss on the change in fair value of the contingent liability relating to an acquisition, partially offset by $0.2 million gain on the forgiveness of the LifeDojo PPP loan, compared to $1.2 million loss related to a change in the fair value of a warrant liability in 2020.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net increased $0.8 million, or 11%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in interest expenses was primarily due to higher average total outstanding loan balance during 2021 compared to 2020 as well as higher effective weighted average annual interest rate applicable to the outstanding 2024 Notes.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million compared to income tax benefit of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $0.2 million income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to state minimum taxes. The $0.6 million income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to a deferred tax liability recorded at the time of the LifeDojo acquisition that was subsequently reversed at December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and restricted cash was $65.9 million and we had working capital of approximately $70.0 million. Based on our cash and restricted cash levels, expected revenue from business operations, and after taking into account the amount available to borrow under the Keep Well Agreement, we expect to have sufficient cash to cover our operating expenses through at least the next twelve months following the date our financial statements in this report are issued. See “Recent Developments-Keep Well Agreement” above. However, delays in cash collections, lower revenue than anticipated, unforeseen expenditures, or our inability to satisfy the conditions precedent to borrowing funds under the Keep Well Agreement could impact our expectation.
We have incurred significant net losses and negative operating cash flows since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur net losses and negative operating cash flow, in part due to the negative impact on our operations by customer terminations. We had an average monthly cash burn rate of approximately $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition to revenue from business operations, our primary source of capital is the amount available under the Keep Well Agreement. We may also be able to raise capital through equity financing, however, when we can effect such sales and the amount of shares we can sell depends on a variety of factors to be determined by us from time to time, including, among others, market conditions, the trading price of our common stock and our determination as to the appropriate sources of funding for our operations.
Management plans to continue to execute on its strategy by (i) exploring other sources of capital with either debt or equity financing for on-going liquidity needs; (ii) continuing to manage operating costs by strategically pursuing cost optimization initiatives; and (iii) continuing to pursue executing our growth strategy by improving our marketing techniques and implementing
new features to increase customer engagement, adding new members and securing new customer contracts. There can be no assurance that capital will be available when needed or that, if available, it will be obtained on terms favorable to us and our stockholders, that we will be successful in implementing cost optimization initiatives, or that we will be successful in executing our growth strategy. In addition, our Goldman debt agreement contains various financial covenants, and any unanticipated non-compliance with those covenants could result in an acceleration of the repayment of the outstanding loan balance, and our ability to borrow funds under the Keep Well Agreement is subject to conditions precedent being satisfied, and we may not satisfy such conditions precedent if and when we need to borrow funds thereunder. Furthermore, equity or debt financings may have a dilutive effect on the holdings of our existing stockholders, and debt financings may subject us to, and if we borrow funds under the Keep Well Agreement, we will be subject to, restrictive covenants, operational restrictions and security interests in our assets. See the risk factors entitled, “We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses and may be unable to obtain additional financing,” and “We may need additional funding, and we cannot guarantee that we will satisfy the conditions precedent for borrowing funds under the Keep Well Agreement or find adequate sources of capital in the future,” in Item 1A. Risk Factors of this report.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
We used $26.2 million of cash from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $6.3 million during the same period in 2020. The $19.9 million increase in net cash used in operating activities in 2021 was primarily related to the increase in revenue resulting from recognition of deferred revenue as service performance obligation was completed and higher cash interest payments in 2021 compared to 2020, partially offset by a decrease in accounts receivable reflecting a decrease in revenues as discussed above.
Net cash used in investing activities was $4.5 million in 2021 compared to $4.6 million in 2020. The $4.5 million of net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to was primarily related to capitalized software development costs. The $4.6 million of net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was primarily related to $2.9 million for the acquisition of LifeDojo in October 2020 and $1.7 million of capital expenditures, which were primarily related to capitalized software development costs and purchases of computer equipment.
We anticipate that software development costs and capital expenditures will decrease in the near future.
Net cash used in financing activities was $6.6 million for 2021, compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $100.1 million for 2020. Net cash used in financing activities for 2021 was primarily related to $10.8 million of repayments made on the outstanding balance of our 2024 Notes, $9.0 million of dividend payments made on our Series A Preferred Stock and $3.0 million of payments made on our financed insurance premiums, partially offset by $11.1 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the ATM offering and $5.6 million of proceeds received from stock option exercises. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to $87.4 million of total proceeds from the issuance of our Series A Preferred Stock, $10.0 million of proceeds from the issuance of the remaining 2024 Notes and $6.2 million of proceeds received from stock option exercises, partially offset by a $1.2 million dividend payment on our Series A Preferred Stock and $1.2 million of payments on our financed insurance premiums.
As a result of the above, our total cash and cash equivalents, including restricted cash of $7.1 million, was $65.9 million as of December 31, 2021.
Debt
See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a detailed discussion about our debt.
Common Stock and Preferred Stock Offering
See Note 9 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a detailed discussion about our common stock and preferred stock offerings, and related preferred stock dividends.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policy and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. On an on-going basis, we evaluate the appropriateness of our estimates and we maintain a thorough process to review the application of our accounting policies. Our actual results may differ from these estimates.
We consider our critical accounting estimates to be those that (1) involve significant judgments and uncertainties, (2) require estimates that are more difficult for management to determine, and (3) may produce materially different results when using different assumptions. We have discussed these critical accounting estimates, the basis for their underlying assumptions and estimates, and the nature of our related disclosures herein with the audit committee of our Board of Directors. We believe our accounting policies related to revenue recognition and share-based compensation expense involve our most significant judgments and estimates that are material to our consolidated financial statements. They are discussed further below.
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates virtual healthcare service revenue from contracts with customers as it satisfies its performance obligations to customers and their members enrolled in our Ontrak program. The virtual healthcare service is transferred to a customer when, or as, the customer obtains control of that service. A performance obligation may be satisfied over time or at a point in time. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied over time is recognized by measuring progress in a manner that depicts the transfer of services to the customer. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time is recognized at the point in time that the Company determines the customer obtains control over the promised service. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those promised services (i.e., the “transaction price”). In determining the transaction price, the Company considers multiple factors, including identification of the performance obligation and the effects of variable consideration. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainties with respect to the amount are resolved. In determining when to include variable consideration in the transaction price, the Company considers the range of possible outcomes, the predictive value of past experiences, the time period of when uncertainties expect to be resolved and the amount of consideration that is susceptible to factors outside the Company's influence, such as the judgment and actions of third parties.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue represents billed, but unrecognized revenue, and is comprised of fees billed or received in advance of the delivery or completion of the services when revenue recognition criteria have not been met. Deferred revenue is recognized as our performance obligation is satisfied over the length of the Ontrak program as our services are delivered.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of salaries related to our care coaches, outreach specialists and other staff directly involved in member care, healthcare provider claims payments and related processing fees and other direct costs incurred in delivering our performance obligation. Salaries and fees charged by our third party administrators for processing claims are expensed in the period in which an eligible member receives services.
Commissions
We defer commissions paid to our sales force and engagement specialists as these amounts are incremental costs of obtaining a contract with a customer and are recoverable from future revenue that gave rise to the commissions. Commissions for initial contracts and member enrollments are deferred on the consolidated balance sheets and amortized on a straight-line basis over a period of benefit that has been determined to be six years and one year, respectively.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
We consider all highly liquid investments with an original maturity of three months or less to be cash equivalents. Financial instruments that potentially subject us to a concentration of credit risk consist of cash and cash equivalents. Cash is deposited with what we believe are highly credited, quality financial institutions. The deposited cash exceeds Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured limits. We cannot provide assurance that we will not experience losses on these deposits.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is carried at historical cost, not amortized, and subject to write-down, as needed, based upon an impairment analysis that we perform annually on October 1 or more frequently if an event occurs or change in circumstances indicates that the asset may be impaired. We operate as one reporting unit and the fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using quoted market prices in active markets of our common stock. The implied fair value of goodwill is compared to the carrying value of goodwill as of the testing date, and an impairment charge is recognized for the excess of the carrying value of goodwill over its implied fair value, if any. We conducted our annual goodwill impairment test as of October 1, 2021 and determined that no impairment of goodwill existed.
Definite-lived intangible assets include acquired software technology and customer relationships resulting from a business acquisition. We amortize such definite-lived intangible assets on a straight line basis over their estimated useful lives. Definite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. See below under "Valuation of Long-Lived Assets" for more information.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
We review long-lived assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In the event the undiscounted future cash flow attributable to the asset is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the long-lived asset. Changes in estimates of future cash flows attributable to the long-lived assets could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
We conducted an impairment analysis of our long-lived assets and determined that there was no impairment relating to these long-lived assets, except for the assets identified as part of our restructuring plan. Please see Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
Share-Based Compensation
Stock Options and Restricted Stock Units - Employees and Directors
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors based on estimated fair values on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of RSU awards based on the closing stock price of our common shares on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of shares for stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as expense over the requisite service periods in the consolidated statements of operations. We recognize forfeitures when they occur.
Stock Options and Warrants - Non-employees
We account for the issuance of stock options and warrants for services from non-employees by estimating the fair value of stock options and warrants issued using the Black-Scholes pricing model. This model’s calculations incorporate the exercise price, the market price of shares on grant date, the weighted average risk-free interest rate, expected life of the option or warrant, expected volatility of our stock and expected dividends.
For options and warrants issued as compensation to non-employees for services that are fully vested and non-forfeitable at the time of issuance, the estimated value is recorded in equity and expensed when the services are performed and benefit is received. For unvested shares, the change in fair value during the period is recognized in expense using the graded vesting method.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the liability method in accordance with Accounting Standards Committee (“ASC”) 740 “Income Taxes.” To date, no current income tax liability has been recorded due to our accumulated net losses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and the amounts that are reported in the tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded on a net basis; however, our net deferred tax assets have been fully reserved by a valuation allowance due to the uncertainty of our ability to realize future taxable income and to recover our net deferred tax assets.
Recently Issued or Newly Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements adopted and under evaluation, refer to Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.