Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On December 21, 2020, Ouster Technologies, Inc. (“OTI”, prior to the Merger, named Ouster, Inc.) entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) with Colonnade Acquisition Corp., a Cayman Islands exempted company (“CLA”), and Beam Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), a Delaware corporation and subsidiary of CLA. OTI’s and CLA’s board of directors unanimously approved OTI’s entry into the Merger Agreement, and on March 11, 2021, the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement were consummated (all such transactions, the “Business Combination”), as further described below. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, (i) CLA domesticated as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”) and changed its name to “Ouster, Inc.” (with CLA after such domestication and the other transactions pursuant to the Merger Agreement being referred to as the “Company”) and (ii) Merger Sub merged with and into OTI (the “Merger”), with OTI surviving the Merger.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this subsection to “we”, “our” and “the Company” refer to the business and operations of OTI (formerly known as Ouster, Inc.) and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Merger and to Ouster, Inc. (formerly known as Colonnade Acquisition Corp.) and its consolidated subsidiaries following the consummation of the Merger.
Overview
We are a leading provider of high-resolution digital lidar sensors that offer advanced 3D vision to machinery, vehicles, robots, and fixed infrastructure assets, allowing each to understand and visualize the surrounding world and ultimately enabling safe operation and autonomy. We design and manufacture digital lidar sensors that we believe are the highest-performing, lowest-cost lidar solutions available today across each of our four target markets: industrial automation; smart infrastructure; robotics; and automotive. We shipped sensors to over 600 paying customers including approximately 40 distributors in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our digital lidar sensors leverage a simplified architecture based on two semiconductor chips and are backed by a suite of patent-protected technology. We have invested heavily in patents since our inception, pursuing comprehensive coverage of invention families and use cases, with broad international coverage. We believe that our extensive patent coverage creates material barriers to entry for anyone aiming to compete in the digital lidar space.
Our product offering today includes three models of sensors in our OS product line: the ultra-wide field of view OS0, the mid-range OS1, and the long-range OS2. In January 2020 we released new models in our OS product line, increasing the resolution of our OS1 model and introducing the OS0 and OS2 models. Within our OS sensor models, we offer numerous customization options, all enabled by embedded software. For each of our three models in the OS product line, we offer resolution options of 128 lines vertically (“channels”), 64 channels, or 32 channels, as well as many beam spacing options. We are currently developing our solid-state DF product line, which is a suite of short, mid, and long-range solid-state digital lidar sensors that provide uniform precision imaging without motion blur across an entire field of view. In October of 2021, Ouster acquired Sense Photonics, Inc. (“Sense”) a developer of solid-state flash lidar based on VCSEL and SPAD technology. This acquisition enables the development of the DF sensor line which leverages technology and engineering expertise from both companies. As such, the product line has been renamed to reflect the underlying technology of our solid-state sensor lineup.
We believe the simplicity of our digital lidar design gives us a meaningful advantage in costs related to manufacturing, supply chain and production yields. The same digital lidar architecture underpins our entire product portfolio which we believe drives economies of scale in our supply chains and speeds time to market. With virtually unlimited software-defined products driving low-cost customization, we are able to increase stock keeping units (“SKUs”) for industry-specific applications, expanding our product offering with minimal manufacturing or inventory changes. Additionally, we are successfully expanding our manufacturing capacity by outsourcing to our manufacturing partner, Benchmark Electronics, Inc. (“Benchmark”). Benchmark manufactures our products at its facility in Thailand, which we expect will reduce our product costs and allow us to rapidly scale production to meet our anticipated product demand. Based on cost quotes for our products in mass production, we believe our manufacturing costs to be lower than certain of our competitors, and we expect our manufacturing costs per unit to decrease further with higher volumes.
We have won and are actively negotiating a number of additional, multi-year sales contracts which includes our Strategic Customer Agreements (“SCAs”) which establish a multi-year purchase and supply framework for Ouster and the customer, and include details about customer programs and applications where the customer intends to use Ouster products. SCAs also include multi-year binding and non-binding customer forecasts (typically of three to five years in length) that provide Ouster with more visibility into its customers' potential business requirements as well as potential revenue streams derived from sources such as mutually agreed upon pricing over the duration of the agreement.
We founded Ouster in 2015 with the invention of our high-performance digital lidar. Since then, we have grown to approximately 278 employees serving over 600 paying customers globally in the year ended December 31, 2021. To continue to grow our business in the coming years, we have expanded and plan to continue to expand our sales and marketing efforts and our software development capabilities, and to accelerate sensor development efforts. We are headquartered in San Francisco, CA.
Merger Agreement with Colonnade Acquisition Corp. and Beam Merger Sub, Inc.
On December 21, 2020, OTI entered into the Merger Agreement with CLA, and Merger Sub. OTI’s and CLA’s board of directors unanimously approved OTI’s entry into the Merger Agreement, and on March 11, 2021, the transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement were consummated. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, (i) CLA domesticated as a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”) and changed its
name to “Ouster, Inc.” (with CLA after such domestication and the other transactions pursuant to the Merger Agreement being referred to as the “Company”) and (ii) Merger Sub merged with and into OTI (the “Merger”), with OTI surviving the Merger.
As a result of and upon the effective time of the Domestication, among other things, (1) each of the then issued and outstanding 5,000,000 CLA Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of CLA (the “CLA Class B ordinary shares”) converted automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a CLA Class A ordinary share (as defined below), (2) immediately following the conversion described in clause (1), each of the then issued and outstanding 25,000,000 Class A ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of CLA (the “CLA Class A ordinary shares”), converted automatically, on a one-for-one basis, into a share of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Ouster (the “Ouster common stock”), (3) each of the then issued and outstanding 10,000,000 redeemable warrants of CLA (the “CLA warrants”) converted automatically into a redeemable warrant to purchase one share of Ouster common stock (the “Public warrants”) pursuant to the Warrant Agreement, dated August 20, 2020 (the “Warrant Agreement”), between CLA and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company (“Continental”), as warrant agent, and (4) each of the then issued and outstanding units of CLA that had not been previously separated into the underlying CLA Class A ordinary shares and underlying CLA warrants upon the request of the holder thereof (the “CLA units”), were cancelled and entitled the holder thereof to one share of Ouster common stock and one-half of one Public warrant, and (5) each of the then issued and outstanding 6,000,000 private placement warrants of CLA (the “Private Placement warrants”) converted automatically into a warrant to purchase one share of Ouster common stock pursuant to the Warrant Agreement. No fractional Public warrants were issued upon separation of the CLA units.
Immediately prior to the effective time of the Merger, (1) each share of OTI’s Series B Preferred Stock, par value $0.00001 per share (the “OTI Preferred Stock”), converted into one share of common stock, par value $0.00001 per share, of OTI (the “OTI common stock” and, together with OTI Preferred Stock, the “OTI Capital Stock”) (such conversion, the “OTI Preferred Conversion”) and (2) all of the outstanding warrants to purchase shares of OTI Capital Stock were exercised in full or terminated in accordance with their respective terms (the “OTI Warrant Settlement”).
As a result of and upon the closing of the Merger, among other things, all shares of OTI Capital Stock (after giving effect to the OTI Warrant Settlement) outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger together with shares of OTI common stock reserved in respect of options to purchase shares of OTI common stock and restricted shares of OTI common stock (together, the “OTI Awards”) outstanding immediately prior to the closing of the Merger that were converted into awards based on Ouster common stock, were canceled in exchange for the right to receive, or the reservation of, an aggregate of 150,000,000 shares of Ouster common stock (at a deemed value of $10.00 per share), which, in the case of OTI Awards, were shares underlying awards based on Ouster common stock, representing a fully-diluted pre-transaction. Upon the closing of the Merger, the Company received gross proceeds of $299.9 million from the Merger and private offering, offset by $8.5 million of pre-merger costs relating to CLA and offering costs of $26.6 million.
Sense Acquisition
On October 22, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Sense, a lidar technology company for autonomous vehicles, and formally established Ouster Automotive, a new functional division of the Company focusing on driving mass-market adoption of digital lidar in consumer and commercial vehicles. The transaction has been accounted for as a business combination. We purchased all of the outstanding shares of the capital stock of Sense and settled all Sense debt for a total consideration of $72.8 million comprised of 9,163,982 shares of the our common stock having a fair value of $60.0 million, fully vested replacement equity awards having a fair value of $1.1 million and a cash payment of $11.7 million to settle Sense pre-existing debt and transaction costs incurred by Sense in connection with the acquisition. We issued and held back 1,573,427 shares of common stock with the aggregate fair value of $10.3 million to satisfy any necessary adjustments, including without limitation certain indemnification claims and net working capital shortfall (“Holdback Shares”). The Holdback Shares will be released, net of any shares necessary to satisfy all unsatisfied or disputed claims for indemnification and net working capital shortfall, and distributed to the Sense stockholders in 18 months from the acquisition date. The Holdback Shares are considered issued and outstanding from a legal perspective and have the same economic and voting rights as other issued and outstanding shares of our common stock. We expect this acquisition will continue to help us expand our presence in the automotive vertical by executing on our hiring goals and product roadmap on a faster timeline.
COVID-19 Impact
Throughout 2020 and 2021, the worldwide spread of the pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”), including several of its variants, and the measures intended to contain the spread of COVID-19, have resulted in a global slowdown of economic activity and caused disruptions to our business. In particular, our headquarters are based in the San
Francisco Bay Area, which has been subject to ongoing government measures and orders such as quarantines and social distancing. During the second and third quarters of 2020 we slowed our operating and capital spending with the expectation that our revenue and ability to raise capital would be impacted by the global pandemic. We believe that our overall growth rate during 2020 and 2021 was negatively impacted by the pandemic due in part to pandemic related supply chain issues, though, despite this impact, we were able to continue to grow our sales during 2021 and estimate that in the long-term the pandemic will act as a catalyst for wider adoption of automation and lidar technology.
As a San Francisco Bay Area based company, we were affected by the “shelter in place” order in the first and second quarter of 2020. While the majority of our employees were able to work remotely, some employees, especially manufacturing employees, were not able to work from home. The “shelter in place” order delayed order fulfillment and revenue recognition during the first and second quarters of 2020. We continued to pay employees during the “shelter in place” order whether or not they were able to work. Manufacturing and order fulfillment employees were able to return to work in the second quarter of 2020; however, the number of employees allowed on premises at one time was greatly reduced as a result of the California reduced capacity mandates, which also affected our ability to fulfill orders and recognize revenue. Some essential employees were paid hazard pay, and the hazard pay combined with underutilized employee pay increased our employee overhead and decreased gross margins in the first and second quarter of 2020. Manufacturing employees continued to work in a reduced capacity at our San Francisco facility until the second quarter of 2021. We have moved a large portion of our manufacturing to our contract manufacturer in Thailand, which allowed us to satisfy demand for our digital lidar sensors in the first two quarters of 2021 and consequently allowing us to increase our year over year revenue. This trend continued throughout the rest of 2021 as we continued to ramp manufacturing at our contract manufacturer.
Our suppliers are located worldwide, and some of our key suppliers have been affected by the pandemic resulting in supply chain disruptions. We have experienced and continue to experience some unfavorable purchase price variance and situational expedite fees in order to meet production and delivery timelines. While we may see additional or new pressures on our supply chain both related and unrelated to the pandemic, we are actively taking steps to mitigate the impact of the materials shortages on our business.
While we experienced quarter-over-quarter increases in revenue in 2020 and 2021, some customers have delayed orders and production schedules due to COVID-19. The pandemic continues to evolve, and the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including sales, expenses, reserves and allowances, manufacturing, research and development costs and personnel-related costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the development of new variants of the disease and the actions taken to contain, prevent or treat COVID-19, rate and success of vaccination efforts, vaccine hesitancy, any resurgence of the pandemic in areas where we, Benchmark or our suppliers operate, and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets.
Going forward, the situation remains uncertain, rapidly changing and hard to predict, and the COVID-19 pandemic may have a material negative impact on our future results.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Supply Chain Continuity. A recent surge in demand for electronics containing semiconductor chips and stockpiling of chips by certain companies has created disruptions in the supply chain, resulting in a global chip shortage impacting our industry. Some chip manufacturers are estimating this supply shortage may continue into 2022. These chip manufacturers are working to increase capacity in the future, and we are managing our inventory and working closely with our regular suppliers and customers to minimize the potential impacts of any supply shortages including by securing additional inventory. While we do not expect the shortage to have a material near-term impact on our ability to meet existing demand for our current products, the shortage adversely impacted our gross margins for the year ended December 31, 2021 and may continue to do so. We anticipate fluctuation in our cost of goods sold over the next 12-18 months as a result of ongoing supply chain constraints. These constraints have caused and may in the future cause us to implement certain temporary price surcharges. Over time, we expect our overall average selling prices to decline as our volume increases. If our mitigating efforts are not successful or the shortage continues or worsens in ways we did not anticipate, our ability to supply or improve our current products as well as our development and rollout of future products could also be adversely affected.
Commercialization of Lidar Applications. We believe that lidar is approaching its inflection point of adoption across our target end market applications, and that we are well-positioned to capitalize on this market adoption. However, as our customers continue research and development projects to commercialize semi-autonomous solutions that rely on lidar technology, it is difficult to estimate the timing of ultimate end market and customer adoption. As a result, we expect that our results of operations, including revenue and gross margins, will fluctuate on a quarterly and annual basis for the
foreseeable future. As the market for lidar solutions matures and more customers reach a commercialization phase with solutions that rely on our technology, the fluctuations in our operating results may become less pronounced. Nonetheless, our revenue may not grow as we expect unless and until more customers commercialize their products and lidar technology becomes more prevalent across our target end markets.
Number of Customers in Production. For certain strategic customers and markets, our products must be integrated into a broader platform, which then must be tested, validated, and achieve system-level performance and reliability thresholds that enable commercial production and sales. The time necessary to reach commercial production varies from six months to seven years, based on the market and application. For example, the production cycle in the automotive market tends to be substantially longer than in our other target markets, including industrial automation, smart infrastructure and robotics. It is critical to our future success in each of our target end markets that our customers reach commercial production and sales and that they select our products in their commercial production applications. Because the timelines to reach production vary significantly and the revenue generated by each customer in connection with commercial production and sales is unpredictable, it is difficult for us to reliably predict our financial performance.
Customers’ Sales Volumes. Our customer base is diversified and we will continue to penetrate into diverse end markets to increase our sales volumes. Ultimately widespread adoption of our customers’ products that incorporate our lidar solutions will depend on many factors, including the size of our customers’ end markets, end market penetration of our customer’s products that incorporate our digital lidar solutions, our end customers’ ability to sell their products, and the financial stability and reputation of the customers. We believe our sales volume by customer depends on the end market demand for our customers’ products that incorporate our digital lidar solutions as well as our ability to grow our sales force.
Average Selling Prices (“ASPs”), Product Costs and Margins. Our product costs and gross margins depend largely on the volumes of sensors sold and the number and variety of solutions we provide to our customers. We expect that our selling prices will vary by target end market and application due to market-specific supply and demand dynamics. We expect to continue to experience some downward pressure on margins from signing anticipated large multi-year agreements (including our SCAs) in the near term with multi-year negotiated pricing, as well as supply chain constraints discussed above. We expect these customer-specific selling price fluctuations combined with our volume-driven product costs may drive fluctuations in revenue and gross margins on a quarterly basis. However, notwithstanding any short-term price surcharge on our products, we expect that over time our volume-driven product costs will lead to gross margin improvement as our sales volume increases.
Competition. Lidar is an emerging market, and there are competitors for the growing market. This has created downward pressure on our ASPs, particularly in the Asia and Pacific region. We expect this pressure to continue to push our ASPs lower in the coming years. However, we believe that because of our complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor, (“CMOS”), digital lidar technology, we are in the position to scale more rapidly than our analog competitors and leverage our scale to deliver positive gross margins.
Continued Investment and Innovation. We believe that we are a leading digital lidar provider. Our financial performance is significantly dependent on our ability to maintain this leading position which is further dependent on the investments we make in research and development. We believe it is essential that we continue to identify and respond to rapidly evolving customer requirements, including successfully realizing our product roadmap. If we fail to continue our innovation, our market position and revenue may be adversely affected, and our investments in that area will not be recovered.
Market Trends and Uncertainties. We anticipate robust demand for our digital lidar solution. We estimate a multibillion dollar total addressable market (“TAM”) for our solutions in the near future. We define our TAM as automation applications in the industrial, smart infrastructure, robotics and automotive end markets where we actively engage and maintain customer relationships. Each of our target markets is potentially a significant global opportunity, and these markets have historically been underserved by limited or inferior technology or not served at all. We believe we are well positioned in our market as a leading provider of high-resolution digital lidar sensors.
Although increasing adoption of semi-autonomous solutions that rely on lidar technology may generate higher demand, we may not be able to take advantage of demand if we are unable to anticipate regulatory changes and adapt quickly enough to meet such new regulatory standards or requirements applicable to us or to our customers’ products in which our digital lidar sensors are used. Market acceptance of semi-autonomous solutions and active safety technology depend upon many factors, including cost, performance, safety performance, regulatory requirements and international taxes or tariffs related to such technologies. These factors may impact the ultimate market acceptance of our lidar technology.
International Expansion. We view international expansion as an important element of our strategy to increase revenue and achieve profitability. We continue to position ourselves in geographic markets that we expect to serve as important sources of future growth. We have an existing presence in three regions: North and South America; Asia and Pacific; and Europe, Middle East and Africa. We intend to expand our presence in these regions over time including through distribution
partnerships. Expanded global reach will require continued investment and may expose us to additional foreign currency risk, international taxes and tariffs, legal obligations and additional operational costs, risks and challenges that may impact our ability to meet our projected sales volumes, revenue and gross margins.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
The majority of our revenue comes from the sale of our digital lidar sensors and accessories both directly to end users and through distributors both domestically and internationally. We recognize revenue from product sales when the performance obligation of transferring control of the product to the customer has been met, generally when the product is shipped. We also recognize revenue by performing services related to product development and validation, and shipping; however, we do not expect product development and validation and license and services to be material components of revenue, cost of revenue or gross margin in the foreseeable future. Performance obligations related to services are generally recognized over time, based on cost-to-cost input basis or straight-line over time. Amounts billed to customers related to shipping and handling are classified as revenue, and we have elected to recognize the cost of shipping activities that occur after control has transferred to the customer as a fulfillment cost rather than a separate performance obligation. All related costs are accrued and recognized within cost of revenue when the related revenue is recognized.
Most of our customers are currently in the evaluation or early R&D stage with our products. Currently, our product revenue consists of both customers ordering small volumes of our products that are in an evaluation phase and customers that order larger volumes of our products and have more predictable long-term production schedules. However, we are still at the very beginning of the lidar adoption curve, and some customers are still learning their ramp rates which can impact the timing of purchase orders quarter to quarter. As we grow our business we expect to improve predictability into our customers’ needs and timelines, and expect the timing of orders will have a less notable impact on our quarterly results. Over the coming years, as more of our customers move into their respective production phases, we expect the majority of our product revenue to shift to larger volume orders based on predictable production schedules. We also expect more of our revenue to come from international customers, and anticipate that our sales from regions outside of North and South America will continue to grow over the long-term.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists of the manufacturing cost of our digital lidar sensors, which primarily consists of sensor components, personnel-related costs directly associated with our manufacturing organization, and amounts paid to our third-party contract manufacturer and vendors. Our cost of revenue also includes depreciation of manufacturing equipment, an allocated portion of overhead, facility and IT costs, stock-based compensation for manufacturing personnel, reserves for estimated warranty expenses, excess and obsolete inventory and shipping costs.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Our gross profit equals total revenues less our total cost of revenues, and our gross margin is our gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. We experienced negative gross margins from the fourth quarter of 2018 until we turned gross margin positive during 2020 primarily due to increased unit volumes which improved our ability to absorb fixed costs and lowered material costs by increasing our buying power and a shift to outsourced mass production of our sensors to Benchmark, who has leverage for greater volume discounts and lower overhead costs. Subject to quarterly fluctuations and volatility, we expect unit costs to improve as we manufacture higher unit volumes of sensors and a greater portion of our sensors are produced by our contract manufacturer in Thailand.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) activities are primarily conducted at our San Francisco based headquarters and our additional R&D facility in Edinburgh, Scotland and consist of the following activities:
•Design, prototyping, and testing of proprietary electrical, optical, and mechanical subsystems for our digital lidar products;
•Robust testing for industrial and autonomous vehicle safety certifications;
•Development of new products and enhancements to existing products in response to customer requirements including firmware development and software development of lidar integration products;
•Custom system-on-a-chip (“SoC”) design for Ouster’s digital lidar products; and
•Development of custom manufacturing equipment.
R&D expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for all personnel directly involved in R&D activities, third-party engineering and contractor costs, and prototype expenses.
R&D costs are expensed as they are incurred. Our investment in R&D will continue to grow as we invest in new lidar technology and related software. Our absolute amount of R&D expenses will grow over time; however, we expect R&D as a percentage of revenue to decrease annually as our business grows.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our business development, customer support and marketing teams are located in offices worldwide. Selling and marketing expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, for all personnel directly involved in business development, customer support, and marketing activities, and marketing expenses including trade shows, advertising, and demonstration equipment. We have experienced additional sales and marketing expenses as a result of our global expansion, but expect sales and marketing spend as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time as our business grows.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, of our executives and members of the board of directors, finance, human resource, IT, and legal departments as well as fees related to legal fees, patent prosecution, accounting, finance and professional services as well as insurance and bank fees. Our absolute amount of general and administrative expenses will grow over time; however, we expect the general and administrative spend as a percentage of revenue to decrease annually as our business grows. We have experienced and may in the near term experience additional increases in general and administrative expenses related to hiring more personnel and consultants to support our growing international expansion and compliance with the applicable provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (“SOX”) and other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) rules and regulations as a result of being a public company.
Interest Income, Interest Expense, and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest income consists primarily of income earned on our cash and cash equivalents. These amounts will vary based on our cash and cash equivalents balances and market rates. Interest expense consists primarily of interest on our debt and convertible notes and amortization of debt issuance costs and discounts. Other income (expense), net consists primarily of realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and balances, the change in fair value of financial instruments, including warrants issued in connection with a debt agreement, and warrants initially issued by CLA in a private placement.
Income Taxes
Our income tax provision consists of federal, state and foreign current and deferred income taxes. Our income tax provision for interim periods is determined using an estimate of our annual effective tax rate, adjusted for discrete items arising in the quarter. Our effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to valuation allowances on deferred tax assets as it is more likely than not that some, or all, of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. We continue to maintain a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations:
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss data as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Product Revenue
Product revenue increased by $16.7 million, or 99%, to $33.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $16.9 million for the prior year. The increase in product revenue was driven by an increase in volume of 202%, which we attribute primarily to the expansion of our sales team and the increase of high volume, long-term deals as some of our customers begin to move into the production stage with their autonomous products. Our average selling price declined by 34% as expected as we sell higher volumes and are able to reduce our cost of goods sold per unit.
Service Revenue
Service revenue decreased by $2.0 million, or 100%, from the prior year. This decrease in revenue was due to no non-recurring engineering work in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Geographic Locations
Revenue in the United States; Americas excluding the United States; Europe, the Middle East and Africa; and Asia and Pacific increased approximately by $6.5 million, $0.4 million, $4.7 million, and $3.1 million, respectively, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The year-over-year global increases for all regions are a result of our investments in personnel and global expansion. We have grown our commercial team across the Americas, Asia Pacific, Europe and the Middle East markets and brought on experienced leaders to develop a focused sales organization geared towards ramping our sales pipeline.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Product Revenue
Product revenue increased by $7.1 million, or 72%, to $16.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in product revenue was driven by an increase in volume of 53%, which we attribute primarily to the release of new products and expansion of our sales team into new geographic regions, and an increase in average selling price of 12% which we attribute primarily to more favorable average selling prices for new products.
Service Revenue
Service revenue increased by $0.4 million, or 25%, to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This revenue represents non-recurring engineering work in relation to our new product release in early 2020.
Geographic Locations
Revenue increased across the geographic regions of the United States, Americas excluding United States, Europe, Middle East and Africa, and Asia and Pacific by $1.3 million, $0.1 million, $3.5 million, and $2.6 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increases in Asia and Pacific and Europe, Middle East and Africa geographic regions were a result of recent expansion in those regions. We opened sales offices in these regions in late 2019 and have since focused our sales resources on expanding globally.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Product Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Product cost of revenue increased by $7.1 million, or 41%, to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $17.4 million for the prior year and cost per unit decreased by 53% in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase in cost of product revenue was due to volume related increases of $8.0 million, $1.6 million, $13.1 million, and $12.4 million in material costs, freight, overhead, and other other product costs, respectively. These increases in volume were partially offset by per unit decreases of $2.3 million, $1.2 million, $13.3 million, and $11.2 million in material costs, freight, overhead, and other other product costs, respectively.
Product gross margin increased from 8% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 27% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The improvement in product gross margin is primarily due to the 53% decrease in cost per unit partially offset by the 34% decrease in average selling prices referenced above.
Services Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Services cost of revenue decreased by $26.0 thousand. This decrease in cost of revenue was due to there being no non-recurring engineering work in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Product Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Product cost of revenue increased by $0.2 million, or 1%, to $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $17.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and cost per unit decreased by 35% in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in product cost of revenue was primarily due to increases of $3.9 million in manufacturing overhead costs, $1.0 million in material costs and $0.2 million in freight. The increases were partially offset by a decrease of $4.8 million in other product costs due to lower allowances for excess and obsolete inventory and component yield increases.
Product gross margin increased from (53)% for the year ended December 31, 2019 to 8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement in product gross margin is primarily due to the decrease in cost per unit and the 12% increase in average selling prices for new products.
Services Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Services cost of revenue decreased by $0.3 million, or 92%, to $26.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Services gross margin increased to 99% for the year from 81% for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in cost of revenue and subsequent increase in gross margin was primarily due to the majority of non-recurring engineering work for a large contract taking place in 2019.
Operating Expenses
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $11.3 million, or 48%, to $34.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $23.3 million for the comparable period in the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $8.1 million in payroll and personnel-related expense driven by an 89 person increase in employees and contractors of which the majority were added in the fourth quarter during the Sense acquisition, including a $1.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, an increase of $0.9 million in product development and equipment costs, an increase of $0.9 million in depreciation expense, an increase of $0.8 million in recruiting and other professional fees and an increase of $0.6 in facility, office and other expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $13.3 million, or 147%, to $22.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $9.0 million for the comparable period in the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $10.3 million in payroll and personnel-related costs driven by the addition of 46 sales personnel in all our global regions, of which $3.2 million was stock-based compensation related, an increase of $0.7 million in consulting and professional fees, an increase of $1.1 million for marketing expenses including additional branding and public relations expenses related to the Merger, an increase of $0.3 million in travel expenses, and $0.9 million in facility, office and related expenses related to opening and expanding sales offices around the world.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $31.0 million, or 148%, to $52.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $21.0 million for the comparable period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $9.0 million of stock-based compensation, a $3.1 million increase in payroll-related expense due to a year over year increase of 18 employees and contractors, an increase of $8.4 million in legal, accounting and professional services fees mostly related to our initial public offering, an increase of $0.7 million in recruiting expense, an increase of $6.0 million in directors and officers insurance premiums, an increase of $2.0 million in facilities and office expense including
equipment for new employees, investments in software infrastructure, and increases in business and local taxes, $0.5 million in investor and public relations, and an increase of $1.3 million in depreciation.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 remained consistent with the year ended December 31, 2019. The balance includes a $7.6 million increase in personnel-related costs, including a $5.4 million increase in stock-based compensation due to an increase in common stock value and a $2.2 million increase primarily related to our headcount growth.
These increases were partially offset by a $3.9 million reduction in development costs and $2.4 million reduction in consulting and contractor expense related to the design of new products in 2019, which was launched in the first quarter of 2020, a $0.7 million reduction in prototype and other research costs, a $0.4 million reduction in office expenses, and a $0.1 million reduction in depreciation expense.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $4.5 million, or 100%, to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $3.6 million in payroll and personnel-related expenses driven by the addition of sales personnel, of which $0.5 million was stock-based compensation related, as well as smaller increases of $0.2 million for facility and office related expenses related to opening offices in Asia and Pacific and Europe, Middle East and Africa geographic regions and $0.3 million related to providing demonstration units for potential customers.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $6.4 million, or 44%, to $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $14.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $4.2 million of stock-based compensation and an increase of $2.2 million in accounting and professional services fees.
Interest Income, Interest Expense and Other Income (Expense), Net
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Interest income was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.0 million for the prior year. This increase in interest income was primarily related to an increase in our cash and cash equivalent balances after the Merger closed on March 11, 2021.
Interest expense was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.5 million for the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to the conversion of convertible notes in the second quarter of 2020 and the repayment of bank debt in the third quarter of 2020 and March 2021.
Other income (expense), net was $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $(52.2) million for the prior year. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain of $11.8 million for the fair value change of warrant liability and a loss of $8.8 million for the fair value change of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded losses of $48.4 million for the fair value change of the warrant liability and $5.3 million for the fair value change of the derivative liability related to our convertible notes, partially offset by a $1.6 million gain from extinguishment of the tranche liability which was recorded as other income.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Interest income was $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. This decrease in interest income was primarily related to a decrease in our cash and cash equivalent balances for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest expense was $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was primarily due to the conversion of convertible notes in the second quarter of 2020 and the repayment of $3.0 million of bank debt.
Other income (expense), net was $(52.2) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $5.3 million for the fair value change of the derivative liability related to our convertible notes and $48.4 million for the fair value change of warrant liability, partially offset by a $1.6 million gain from extinguishment of the tranche liability which was recorded as other income.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax benefit was 2.89% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to our effective tax rate of (0.35)% for the prior year. Our tax expense decreased by $3.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to prior year, primarily due to the release of the valuation allowance of $2.8 million as a result of the recording of a deferred tax liability from an acquisition during the year.
Our effective tax rate was (0.35)% for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 0.00% for the prior year. Our tax expense increased by $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to state taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are working capital, inventory management, capital expenditures, public company costs and general corporate needs. We expect these needs to continue as we develop and grow our business. Prior to the Merger, we primarily funded our operations from the net proceeds from sales of our preferred convertible stock and convertible notes, borrowing under our loan and security agreement with Runway Growth Credit Fund, Inc. and product revenue. Upon closing of the Merger, we received gross proceeds of $299.9 million from the Merger and private offering, offset by $8.5 million of pre-merger costs relating to CLA and offerings costs of $26.6 million. Subsequent to the Merger, our principal sources of liquidity have been and are expected to be our cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from product revenues.
As of December 31, 2021 we had an accumulated deficit of $303.4 million and cash and cash equivalents of $182.6 million. We have experienced recurring losses from operations, and negative cash flows from operations, and we expect to continue operating at a loss and to have negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future. We believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, together with cash we expect to generate from future operations, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for a period of at least twelve months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, because we are in the growth stage of our business and operate in an emerging field of technology, we expect to continue to invest in research and development and expand our sales and marketing teams worldwide. We are likely to require additional capital to respond to technological advancements, competitive dynamics or technologies, customer demands, business opportunities, challenges, acquisitions or unforeseen circumstances and in either the short-term or long-term may determine to engage in equity or debt financings or enter into credit facilities for other reasons. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us, when we require it, our
ability to continue to grow or support our business and to respond to business challenges could be significantly limited. In particular, the widespread COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital. If we are unable to raise additional funds when or on the terms desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
PIPE Investment
On December 21, 2020, concurrently with the execution of the Merger Agreement, CLA entered into subscription agreements with certain institutional and accredited investors (collectively, the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to purchase, in the aggregate, 10,000,000 shares of Ouster common stock at $10.00 per share for an aggregate commitment amount of $100,000,000 (the “PIPE Investment”), a portion of which was funded by certain affiliates of Colonnade Sponsor LLC, CLA’s sponsor (the “Sponsor”). The PIPE Investment was consummated substantially concurrently with the closing of the Merger.
Financing Arrangements
On November 27, 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with Runway Growth Credit Fund, Inc. (“Runway Loan and Security Agreement”) and borrowed $10.0 million per the terms of that agreement with a loan maturity date of November 15, 2021. The loan carried an interest rate equal to LIBOR plus 8.50%. We repaid $3.0 million of the loan in August 2020. On March 26, 2021 we terminated the Runway Loan and Security Agreement and repaid the $7.0 million principal amount outstanding as well as interest and fees amounting to $0.4 million. We incurred no prepayment fees in connection with the termination and all liens and security interests securing the loan made pursuant to the Runway Loan and Security Agreement were released upon termination. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal balance of the loan was nil and $7.0 million, respectively.
Material Cash Requirements
We are a party to many contractual obligations involving commitments to make payments to third parties. These obligations impact our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Certain contractual obligations are reflected on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, while others are considered future commitments. Our contractual obligations primarily consist of non-cancelable purchase commitments with various parties to purchase goods or services, primarily inventory, entered into in the normal course of business and operating leases. For information regarding our other contractual obligations, refer to Note 9, Leases and Note 10, Commitments and Contingencies.
Cash Flow Summary
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $71.1 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $94.0 million, impacted by our non-cash charges of $29.1 million primarily consisting of depreciation and amortization of $5.5 million, stock-based compensation of $25.4 million, change in right-of-use asset of $2.2 million, amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount of $0.3 million, inventory write down of $0.8 million and allowance for expected credit losses of $0.4 million, partially offset by deferred income taxes of $2.5 million and $2.9 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.1 million was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable of $8.0 million, an increase in inventories of $3.4 million, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.4 million, a decrease in accounts payable of $2.4 million, an increase in accrued and other liabilities of $9.1 million and a decrease of operating lease liability of $1.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $42.1 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $106.8 million, impacted by our non-cash charges of $72.0 million primarily consisting of a $5.3 million change in fair value of derivative liability and $48.4 million change in fair value of warrant liabilities, depreciation and amortization of $3.7 million, stock-based compensation of $12.1 million, change in right-of-use asset of $1.9 million, interest expense on convertible debt of $1.0 million, inventory write down of $0.8 million, amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount of $0.3 million, partially offset by a gain on extinguishment of tranche right liability of $1.6 million. The cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $7.3 million was primarily due to an increase in inventories of $3.1 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $1.5 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $1.4 million, a decrease in accrued and other liabilities of $0.4 million, and a decrease of operating lease liability of $1.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $40.2 million in cash. The primary factors affecting our operating cash flows during this period were our net loss of $51.7 million, impacted by our non-cash charges of $12.9 million primarily consisting of inventory write down of $4.8 million, interest expense on convertible debt of $2.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.0 million, change in right-of-use asset of $1.3 million, stock-based compensation of $1.2 million, write-off property and equipment of $0.6 million, amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount $0.3 million. The cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.4 million was primarily due to an increase in inventories of $5.4 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.5 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $0.6 million, an increase in accrued and other current liabilities of $2.6 million, an increase of accounts payable of $2.1 million, and an increase of operating lease liability of $0.4 million.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $15.2 million, which was primarily related to cash used for our acquisition of Sense, net of cash acquired, of $10.9 million and purchases of property, plant and equipment of $4.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was $3.5 million, which was related to purchases of property, plant and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities was $7.5 million, which was related to purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $258.3 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the merger and PIPE Investment of $264.8 million, and proceeds from exercise of stock options of $0.5 million, partially offset by repayment of debt of $7.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $39.9 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from issuance of Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock of $41.5 million and proceeds from exercise of stock options of $1.3 million, partially offset by repayment of long-term debt of $3.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities was $50.5 million primarily consisting of $40.5 million of net proceeds from issuance of convertible notes, and $10.0 million of proceeds from issuance of debt.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue
Revenue is recognized at a point in time when control of the goods are transferred to the customer, occurring upon shipment or delivery dependent upon the terms of the underlying contract. Product sales to certain customers may require customer acceptance due to performance acceptance criteria that is considered more than a formality. For these product
sales, revenue is recognized upon the expiration of the customer acceptance period. Amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling are included in revenue. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenue on the net basis of accounting.
For service projects, we bill and recognize revenue as the services are performed. For these arrangements, control is transferred over time as we input costs incurred to complete the project; therefore, revenue is recognized over the service period with the measure of progress using the input method based on labor costs incurred to total labor cost (cost-to-cost) as the services are provided.
We enter into contracts that can include multiple performance obligations, we account for individual products and services separately if the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer and the product or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the arrangement. The consideration is allocated between separate performance obligations in proportion to their estimated standalone selling price. The standalone selling price reflects the price we would charge for a specific product or service if it were sold separately in similar circumstances and to similar customers.
Business Combinations
Business combinations are accounted for under the acquisition method. We recognize the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations on the basis of their fair values at the date of acquisition. We assess the fair value of assets acquired, including intangible assets, and liabilities assumed using a variety of methods. Each asset acquired and liability assumed is measured at fair value from the perspective of a market participant. The method used to estimate the fair values of intangible assets incorporates significant estimates and assumptions regarding the estimates a market participant would make in order to evaluate an asset, including a market participant’s use of the asset, future cash inflows and outflows, probabilities of success, asset lives, and the appropriate discount rates. Any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired is allocated to goodwill. Transaction costs and restructuring costs associated with a business combination are expensed as incurred.
During the measurement period, which extends no later than one year from the acquisition date, we may record certain adjustments to the carrying value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. After the measurement period, all adjustments are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations within other income (expense), net.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize stock-based compensation expense for stock-based awards granted to employees, directors, and consultants over the requisite service periods based on the estimated grant date fair value, which for options is using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model using the following variables:
•Common Stock Valuation - The fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our stock-based awards issued after the Merger is based on the grant date closing fair market value of our common stock. Before closing of the Merger, the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our stock-based awards was historically determined by management and approved by the Board of Directors. Because there was no public market for the our common stock, the Board of Directors determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of grant of the option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including contemporaneous valuations performed by an unrelated third-party specialist, valuations of comparable public companies, operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of capital stock, and general and industry-specific economic outlook. Valuations performed by the third-party valuation specialist used methodologies, approaches, and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (“AICPA” Accounting and Valuation Guide). In relation to options, the Board intends all options granted to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per share fair value of the common stock underlying those options on the date of grant.
•Expected Term - The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method, which deems the term to be the average of the time to vesting and the contractual life of the options.
•Expected Volatility - The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility for the period commensurate with the expected term of the awards for a peer group of comparable companies with publicly traded shares.
•Expected Dividends - We do not currently pay cash dividends on its common stock and does not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, the expected dividend yield is 0%.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield for a term consistent with the expected life of the awards in effect at the time of grant.
The fair values of the restricted stock awards and restricted stock units were determined based on the fair value of the our common stock on the grant date. We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur. Our policy for issuing stock upon stock option exercise is to issue new common stock.
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value. Costs are computed under the standard cost method, which approximates actual costs determined on the first in, first out basis. We record write-downs of inventories which are obsolete or in excess of anticipated demand. Significant judgment is used in establishing our forecasts of future demand and obsolete material exposures. We consider marketability and product life cycle stage, product development plans, demand forecasts, and assumptions about future demand and market conditions in establishing our estimates. If the actual component usage and product demand are significantly lower than forecast, which may be caused by factors within and outside of our control, or if there were a higher incidence of inventory obsolescence because of rapidly changing technology and our customer requirements, we may be required to increase our inventory write-downs. A change in our estimates could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our results of operations.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to the Business Combination, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards was determined by our board of directors, with input from management and corroboration from contemporaneous third-party valuations. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock prior to the Business Combination, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors included:
•contemporaneous valuations of our common stock performed by independent third-party specialists;
•the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the prices paid for common or convertible preferred stock sold to third-party investors by us and prices paid in secondary transactions for shares repurchased by us in arm’s-length transactions, including any tender offers, if any;
•the lack of marketability inherent in our common stock;
•our actual operating and financial performance;
•our current business conditions and projections;
•the hiring of key personnel and the experience of our management;
•the history of the company and the introduction of new products;
•our stage of development;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering (IPO), a merger, or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions;
•the operational and financial performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•the U.S. and global capital market conditions and overall economic conditions.
In valuing our common stock, the fair value of our business was determined using various valuation methods, including combinations of income, market, cost approaches with input from management. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate that is derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly traded companies in our industry or similar business operations as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks
inherent in our cash flows. The market approach estimates value based on a comparison of the subject company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined and then applied to the subject company’s financial forecasts to estimate the value of the subject company.
For each valuation, the fair value of our business determined by these approaches was then allocated to the common stock using the option-pricing method.
In addition, we also considered any secondary transactions involving our capital stock. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange and assigned the transactions an appropriate weighting in the valuation of our common stock. Factors considered include the number of different buyers and sellers, transaction volume, timing relative to the valuation date, whether the transactions occurred between willing and unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
Following the Business Combination, the fair value of our common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock on the relevant determination date, as reported on the New York Stock Exchange.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K for recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this Form 10-K.