Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should carefully read the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on drug discovery and development for epilepsies and rare CNS disorders in a manner that is scientifically driven, patient focused and is coupled with an integrated and discipled approach to research, clinical development and business development. Our team has significant experience and understanding of rare epilepsy and neurological conditions, and we continue to build insight into the way the different molecular mechanisms and pathways underlying these disorders impact the symptoms patients suffer. Ovid has set out to be a leader in the field, and has developed a differentiated pipeline containing three novel mechanisms of action to target different causes of epilepsies and seizures. Our knowledge of epilepsy disease biology and pathology, which was acquired through our small molecule development programs, now contributes to our pursuit of additional relevant genetic targets and molecular pathways that are the cause of seizures. Over time, we have built a scalable scientific platform and efficient development capabilities in epilepsies that focus on clear, clinical endpoints. We are initially pursuing therapeutic assets for rare disorders as they can leverage accelerated development programs. If successfully developed and marketed in rare conditions, we intend to explore these assets for broader neurologic indications. Our cohesive focus in epilepsies and seizures reinforces our belief that we can develop and produce multiple novel medicines, scale our infrastructure, and thereby succeed in our mission.
Since our inception in April 2014, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to organizing and planning our business, building our management and technical team, acquiring operating assets and raising capital.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $208.4 million of license and other revenue primarily through the license and collaboration agreement with Takeda, and have otherwise funded our business primarily through the sale of our capital stock. Through December 31, 2021, we have raised net proceeds of $275.4 million from the sale of our convertible preferred stock and our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had $187.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. We recorded net income of $122.8 million and net loss $81.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $171.4 million.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of our planned clinical trials and expenditures on our other research and development and commercial development activities. We expect our expenses will increase substantially over time as we:
•continue the ongoing and planned preclinical and clinical development of our drug candidates;
•build a portfolio of drug candidates through the development, acquisition or in-license of drugs, drug candidates or technologies;
•initiate preclinical studies and clinical trials for any additional drug candidates that we may pursue in the future;
•seek marketing approvals for our current and future drug candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any drug candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•develop, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•implement operational, financial and management systems; and
•attract, hire and retain additional administrative, clinical, regulatory, manufacturing, commercial and scientific personnel.
Recent Developments
License Agreement with AstraZeneca AB
On December 30, 2021, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with AstraZeneca AB, for a library of early-stage small molecules targeting the KCC2 transporter, including lead candidate OV350. Upon execution of the agreement, we owed an upfront cash payment of $5.0 million and issued shares of our common stock in an amount that equaled $7.3 million based on the volume-weighted average price of shares of our common stock for the 30 business days immediately preceding the execution date of the transaction. The cash payment of $5.0 million was paid in January 2022.
Pursuant to the AstraZeneca license agreement, we agreed to potential milestone payments of up to $203.0 million upon the achievement of certain developmental, regulatory and sales milestones. The first payment of $3.0 million is due upon the successful completion of the first Phase 2 clinical study of a licensed product following a positive biomarker readout in a Phase 1 clinical study. In addition, if a licensed product achieves regulatory approval, AstraZeneca is entitled to tiered royalty payments ranging from the single digits up to 10 percent on net sales subject to standard reductions in certain circumstances.
COVID-19 Update
We have implemented business continuity plans designed to address and mitigate the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our employees and our business. We continue to operate normally with the exception of enabling all of our employees to work productively at home and abiding by travel restrictions issued by federal, state and local governments. Our current plans to return to the office remain fluid as federal, state and local guidelines, rules and regulations continue to evolve.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We generated revenue under the Takeda License and Termination Agreement and under the Angelini License Agreement. We have not generated any revenue from commercial drug sales and we do not expect to generate any further revenue unless or until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize one or more of our current or future drug candidates. In the future, we may also seek to generate revenue from a combination of research and development payments, license fees and other upfront or milestone payments.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our product discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates, which include, among other things:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
•fees paid to consultants for services directly related to our drug development and regulatory effort;
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, as well as contract manufacturing organizations and consultants that conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities;
•costs associated with technology and intellectual property licenses;
•milestone payments and other costs under licensing agreements; and
•depreciation expense for assets used in research and development activities.
Costs incurred in connection with research and development activities are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or other information provided to us by our vendors.
Research and development activities are and will continue to be central to our business model. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we advance our current and future drug candidates through preclinical studies and clinical trials. The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. It is difficult to determine with certainty the duration and costs of any preclinical study or clinical trial that we may conduct. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trial programs and development of our current and future drug candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to, the following:
•number of clinical trials required for approval and any requirement for extension trials;
•per patient trial costs;
•number of patients who participate in the clinical trials;
•number of sites included in the clinical trials;
•countries in which the clinical trial is conducted;
•length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•number of doses that patients receive;
•drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•duration of patient follow-up; and
•efficacy and safety profile of the drug candidate.
In addition, the probability of success for any of our current or future drug candidates will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success of each drug candidate, as well as an assessment of each drug candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, related to our executive, finance, business development and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include costs associated with operating as a public company described below, travel expenses, conferences, professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services and facility-related costs.
Other (expense) income, net
Other (expense) income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents maintained in money market funds and accretion of discount on short-term investments.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the results of our operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Total revenue was $208.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of revenue recorded in connection with the Takeda License and Termination Agreement and the Angelini License Agreement. Revenue was $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $46.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $63.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $16.5 million was primarily due to a decrease in activities related to our ongoing development programs, including as a result of the termination of the development of OV101 and the transfer of the development of OV935, which was taken over by Takeda. During the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development expenses consisted of $30.4 million in preclinical and development expenses, $13.5 million in payroll and payroll-related expenses, of which $1.7 million related to stock-based compensation, and $3.1 million in other expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, total research and development expenses consisted of $43.6 million in preclinical and development expenses, $15.4 million in payroll and payroll-related expenses, of which $2.8 million related to stock-based compensation, and $4.4 million in other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $37.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $30.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $6.6 million primarily consisted of increases in business development costs related to the Takeda transaction, compliance and pre-commercialization expenses and professional fees.
Income Taxes
The provision recorded for income taxes for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is $1.3 million and zero, respectively, with an effective rate of 1.07% and 0%, respectively. There was an increase in the provision for income taxes due to the significant one-time, upfront payment from Takeda pursuant to the Takeda License and Termination Agreement, as well as disallowed use of net operating losses. The Company has historically incurred operating losses and maintains a full valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets. The valuation allowance was approximately $63.3 million and $89.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had total cash and cash equivalents of $187.8 million as compared to $72.0 million as of December 31, 2020. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will fund our projected operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Similar to other development-stage biotechnology companies, we have generated limited revenue. Our net revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a significant one-time, upfront payment from Takeda pursuant to the Takeda License and Termination Agreement. Otherwise, we have incurred losses and experienced negative operating cash flows in most years since our inception, and anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. We incurred net income of approximately $122.8 million and net losses of approximately $81.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $171.4 million and working capital of $175.7 million.
Future Funding Requirements
We believe that our available cash and cash equivalents are sufficient to fund existing and planned cash requirements. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Additionally, the process of testing drug candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain. We cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no long-term debt and no material non-cancelable purchase commitments with service providers, as we have generally contracted on a cancelable, purchase order basis. We cannot estimate whether we will receive or the timing of any potential contingent payments upon the achievement by us of clinical, regulatory and commercial events, as applicable, or royalty payments that we may be required to make under license agreements we have entered into with various entities pursuant to which we have in-licensed certain intellectual property as contractual obligations or commitments, including agreements with AstraZeneca AB, H. Lundbeck A/S, and Northwestern. Pursuant to these license agreements, we have agreed to make milestone payments up to an aggregate of $279.3 million upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and sales milestones. We excluded these contingent payments given that the timing, probability, and amount, if any, of such payments cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any product revenues from product sales to date. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and additional funding from license and collaboration arrangements. Except for any obligations of our collaborators to reimburse us for research and development expenses or to make milestone or royalty payments under our agreements with them, we will not have any committed external source of liquidity. To the extent that we raise additional capital through future equity offerings or debt financings, ownership interests may be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt and equity financings, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. There can be no assurance that such financings will be obtained on terms acceptable to us, if at all. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve and has already resulted in a significant disruption of global financial markets. If the disruption persists and deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future
negatively affect our operations. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing agreements with third parties for one or more of our current or future drug candidates, we may be required to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or drug candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy.
At-the-Market Offering Program
In November 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-250054) that allows us to sell up to an aggregate of $250.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and/or warrants (the “S-3 Registration Statement”), which includes a prospectus covering the issuance and sale of up to $75.0 million of common stock pursuant to an at-the-market (“ATM”) offering program. As of December 31, 2021, we had $250.0 million available under our S-3 Registration Statement, including $75.0 million available pursuant to our ATM program.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $118.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of net income of $122.5 million offset by various non-cash charges and indirect cash changes, primarily related to $12.3 million related to an asset acquisition via stock issuance and cash, stock-based compensation expense of $5.0 million, and $12.4 million of deferred revenue reversal. Net cash used in operating activities was $51.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of a net loss of $81.0 million offset by a net of $29.5 million of non-cash charges and indirect cash changes, primarily related to $7.2 million of stock-based compensation expense and $12.4 million in deferred revenue.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily comprised of $1.6 million in purchase of a long-term equity investment. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $34.6 million was provided by investing activities, which was primarily due to net proceeds from short-term investments during the year.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to proceeds from the exercise of options. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $47.0 million was primarily due to the net proceeds from the August 2020 Offering.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the revenue and expenses incurred during the reported periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition and accrued clinical expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. In making estimates and judgments, management employs critical accounting policies. Our critical accounting policies are described in greater detail in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We have listed below our critical accounting estimates that we believe to have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting estimates have not differed materially from actual results.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue under sublicense agreements in accordance with ASC 606 which is applicable to the Angelini License Agreement and the Takeda License and Termination Agreement. The terms of the agreements within this scope may contain multiple performance obligations, including but not limited to licenses and research and development activities. ASC 606 requires that we evaluate these agreements to determine the distinct performance obligations. Non-refundable, up-front fees that are not contingent on any future performance and require no consequential continuing involvement by us, are recognized as revenue when the license term commences and the licensed data, technology or product is delivered. We defer recognition of non-refundable upfront fees if the performance obligations are not satisfied.
For the Takeda License and Termination Agreement that closed on March 29, 2021, we received an upfront payment of $196.0 million. We determined that the transaction price was equal to the upfront fee of $196.0 million and was associated with several material conditions that were satisfied at the closing date. We recognized the full upfront payment of $196.0 million as revenue at the closing date upon the satisfaction of the material conditions outlined in the termination agreement.
On March 29, 2021, we received a notice of termination of the Angelini License Agreement. Subsequently, we and Angelini mutually agreed to waive the six month termination notice provisions and the Angelini License Agreement terminated effective March 31, 2021. We have been released from our performance obligations and will not be entitled to any future milestone payments under the Angelini License Agreement. As a result of being released from the performance obligations, we recognized $12.4 million of revenue at the termination date, consisting of $5.4 million of license revenue related to ongoing trials and $7.0 million related to the potential 35% funding of the cost for Angelini's future trials.
Accrued Clinical Expenses
When preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued clinical expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. Payments under certain contracts we have with third parties depend on factors, such as the successful enrollment of certain numbers of patients, site initiation and the completion of clinical trial milestones.
When accruing clinical expenses, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If possible, we obtain information regarding unbilled services directly from our service providers. However, we may be required to estimate the cost of these services based only on information available to us. If we underestimate or overestimate the cost associated with a trial or service at a given point in time, adjustments to research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods. Historically, our estimated accrued clinical expenses have approximated actual expense incurred.
Emerging Growth Company Status and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, and may remain an emerging growth company until December 31, 2022. For so long as we remain an emerging growth company, we are permitted and intend to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. These exemptions include:
•reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements;
•no non-binding stockholder advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements; and
•exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting.
We have taken advantage of reduced reporting requirements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and may continue to do so until such time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (a) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (b) December 31, 2022, the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of the our IPO, (c) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (d) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer
under the rules of the SEC. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
In addition, we are also a smaller reporting company as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as (i) our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.