Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This MD&A contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in “Part I-Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this report, and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated and combined financial statements notes included elsewhere in this report.
Overview
2021 was a pivotal year for Blue Owl. We completed our transition to a publicly traded company, a successful combination of Owl Rock and Dyal Capital, record level of AUM and FPAUM, over $1.0 billion raised in the debt markets and closed out the year with the closing of the Oak Street Acquisition.
2021 GAAP and Non-GAAP Results
(1) For the specific components and calculations of these Non-GAAP measures, as well as a reconciliation of these measures to the most comparable measure in accordance with GAAP, see “-Non-GAAP Analysis” and “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations.”
Net Loss Attributable to Blue Owl Capital Inc. (“Net Loss”) during the year ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by significant non-cash equity-based compensation expenses recognized in connection with the Business Combination. Our results for periods prior to the Business Combination Date do not include the results of Dyal Capital; therefore, prior period amounts are not comparable to current period. Additionally, since the Oak Street Acquisition closed on December 29, 2021, their results were not material to our 2021 results. We expect Oak Street, which will be part of our single reportable segment, to be accretive to our results in 2022. Please see “-GAAP Results of Operations Analysis” and “-Non-GAAP Analysis” for a detailed discussion of the underlying drivers of our results, including the accretive impacts of the Dyal Acquisition.
Assets Under Management
We finished the year with $94.5 billion of AUM, which included $61.4 billion of FPAUM. During the fourth quarter of 2021, approximately 98% of our management fees were earned on AUM that we refer to as permanent capital. As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $11.0 billion in AUM not yet paying fees, providing approximately $140.0 million of annualized management fees once deployed or upon the expiration of certain fee holidays. See “-Assets Under Management” for additional information, including important information on how we define these metrics.
Oak Street Acquisition
On December 29, 2021, we closed the Oak Street Acquisition, expanding our product offering into real estate. Please see Note 3 to our Financial Statements for additional information.
Business Environment
Our business is impacted by conditions in the financial markets and economic conditions in the U.S., and to a lesser extent, elsewhere in the world.
In the alternative asset management industry, 2021 was a year of robust levels of fundraising and investment activity across the industry. Allocations to alternative strategies have continued to rise across institutional and retail investors, driven by a need for yield and demand for differentiated, uncorrelated returns. Alternative asset managers were able to deploy their dry powder across a wide spectrum of investment opportunities, driving record M&A activity for the year. We have benefited from these ongoing secular tailwinds, providing the capital that managers require to finance acquisitions in their funds through our Direct Lending products, and the capital that managers need to expand and diversify their platforms through our GP Capital Solutions products.
Higher than expected inflation has impacted expectations for the pace of rate hikes, driving market volatility and adjusting investors’ views on earnings growth for many public companies. We anticipate a net positive effect on our business from a rising rate environment. We expect our Direct Lending products to benefit from rising rates, as investor demand would increase for senior secured floating rate assets, and over time, the effect of rising rates would be positive for the net interest income of our Direct Lending products’ loan portfolios. For GP Capital Solutions, market volatility should drive demand for products managed by large, diversified managers, benefiting the types of firms our GP Capital Solutions products have typically taken stakes in. With respect to our Real Estate products, we believe there will continue to be strong demand for real estate strategies with long-term, contractual income that are positively correlated to inflation and backed by investment grade tenants.
We believe that our disciplined investment philosophy across our distinct but complementary products contributes to the stability of our performance throughout market cycles. Our products have a stable base of permanent or long-term capital enabling us to invest in assets with a long-term focus over different points in a market cycle.
Assets Under Management
We present information regarding our AUM, FPAUM and various other related metrics throughout this MD&A to provide context around our fee generating revenues results, as well as indicators of the potential for future earnings from existing and new products. Our calculations of AUM and FPAUM may differ from the calculation methodologies of other asset managers, and as a result these measures may not be comparable to similar measures presented by other asset managers. In addition, our calculation of AUM includes amounts that are fee exempt (i.e., not subject to fees).
As of December 31, 2021, our assets under management include approximately $1.9 billion related to executives and other employees and approximately $1.0 billion related to other related parties. A portion of these assets under management relate to accrued carried interests, as well as investments that are not charged fees.
Composition of Assets Under Management
Our AUM consists of FPAUM, AUM not yet paying fees, fee-exempt AUM and net appreciation and leverage in products on which fees are based on commitments or investment cost. AUM not yet paying fees generally relates to unfunded capital commitments (to the extent such commitments are not already subject to fees), undeployed debt (to the extent we earn fees based on total asset values or investment cost, inclusive of assets purchased using debt) and AUM that is subject to a temporary fee holiday. Fee-exempt AUM represents certain investments by us, our employees, other related parties and third parties, as well as certain co-investment vehicles on which we do not earn fees.
Management uses AUM not yet paying fees as an indicator of management fees that will be coming online as we deploy existing assets in products that charge fees based on deployed and not uncalled capital, as well as AUM that is currently subject to a fee holiday that will expire at a predetermined time in the future. AUM not yet paying fees could provide approximately $140.0 million of additional annualized management fees once deployed or upon the expiration of the relevant fee holidays. Approximately $2.2 billion of AUM not yet paying fees moved to FPAUM on January 1, 2022, driven primarily by the expiration of certain fee holidays in Dyal Fund V.
Permanency and Duration of Assets Under Management
Our capital base is heavily weighted toward permanent capital. We use the term “permanent capital” to refer to AUM in our products that do not have ordinary redemption provisions or a requirement to exit investments and return the proceeds to investors after a prescribed period of time. Some of these products, however, may be required, or elect, to return all or a portion of capital gains and investment income. Permanent capital includes certain products that are subject to management fee step downs and/or roll-offs over time. Substantially all of our remaining AUM is in what we refer to as “long-dated funds.” These are funds in which the contractual remaining life is five years or more.
We view the permanency and duration of the products that we manage as a differentiator in our industry and as a means of measuring the stability of our future revenues stream. The chart below presents the composition of our management fees by remaining product duration. Changes in these relative percentages will occur over time as the mix of products we offer investors change. For example, our Real Estate products have a higher concentration in long-dated funds, which in isolation may cause our percentage of management fees from permanent capital to decline.
Changes in AUM
Direct Lending. Increase in AUM was driven by a combination of continued fundraising and debt deployment across the platform.
•$2.5 billion new capital raised in Diversified Lending, primarily driven by retail fundraising in ORCIC.
•$0.9 billion new capital raised in Technology Lending, driven by the initial launch of ORTF II, our second technology-focused BDC.
•$0.6 billion new capital raised in Opportunistic Lending, driven by additional commitments to our Owl Rock Opportunistic private fund.
•$7.3 billion of debt deployment across all of Direct Lending, as we continue to opportunistically deploy leverage in our BDCs.
GP Capital Solutions. Increase in AUM was driven by new capital raised, primarily in Dyal Fund V, and overall appreciation across all of our major products.
Real Estate. Our Real Estate products represent the products added in connection with the Oak Street Acquisition that closed at the end of 2021.
Changes in FPAUM
Direct Lending. Increase in FPAUM was driven by a combination of continued fundraising and debt deployment as discussed in the AUM section above.
GP Capital Solutions. Increase in FPAUM was driven by new capital raised, primarily in Dyal Fund V. On January 1, 2022, $2.2 billion of AUM not yet paying fees moved to FPAUM due to the expiration of certain fee holidays in Dyal Fund V.
Real Estate. Our Real Estate products represent the products added in connection with the Oak Street Acquisition that closed at the end of 2021.
Product Performance
Product performance for certain of our products is included throughout this discussion with analysis to facilitate an understanding of our results of operations for the periods presented. The performance information of our products reflected is not indicative of our performance. An investment in Blue Owl is not an investment in any of our products. Past performance is not indicative of future results. As with any investment, there is always the potential for gains as well as the possibility of losses. There can be no assurance that any of these products or our other existing and future products will achieve similar returns. MoIC and IRR data has not been presented for products that have launched within the last two years as such information is generally not meaningful (“NM”).
Direct Lending
(1)Includes reinvested dividends, if applicable.
(2)Invested capital includes capital calls, reinvested dividends and periodic investor closes, as applicable.
(3)Realized proceeds represent the sum of all cash distributions to investors.
(4)Unrealized value represents the product’s NAV. There can be no assurance that unrealized values will be realized at the valuations indicated.
(5)Gross multiple of invested capital (“MoIC”) is calculated by adding total realized proceeds and unrealized values of a product’s investments and dividing by the total amount of invested capital. Gross MoIC is before giving effect to management fees (including Part I Fees) and Part II Fees, as applicable.
(6)Net MoIC measures the aggregate value generated by a product’s investments in absolute terms. Net MoIC is calculated by adding total realized proceeds and unrealized values of a product’s investments and dividing by the total amount of invested capital. Net MoIC is calculated after giving effect to management fees (including Part I Fees) and Part II Fees, as applicable, and all other expenses.
(7)Gross IRR is an annualized since inception gross internal rate of return of cash flows to and from the product and the product’s residual value at the end of the measurement period. Gross IRRs are calculated before giving effect to management fees (including Part I Fees) and Part II Fees, as applicable.
(8)Net IRRs are calculated consistent with gross IRRs, but after giving effect to management fees (including Part I Fees) and Part II Fees, as applicable, and all other expenses. An individual investor’s IRR may be different to the reported IRR based on the timing of capital transactions.
(9)For the purposes of calculating Gross IRR, the expense support provided to the fund would be impacted when assuming a performance excluding management fees (including Part I Fees) and Part II Fees, and therefore is not meaningful for ORCC II.
(10)Owl Rock First Lien Fund is comprised of three feeder funds: Onshore Levered, Offshore Levered and Insurance Unlevered. The gross and net MoIC and IRR presented in the chart are for Onshore Levered and Insurance Unlevered as those are the largest of the levered and unlevered feeder funds. The gross and net MoIC for the Offshore Levered feeder fund is 1.20x and 1.14x, respectively. The gross and net IRR for the Offshore Levered feeder is 10.4% and 7.0%, respectively. All other values for Owl Rock First Lien Fund Levered are for Onshore Levered and Offshore Levered combined. AUM is presented as the aggregate of the three Owl Rock First Lien Fund feeders. Owl Rock First Lien Fund Unlevered Investor equity and note commitments are both treated as capital for all values.
GP Capital Solutions
(1)Valuation-related amounts and performance metrics are presented on a quarter lag and are exclusive of investments made by us and the related carried interest vehicles of the respective products.
(2)Invested capital includes capital calls.
(3)Realized proceeds represent the sum of all cash distributions to investors.
(4)Unrealized value represents the product's NAV. There can be no assurance that unrealized values will be realized at the valuations indicated.
(5)Gross MoIC is calculated by adding total realized proceeds and unrealized values of a product’s investments and dividing by the total amount of invested capital. Gross MoIC is before giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable.
(6)Net MoIC measures the aggregate value generated by a product's investments in absolute terms. Net MoIC is calculated by adding total realized proceeds and unrealized values of a product's investments and dividing by the total amount of invested capital. Net MoIC is calculated after giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable, and all other expenses.
(7)Gross IRR is an annualized since inception gross internal rate of return of cash flows to and from the product and the product’s residual value at the end of the measurement period. Gross IRRs are calculated before giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable.
(8)Net IRR is an annualized since inception net internal rate of return of cash flows to and from the product and the product's residual value at the end of the measurement period. Net IRRs reflect returns to all investors. Net IRRs are calculated after giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable, and all other expenses. An individual investor's IRR may be different to the reported IRR based on the timing of capital transactions.
Real Estate
(1)Valuation-related amounts and performance metrics, as well as invested capital and realized proceeds, are presented on a quarter lag where applicable.
(2)Invested capital includes investments by the general partner, capital calls, dividends reinvested and periodic investors closes, as applicable.
(3)Realized proceeds represent the sum of all cash distributions to all investors.
(4)Unrealized value represents the fund’s NAV. There can be no assurance that unrealized values will be realized at the valuations indicated.
(5)Gross MoIC is calculated by adding total realized proceeds and unrealized values of a product’s investments and dividing by the total amount of invested capital. Gross MoIC is before giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable.
(6)Net MoIC measures the aggregate value generated by a product's investments in absolute terms. Net MoIC is calculated by adding total realized proceeds and unrealized values of a product's investments and dividing by the total amount of invested capital. Net MoIC is calculated after giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable, and all other expenses.
(7)Gross IRR is an annualized since inception gross internal rate of return of cash flows to and from the product and the product’s residual value at the end of the measurement period. Gross IRRs are calculated before giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable.
(8)Net IRR is an annualized since inception net internal rate of return of cash flows to and from the product and the product's residual value at the end of the measurement period. Net IRRs reflect returns to all investors. Net IRRs are calculated after giving effect to management fees and carried interest, as applicable, and all other expenses. An individual investor's IRR may be different to the reported IRR based on the timing of capital transactions.
(9)Capital raised for this product includes the par value of notes issued in the securitization. Invested capital, realized proceeds, unrealized and total values relate to the subordinated notes/equity of the securitization.
GAAP Results of Operations Analysis
As a result of the Dyal Acquisition, prior year amounts are not comparable to current year amounts or expected future trends. Dyal Capital’s results of operations are included from the Business Combination Date.
For a discussion of our results for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to “Owl Rocks Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Proxy Statement/Prospectus, filed May 3, 2021.
Year Ended December 31, 2021, Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues, Net
Management Fees. Management fees increased primarily due to the $234.3 million accretive impact of GP Capital Solution’s management fees from the Business Combination Date. Additionally, management fees increased due to the fee waivers in ORCC that expired in October 2020. These waivers totaled $130.9 million (inclusive of $74.8 million of Part I Fees) in 2020. The remaining increase was driven primarily by the overall growth in FPAUM across all of our Diversified Lending product strategies. See Note 6 to our consolidated and combined financial statements for additional details on our GAAP management fees by product and strategy.
Administrative, Transaction and Other Fees. The increase in administrative, transaction and other fees was driven primarily by a $66.6 million increase in fee income earned for services provided to portfolio companies. Also contributing to the year-over-year increase was $18.6 million of fees related to our GP Capital Solutions products, which are included from the Business Combination Date.
Realized Performance Income. Realized performance income in 2021 was driven by Part II Fees from our technology lending products.
Expenses
Compensation and Benefits. Compensation and benefits expenses increased due to non-cash equity-based compensation charges totaling $1.2 billion in connection with Common Units issued in connection with the Business Combination and the additional $72.1 million was primarily related to subsequent compensation and acquisitions related equity grants and growth in our employee headcount.
Amortization of Intangible Assets. These expenses relate to the amortization of intangible assets acquired in connection with the Dyal Acquisition. See Note 3 to our Financial Statements for additional information.
General, Administrative and Other Expenses. The increase in general, administrative and other expenses was primarily due to Transaction Expenses of $56.2 million that were not eligible to be netted against offering proceeds for GAAP, an $8.9 million increase driven by higher legal, accounting and insurance expenses associated with being a public company and a $9.0 million increase in placement fees primarily due to closes in Dyal Fund V. Partially offsetting these increases in expenses was a $21.9 million decrease in expense support to certain Direct Lending products.
Other Loss
Net losses on retirement of debt. The net loss on retirement of debt in the current year period was primarily due to a $12.5 million call protection premium paid in connection with the early repayment of our Term Loan. The remaining amount relates to the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs related to the Term Loan and terminated revolving credit facilities. See Note 4 to our Financial Statements for additional information.
Interest expense. The increase in interest expense was driven by higher average debt outstanding, as in 2020 our long-term debt outstanding related to the $250.0 million Term Loan that was repaid in the second quarter of 2021 using proceeds from the $700 million of 2031 Notes, a larger size facility. Further, we issued the $350 million of 2051 Notes during the fourth quarter of 2021. Partially offsetting the impact of higher average borrowing outstanding were lower average borrow rates on the Notes in 2021 compared to the Term Loan in 2020.
Change in TRA liability. The change in TRA liability was due to the impact of the time value of money on the portion of the TRA that is carried at fair value (i.e., Dyal Acquisition contingent consideration), as well as changes in estimated future tax rates due to changes in our state income tax apportionment.
Change in warrant liability. The change in warrant liability was driven by the increase in the price of our publicly traded warrants, as such price directly impacts the Public Warrants and is also a significant input to the valuation of our Private Placement Warrants.
Change in earnout liability. The change in earnout liability was primarily due to the increase in our Class A Share price, as such input was a material driver of the valuation of the Earnout Securities carried at fair value through the Class E Trigger Event Dates. No Earnout Securities remained outstanding as of December 31, 2021; however, the Oak Street Cash Earnout was brought onto the statement of financial condition at the end of 2021 in connection with the Oak Street Acquisition, and such amounts will be subject to fair value remeasurement each period until the relevant Oak Street Trigger Events occur. See Note 3 to our Financial Statements for additional information on the Oak Street Cash Earnout.
Income Tax Benefit
Prior to the Business Combination, our income was generally subject to New York City UBT, as the operating entities are partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes. In connection with the Business Combination, the portion of income allocable to the Registrant is also generally subject to corporate tax rates at the U.S. federal and state and local levels. This resulted in an increase in income tax benefit in the current year period. Please see Note 10 to our Financial Statements for a discussion of the significant tax differences that impacted our effective tax rate.
Net Loss Attributable to Noncontrolling Interest
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests in the current year primarily represents the allocation to Common Units of their pro rata share of the Blue Owl Operating Group’s post-Business Combination net loss due to the drivers discussed above. The Common Units represent an approximately 74% weighted average economic interest in the Blue Owl Operating Group. Prior to the Business Combination, amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests were not significant, and related primarily to third-party interests held in certain of our consolidated investment advisor holding companies.
Non-GAAP Analysis
In addition to presenting our consolidated and combined results in accordance with GAAP, we present certain other financial measures that are not presented in accordance with GAAP. Management uses these measures to assess the performance of our business, and we believe that this information enhances the ability of shareholders to analyze our performance from period to period. These non-GAAP financial measures supplement and should be considered in addition to and not in lieu of our GAAP results, and such measures should not be considered as indicative of our liquidity. Our non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measured used by other companies. Please see “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for reconciliations of these measures to the most comparable measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Fee-Related Earnings and Related Components
Fee-Related Earnings is a supplemental non-GAAP measure of operating performance used to make operating decisions and assess our operating performance. Fee-Related Earnings excludes certain items that are required for the presentation of our results on a GAAP basis. Management also reviews the components that comprise Fee-Related Earnings (i.e., FRE Revenues and FRE Expenses) on the same basis used to calculate Fee-Related Earnings, and such components are also non-GAAP measures and have been identified with the prefix “FRE” in the tables and discussion below. Management believes that by excluding these items, which are described below, Fee-Related Earnings and its components can be useful as supplemental measures to our GAAP results in assessing our operating performance and focusing on whether our recurring revenues, primarily consisting of management fees, are sufficient to cover our recurring operating expenses.
Fee-Related Earnings exclude various items that are required for the presentation of our results under GAAP, including the following: noncontrolling interests in the Blue Owl Operating Partnerships; equity-based compensation expense; compensation expenses related to capital contributions in certain subsidiary holding companies that are in-turn paid as compensation to certain employees, as such contributions are not included in Fee-Related Earnings or Distributable Earnings; amortization of intangible assets; “Transaction Expenses” as defined below; net gains (losses) on investments, changes in TRA, earnout and warrant liabilities; net losses on retirement of debt; interest and taxes. In addition, management reviews revenues by reducing GAAP administrative, transaction and other fees for certain expenses related to reimbursements from our products, which are presented gross for GAAP but net for non-GAAP measures. Transaction Expenses are expenses incurred in connection with the Business Combination and other acquisitions and strategic transactions, including subsequent adjustments related to such transactions, that were not eligible to be netted against consideration or recognized as acquired assets and assumed liabilities in the relevant transaction.
Distributable Earnings
Distributable Earnings is a supplemental non-GAAP measure of operating performance that equals Fee-Related Earnings plus or minus, as relevant, realized performance income and related compensation, interest expense, as well as amounts payable for taxes and payments made pursuant to the TRA. Amounts payable for taxes presents the current income taxes payable related to the respective period’s earnings, assuming that all Distributable Earnings were allocated to the Registrant, which would occur following the exchange of all Blue Owl Operating Group Units for Class A Shares. Current income taxes payable and payments made pursuant to the TRA reflect the benefit of tax deductions that are excluded when calculating Distributable Earnings (e.g., equity-based compensation expenses, net losses on retirement of debt, Transaction Expenses, tax goodwill, etc.). If these tax deductions were to be excluded from amounts payable for taxes, Distributable Earnings would be lower and our effective tax rate would appear to be higher, even though a lower amount of income taxes would have been paid or payable for a period’s earnings. We make these adjustments when calculating Distributable Earnings to more accurately reflect the net realized earnings that are expected to be or become available for distribution or reinvestment into our business. Management believes that Distributable Earnings can be useful as a supplemental performance measure to our GAAP results assessing the amount of earnings available for distribution.
Fee-Related Earnings and Distributable Earnings Summary
Fee-Related Earnings and Distributable Earnings increased year-over-year as a result of the accretive impact of the Dyal Acquisition, as well as higher FRE revenues from our Direct Lending products as certain fee waivers in ORCC, our largest BDC, expired in the fourth quarter of 2020. These increases were offset by higher FRE expenses, primarily due to compensation and benefits as discussed further below.
FRE Revenues
FRE revenues increased primarily due to higher management fees from our Direct Lending products due to the fee waivers in ORCC, our largest BDC, that expired in October 2020. These waivers totaled $130.9 million (inclusive of $74.8 million of Part I Fees) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The remaining increase was driven primarily by the overall growth in FPAUM across all of our Diversified Lending product strategies. Also contributing to the increase were higher administrative, transaction and other fees due to higher fee income earned for services provided to portfolio companies. FRE revenues also increased due to the accretive impact of Dyal Capital’s management fees from the Business Combination Date.
FRE Expenses
FRE expenses increased primarily due to higher FRE compensation and benefits as a result of increased headcount, both in the legacy Owl Rock business, as well as due to an increase related to the Dyal Acquisition. FRE general, administrative and other expenses were up primarily due to placement fees related to Dyal Fund V, expenses related to being a public company and increased travel and office-related expenses as we transition from working remotely back to the office. These increases were partially offset by lower expense support to certain products. See “-GAAP Results of Operations Analysis” for additional information on these drivers.
Non-GAAP Reconciliations
The table below presents the reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures presented throughout this MD&A. Please see “-Non-GAAP Analysis” for important information regarding these measures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We rely on management fees as the primary source of our operating liquidity. From time-to-time we may rely on the use of revolving credit facilities between management fee collection dates, which generally occur on a quarterly basis. We may also rely on our Revolving Credit Facility for liquidity needed to fund acquisitions, which we may replace with longer-term financing, subject to market conditions. To the extent that we have excess liquidity, we may invest such excess liquidity in corporate bonds, agency securities and other investments.
We ended 2021 with $42.6 million of cash and cash equivalents, excess liquidity investments of $1.3 million and $487.0 million available under our Revolving Credit Facility. We had $153.0 million outstanding on our Revolving Credit Facility, and such amounts were repaid in January 2022 in connection with revenues collected at the start of the quarter. In February, we increased the capacity of our Revolving Credit Facility, and as of the date of this filing, we have $715.0 million available under the Revolving Credit Facility, which is available for general corporate purposes. In February 2022, we also issued the $400.0 million 2032 Notes, providing additional liquidity for general corporate purposes, including to fund future strategic acquisitions or related transactions and growth initiatives.
Based on management’s experience and our current level of liquidity and assets under management, we believe that our current liquidity position and cash generated from management fees will continue to be sufficient to meet our anticipated working capital needs for at least the next 12 months.
Over the short and long term, we may use cash and cash equivalents, issue additional debt or equity securities, or may seek other sources of liquidity to:
•Grow our existing investment management business.
•Expand, or acquire, into businesses that are complementary to our existing investment management businesses or other strategic growth initiatives.
•Pay operating expenses, including cash compensation to our employees.
•Repay debt obligations and interest thereon.
•Opportunistically repurchase Class A Shares pursuant to the Share Repurchase Program (as defined below).
•Pay income taxes and amounts due under the TRA.
•Pay dividends to holders of our Class A Shares, as well as make corresponding distributions to holders of Common Units at the Blue Owl Operating Group level.
•Fund investment commitments to existing or future products.
Debt Obligations
Our long-term debt obligations consisted of the $700.0 million 2031 Notes and the $350.0 million 2051 Notes as of December 31, 2021. We also had $153.0 million outstanding on our Revolving Credit Facility, and such amounts were repaid in January 2022, as discussed above, and issued the $400.0 million 2032 Notes in February 2022. We expect to use cash on hand to pay interest and principal due on our financing arrangements over time, which would reduce amounts available for dividends and distributions to our shareholders. We may choose to refinance all or a portion of any amounts outstanding on or prior to their respective maturity dates by issuing new debt, which could result in higher borrowing costs. We may also choose to repay borrowing by using proceeds from the issuance of equity or other securities, which would dilute shareholders. See Note 4 to our consolidated and combined financial statements in this report for additional information regarding our debt obligations.
Management regularly reviews Adjusted EBITDA to assess our ability to service our debt obligations. Adjusted EBITDA is equal to Distributable Earnings plus interest expense, taxes and TRA payable, and fixed assets depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that supplements and should be considered in addition to and not in lieu of our GAAP results, and such measure should not be considered as indicative of our liquidity. Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measured used by other companies. Adjusted EBITDA was $169.4 million for the quarter ended December 31, 2021. Please see “-Non-GAAP Reconciliations” for reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA to the most comparable measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Tax Receivable Agreement
As discussed in Note 11 to our consolidated and combined financial statements in this report, we may in the future be required to make payments under the TRA. As of December 31, 2021, assuming no material changes in the relevant tax law and that we generate sufficient taxable income to realize the full tax benefit of the increased amortization resulting from the increase in tax basis of certain Blue Owl Operating Group assets, we expect to pay approximately $670.7 million under the TRA, net of fair value adjustments. Future cash savings and related payments under the TRA in respect of subsequent exchanges of Blue Owl Operating Group Units for Class A or B Shares would be in addition to these amounts.
Payments under the tax receivable agreement are anticipated to increase the tax basis adjustment and, consequently, result in increasing annual amortization deductions in the taxable years of and after such increases to the original basis adjustments, and potentially will give rise to increasing tax savings with respect to such years and correspondingly increasing payments under the TRA.
The obligation to make payments under the tax receivable agreement is an obligation of Blue Owl GP, and any other corporate taxpaying entities that in the future may hold GP Units, and not of the Blue Owl Operating Group. We may need to incur debt to finance payments under the TRA to the extent the Blue Owl Operating Group does not distribute cash to Registrant or Blue Owl GP in an amount sufficient to meet our obligations under the TRA.
The actual increase in tax basis of the Blue Owl Operating Group assets resulting from an exchange or from payments under the TRA, as well as the amortization thereof and the timing and amount of payments under the TRA, will vary based upon a number of factors, including the following:
•The amount and timing of our taxable income will impact the payments to be made under the TRA. To the extent that we do not have sufficient taxable income to utilize the amortization deductions available as a result of the increased tax basis in the Blue Owl Operating Partnerships’ assets, payments required under the TRA would be reduced.
•The price of our Class A Shares at the time of any exchange will determine the actual increase in tax basis of the Blue Owl Operating Partnerships’ assets resulting from such exchange; payments under the TRA resulting from future exchanges, if any, will be dependent in part upon such actual increase in tax basis.
•The composition of the Blue Owl Operating Group assets at the time of any exchange will determine the extent to which we may benefit from amortizing the increased tax basis in such assets and thus will impact the amount of future payments under the TRA resulting from any future exchanges.
•The extent to which future exchanges are taxable will impact the extent to which we will receive an increase in tax basis of the Blue Owl Operating Group assets as a result of such exchanges, and thus will impact the benefit derived by us and the resulting payments, if any, to be made under the TRA.
•The tax rates in effect at the time any potential tax savings are realized, which would affect the amount of any future payments under the TRA.
Depending upon the outcome of these and other factors, payments that we may be obligated to make under the TRA in respect of exchanges could be substantial. In light of the numerous factors affecting our obligation to make payments under the TRA, the timing and amounts of any such actual payments are not reasonably ascertainable.
Warrants
We classify the warrants issued in connection with the Business Combination as liabilities in our consolidated and combined statements of financial condition, as in the event of a change in control, warrant holders have the ability to demand cash settlement from us. In addition, we have the option to cash settle outstanding warrants when certain criteria is met, as described in Note 2 to our Financial Statements. To the extent we have insufficient cash on hand or that we opt to, we may rely on debt or equity financing to facilitate these transactions in the future if needed.
Earnout Securities and Oak Street Cash Earnout
We classified certain Earnout Securities as liabilities in our consolidated and combined statements of financial condition, as described in Note 2 to our Financial Statements. The settlement of these liabilities during 2021 was in the form of Class A Shares and Common Units that were issued upon the relevant Class E Triggering Events and did not require cash settlement.
A portion of the Oak Street Cash Earnouts are also liability classified and represent the fair value of the obligation to make future cash payments that would need to be made if all the respective Oak Street Triggering Events occur. Further, the portion classified as compensation expense will be expensed and a corresponding accrued compensation liability will be recorded over the service period. To the extent we have insufficient cash on hand or that we opt to, we may rely on debt or equity financing to facilitate these transactions in the future. See Note 2 to our Financial Statements for additional information.
Dividends and Distributions
We intend to continue to pay to Class A Shareholders (and Class B Shareholders in the future to the extent any Class B Shares are outstanding) a quarterly dividend representing approximately 85% of Distributable Earnings following the end of each quarter. Blue Owl Capital Inc.’s share of Distributable Earnings, subject to adjustment as determined by our Board to be necessary or appropriate to provide for the conduct of our business, to make appropriate investments in our business and products, to comply with applicable law, any of our debt instruments or other agreements, or to provide for future cash requirements such as tax-related payments, operating reserves, clawback obligations and dividends to shareholders for any ensuing quarter. All of the foregoing is subject to the qualification that the declaration and payment of any dividends are at the sole discretion of our Board, and our Board may change our dividend policy at any time, including, without limitation, to reduce or eliminate dividends entirely.
The Blue Owl Operating Partnerships will make cash distributions (“Tax Distributions”) to the partners of such partnerships, including to Blue Owl GP, if we determine that the taxable income of the relevant partnership will give rise to taxable income for its partners. Generally, Tax Distributions will be computed based on our estimate of the taxable income of the relevant partnership allocable to a partner multiplied by an assumed tax rate equal to the highest effective marginal combined U.S. federal, New York State and New York City income tax rates prescribed for an individual or corporate resident in New York City (taking into account certain assumptions set forth in the relevant partnership agreements). Tax Distributions will be made only to the extent distributions from the Blue Owl Operating Partnerships for the relevant year were otherwise insufficient to cover the estimated assumed tax liabilities.
Holders of our Class A and B Shares may not always receive distributions or may receive lower distributions on a per share basis at a time when we, indirectly through Blue Owl GP, and holders of our Common Units are receiving distributions on their interests, as distributions to the Registrant and Blue Owl GP may be used to settle tax and TRA liabilities, if any, and other obligations.
Dividends are expected to be treated as qualified dividends under current law to the extent of the Company’s current and accumulated earnings and profits, with any excess dividends treated as a return of capital to the extent of a shareholder’s basis, and any remaining excess generally treated as gain realized on the sale or other disposition of stock.
Risks to our Liquidity
Our ability to obtain financing provides us with additional sources of liquidity. Any new financing arrangement that we may enter into may have covenants that impose additional limitations on us, including with respect to making distributions, entering into business transactions or other matters, and may result in increased interest expense. If we are unable to secure financing on terms that are favorable to us, our business may be adversely impacted. No assurance can be given that we will be able to issue new debt, enter into new credit facilities or issue equity or other securities in the future on attractive terms or at all.
Adverse market conditions, including from the COVID-19 pandemic or any other market dislocation event, may negatively impact our liquidity. Cash flows from management fees may be impacted by a slowdown or a decline in fundraising and deployment, as well as declines in the value of investments held in certain of our products.
LIBOR Transition
On March 5, 2021, the UK Financial Conduct Authority announced that it would phase out LIBOR as a benchmark immediately after December 31, 2021, for sterling, euro, Japanese yen, Swiss franc and 1-week and 2-month U.S. Dollar settings and immediately after June 30, 2023, the remaining U.S. Dollar settings. Our Notes are fixed rate borrowings, and therefore the LIBOR phase out will not have an impact on this borrowing. The Revolving Credit Facility is subject to SOFR rates at our option, or alternative rates that are not tied to LIBOR. Certain of our products hold investments and have borrowings that are tied to LIBOR, and we continue to focus on managing any risk related to those exposures. Our senior management has oversight of these transition efforts. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Legal and Regulatory Environment-Changes to the method of determining the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) or the selection of a replacement for LIBOR may affect the value of investments held by our products and could affect our results of operations and financial results.”
Cash Flows Analysis
Operating Activities. Our net cash flows from operating activities are generally comprised of management fees, less cash used for operating expenses, including interest paid on our debt obligations. One of our largest operating cash outflows generally relates to bonus expense, which are generally paid out during the first quarter of the year following the expense. The cash flows related to Dyal Capital are included starting on the Business Combination Date, and therefore our historical operating cash flows are not representative of our future cash flows.
Net cash flows from operating activities increased from the prior year period due to the inclusion of the Dyal Capital related cash flows, as well as higher management fees from our Direct Lending products. These increases were partially offset by higher 2020 discretionary bonuses, which were paid in the first quarter of 2021, as compared to discretionary bonuses in 2019, which were paid in the first quarter of 2020.
Investing Activities. Cash flows related to investing activities for 2021 primarily related to the cash consideration paid in connection with the Dyal Acquisition and Oak Street Acquisition. In 2021, we also invested excess liquidity from our Notes offerings and retained earnings in various fixed income investments and subsequently sold such investments for general corporate purposes. In 2020, cash flows related to investing activities were not material.
Financing Activities. Cash flows related to financing activities for 2021 were primarily driven by cash proceeds from the Business Combination, as well as related cash consideration paid to certain pre-Business Combination Owl Rock owners. Additionally, distributions of pre-Business Combination-related earnings were also made during 2021, with a final distribution of $52.0 million related to pre-Business Combination-related earnings made during the third quarter of 2021. Cash flows related to financing activities in 2021 also included the proceeds from our 2031 Notes, which proceeds were used in part to repay our previously outstanding Term Loan and proceeds from our 2051 Notes, which proceeds were used to finance working capital needs and general capital purposes. We also made various short-term borrowings and repayments under our revolving credit facilities. Such borrowings were fully repaid by January 2022.
Our 2020 cash flows related to financing activities included borrowings and repayments under our previously outstanding revolving credit facilities. In addition, distributions related to pre-Business Combination-related earnings was another significant financing cash flow in the prior-year period.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In applying many of these accounting principles, we make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses in our consolidated and combined financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience and other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates, however, are subjective and subject to change, and actual results may differ materially from our current estimates due to the inherent nature of these estimates, including uncertainty in the current economic environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Financial Statements.
Estimation of Fair Values
Investments Held by our Products
The fair value of the investments held by our Direct Lending products is the primary input to the calculation for the majority of our management fees. Management fees from our GP Capital Solutions and Real Estate products are generally based on commitments or investment cost, so our management fees are generally not impacted by changes in the estimated fair values of investments held by these products. However, to the extent that management fees are calculated based on investment cost of the product’s investments, the amount of fees that we may charge will increase or decrease from the effect of changes in the cost basis of the product’s investments, including potential impairment losses. In the absence of observable market prices, we use valuation methodologies applied on a consistent basis and assumptions that we believe market participants would use to determine the fair value of the investments. For investments where little market activity exists, the determination of fair value is based on the best information available, we incorporate our own assumptions and involves a significant degree of judgment, and the consideration of a combination of internal and external factors.
Our products generally value their investments at fair value, as determined in good faith by each product’s respective board of directors or valuation committee, as applicable, based on, among other things, the input of third party valuation firms and taking into account the nature and realizable value of any collateral, an investee’s ability to make payments and its earnings, the markets in which the investee operates, comparison to publicly traded companies, discounted cash flow, current market interest rates and other relevant factors. Because such valuations are inherently uncertain, the valuations may fluctuate significantly over time due to changes in market conditions. These valuations would, in turn, have corresponding proportionate impacts on the amount management fees that we may earn from certain products on which revenues are based on the fair value of investments.
TRA Liability
We carry a portion of our TRA liability at fair value, as it is contingent consideration related to the Dyal Acquisition. The valuation of this portion of the TRA liability is mostly sensitive to our expectation of future cash savings that we may ultimately realize related to our tax goodwill and other intangible assets deductions. We then apply a discount rate that we believe is appropriate given the nature of and expected timing of payments of the liability. A decrease in the discount rate assumption would result in an increase in the fair value estimate of the liability, which would have a correspondingly negative impact on our GAAP results of operations. However, payments under the TRA are ultimately only made to the extent we realize the offsetting cash savings on our income taxes due to the tax goodwill and other intangibles deduction. See Note 9 to our Financial Statements for additional details.
Earnout Liability and Private Placement Warrants Liability
The fair values of our Earnout Securities liability and Private Placement Warrants liability were determined using Monte Carlo simulations that have various significant unobservable inputs. The assumptions used could have a material impact on the valuation of these liabilities, and include our best estimate of expected volatility, expected holding periods and appropriate discounts for lack of marketability. Changes in the estimated fair values of these liabilities may have material impacts on our results of operations in any given period, as any increases in these liabilities have a corresponding negative impact on our GAAP results of operations in the period in which the changes occur. See Note 9 to our Financial Statements for additional details.
Equity-based Compensation
The fair values of our equity-based compensation RSU and Incentive Unit grants are generally determined using our Class A Share price on the grant date, adjusted for the lack of dividend participation during the vesting period, and the application of a discount for lack of marketability on RSUs and Incentive Units that are subject to a one-year post-vesting transfer restriction. The higher these discounts, the lower the compensation expense taken over time for these grants.
For the Seller Earnout Securities and Oak Street Earnout Units that were classified as equity-based compensation for GAAP, we used Monte Carlo simulations that had various significant unobservable inputs. The assumptions used have a material impact on the valuation of these grants, and include our best estimate of expected volatility, expected holding periods and appropriate discounts for lack of marketability. The higher the expected volatility, the higher the compensation expense taken each period for these grants. The higher the expected holding periods and discount for lack of marketability, the lower the compensation expense taken each period for these grants. See Note 8 to our Financial Statements for additional details.
Deferred Tax Assets
As a result of the Business Combination, deferred tax assets comprise one of our largest assets in our consolidated and combined statements of financial condition. Substantially all of our deferred tax assets relate to the goodwill and other intangible assets deductible for tax purposes that arose in connection with the purchase of Blue Owl Operating Group Units with proceeds from the Business Combination, as well as subsequent payments expected to be made under the TRA and other capital transactions that have occurred since the Business Combination. In accordance with relevant tax rules, we expect to take substantially all of these goodwill and other intangible deductions over the 15-year period following the Business Combination Date. To the extent we generate insufficient taxable income to take the full deduction in any given year, we will generate a net operating loss (“NOL”) that is available for us to use over an indefinite carryforward period in order to fully realize the deferred tax assets.
When evaluating the realizability of deferred tax assets, all evidence-both positive and negative-is considered. This evidence includes, but is not limited to, expectations regarding future earnings, future reversals of existing temporary tax differences and tax planning strategies. We did not take into account any tax planning strategies when arriving at this conclusion; however, the other assumptions underlying the taxable income estimates, are based on our near-term operating model. If we experience a significant decline in AUM for any extended time during the period for which these estimates relate and we do not otherwise experience offsetting growth rates in other periods, we may not generate taxable income sufficient to realize the deferred tax assets and may need to record a valuation allowance. However, given the indefinite carryforward period available for NOLs and the conservative estimates used to prepare the taxable income projections, the sensitivity of our estimates and assumptions are not likely to have a material impact on our conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed.
Impairment of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Our ongoing accounting for goodwill and other intangible assets acquired as part of the Business Combination requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions as we exercise judgement to evaluate these assets for impairment. We generally undertake a qualitative review of factors that may indicate whether an impairment exists. We take into account factors such as the growth in AUM and FPAUM, general economic conditions, and various other factors that require judgement in deciding whether a quantitative analysis should be undertaken. Our evaluation for indicators of impairment may not capture a potential impairment, which could result in an overstatement of the carrying values of goodwill and other intangible assets.
Impact of Changes in Accounting on Recent and Future Trends
We believe that none of the changes to GAAP that went into effect during the year ended December 31, 2021, or that have been issued but that we have not yet adopted, are expected to substantively impact our future trends.