ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company's financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the Company's financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to the Company's plans and strategy for its business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors”, in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the Company's actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Please also see the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
The discussion and analysis below has been organized as follows:
•Executive summary, including a description of the business and significant events that are important to understanding the results of operations and financial condition;
•Components of operating results and results of operations, including an explanation of significant differences between the periods presented in the specific line items of the statements of operations;
•Financial condition addressing the Company's liquidity position, sources and uses of cash, capital resources and requirements, commitments; and
•Critical accounting policies, significant judgements and use of estimates which are most important to both the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and results of operations.
Executive Summary
Introduction and Overview
Oyster Point Pharma, Inc. (the Company) is a commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of first-in-class pharmaceutical therapies to treat ophthalmic diseases. On October 15, 2021, TYRVAYA™ (varenicline solution) Nasal Spray (TYRVAYA Nasal Spray), formerly referred to as OC-01 (varenicline solution) nasal spray, a highly selective nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) agonist, was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of the signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. TYRVAYA Nasal Spray’s highly differentiated mechanism of action is designed to increase basal tear production with a goal to re-establish tear film homeostasis.
The Company began selling TYRVAYA Nasal Spray in November 2021 and generated net product revenues of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company expects its product revenue to increase if it gains market share and TYRVAYA Nasal Spray obtains insurance coverage from third-party payors. The Company generated net losses of $100.7 million and $70.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $255.4 million as of December 31, 2021. The Company has historically financed its operations primarily through the sale and issuance of its securities. However in the second half of 2021, the Company secured debt capital in the form of a long-term credit facility to finance its operations. The Company expects that its operating expenses will increase as it expands its commercialization of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, advances its other product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seeks regulatory approval, and prepares for and, if approved, proceeds to commercialization of its other product candidates, acquires, discovers, validates and develops additional product candidates; obtains, maintains, protects and enforces its intellectual property portfolio, and hires additional personnel.
Significant Events
FDA Approval of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray
On October 15, 2021, TYRVAYA Nasal Spray was approved by the FDA for the treatment of the signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. TYRVAYA Nasal Spray is the first and only nasal spray approved for the treatment of dry eye disease. TYRVAYA Nasal Spray is believed to bind to cholinergic receptors to activate the trigeminal parasympathetic pathway resulting in increased production of basal tear film as a treatment for dry eye disease. TYRVAYA Nasal Spray is a highly selective cholinergic agonist delivered twice daily as a multidose, aqueous nasal spray into each nostril to activate basal tear production.
Nasal spray administration provides a new way to treat dry eye disease without administering medication onto an already irritated ocular surface.
Credit Facility with OrbiMed
On August 5, 2021, the Company entered into a $125 million term loan credit facility (the Credit Agreement) with OrbiMed Royalty & Credit Opportunities III, LP, as administrative agent and initial lender (OrbiMed). The Credit Agreement provides for loans to be funded in three separate tranches: the first $45 million tranche was funded on August 10, 2021, the second $50 million tranche was funded on November 4, 2021 following the FDA approval of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray for the signs and symptoms of dry eye disease, and the third $30 million tranche may be funded on or prior to June 30, 2023, at the option of the Company, upon the Company having received at least $40 million in TYRVAYA Nasal Spray net recurring revenue, as defined in the Credit Agreement, in any twelve-month period prior to March 31, 2023, among other conditions.
On October 19, 2021, the Company entered into a waiver and amendment to the Credit Agreement to waive certain labeling requirements required for, and to permit the availability of, the second $50 million tranche of funding under the Credit Agreement (among other customary funding provisions) and to make certain other amendments thereto, subject to the terms and conditions contained therein. Additionally, commencing with the fourth full fiscal quarter after the regulatory approval of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, the amount of the principal to be repaid will be increased to $10 million if (i) the Company does not meet certain minimum recurring revenue thresholds from the sale and/or licensing of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray in the last four quarters and (ii) an improper promotional event has occurred.
Ji Xing License and Collaboration Agreement
On August 5, 2021, the Company entered into the License Agreement with Ji Xing, a biotechnology company headquartered in Shanghai, China and backed by RTW. Pursuant to the License Agreement, the Company has granted Ji Xing an exclusive license to develop and commercialize OC-01 (varenicline solution) and OC-02 (simpinicline) nasal sprays, for all prophylactic uses for, and treatment of, ophthalmology diseases or disorders in the greater China region. Ji Xing will be responsible for the development, regulatory, manufacturing and commercialization activities and all related costs in the greater China region, including mainland China, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Macau Special Administrative Region, and Taiwan. The Company is responsible for supplying the drug substance and finished products of OC-01 (varenicline solution) and OC-02 (simpinicline) for Ji Xing's clinical development at quantities agreed by the parties for a period of up to twelve months, subject to one or more separate supply agreements as contemplated by the License Agreement. In August 2021, the Company recognized $17.9 million of revenue in connection with the License Agreement, which is inclusive of 397,562 of Ji Xing senior common shares valued at $0.4 million and $17.5 million in cash consideration. In October 2021, the Company received an additional 397,561 senior common shares of Ji Xing valued at $0.4 million and a $5.0 million development milestone payment following the FDA approval of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray which occurred on October 15, 2021. Per the License Agreement, the
Company is eligible to receive up to $204.8 million in aggregate development and sales-based milestone payments and royalty payments that are tiered on future net sales of OC-01 and OC-02 and based on royalty rates between 10% and 20%.
Preclinical Data Highlighting Potent Activity of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray and OC-02 (simpinicline) against SARS-CoV-2 Virus and Variants.
In July 2021, the Company announced preclinical data in non-human primates and in vitro models evaluating TYRVAYA Nasal Spray against SARS-CoV-2 and the alpha and beta variants, the viruses that cause COVID-19 disease. Administration of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray to non-human primates was observed to inhibit viral replication in the nose within 24 hours of infectious SARS-CoV-2 challenge with absence of subgenomic RNA at Day 3 and Day 5 post-challenge. The results were published on the preprint server bioRxiv. In addition, varenicline was observed to inhibit cellular entry and replication of SARS-CoV-2 and its alpha and beta variants in multiple human cell types. Lastly, OC-02 (simpinicline) was also observed to inhibit cellular entry and replication of SARS-CoV-2 alpha variant in Calu-3 human cells at very low concentrations. Additional preclinical studies with SARS-CoV-2 variants are currently underway.
Enrollment of First Subject in the OLYMPIA Phase 2 Clinical Trial of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray for Patients with Neurotrophic Keratopathy
In June 2021, the Company announced enrollment of the first subject in the OLYMPIA Phase 2 clinical trial of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray for the treatment of Stage 1 Neurotrophic Keratopathy (NK). Enrollment is expected to be completed in 2022.
Pipeline Expansion with Enriched Tear Film (ETF™) Gene Therapy to Target Ophthalmic Diseases
In June 2021, the Company announced the expansion of its pipeline with the introduction of its proprietary ETF™ gene therapy and proof-of-concept in vivo study results from it first gene therapy candidate, OC-101. Preclinical study results from a 42-day proof-of-concept in vivo study demonstrated that a single, intralacrimal gland injection of an adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector that delivers the human Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) gene produced a statistically significant increase of NGF in tear film, as compared to control. Preclinical study results also demonstrated that following AAV transduction of the lacrimal gland, cholinergic activation with TYRVAYA Nasal Spray produced a statistically significant increase of NGF levels in tear film of a rabbit model, as compared to control, potentially indicating OC-01’s ability to modulate lacrimal secretion of NGF. No macroscopic or microscopic safety findings were observed associated with either the intralacrimal gland administration of OC-101 or intranasal administration of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray. Additional preclinical studies with this gene therapy approach are currently underway.
Research Collaboration with Adaptive Phage Therapeutics, Inc. to Target Ophthalmic Diseases
In May 2021, the Company entered into a research collaboration agreement with Adaptive Phage Therapeutics (APT) for the development of potential biological treatments for multiple ophthalmic diseases. Under the terms of the collaboration agreement, the Company has the option and certain rights to obtain an exclusive license to develop and commercialize APT’s technology for ophthalmic diseases and disorders. Under the license terms, if such option is exercised, the Company would pay potential development and regulatory milestones, as well as potential sales-related milestones and tiered royalties of net sales, if a licensed phage therapy is approved by the FDA or certain other regulatory authorities. Pursuant to the terms of the agreement, the Company paid a one-time, non-refundable, upfront payment of $0.5 million for the research collaboration agreement, which was
included in research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company has not exercised the option granted under the agreement as of December 31, 2021. Preclinical studies investigating potential indications are underway.
The Impact of the SARS-CoV-2 Virus Pandemic
The Company does not believe its financial results were significantly affected by the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2021. However, the extent to which the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic may affect the Company’s future financial results and operations will depend on future developments which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the pandemic, the availability and effectiveness of vaccines and treatment options, and current or future domestic and international actions to contain it and treat it. The Company continues to evaluate the potential impact of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic as it initiated commercialization of the TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, including potential supply-chain challenges, and the potential impact on its trials, expected timelines and costs, as it continues to learn more about the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on the industry. In addition, the Company has taken a variety of measures in an effort to ensure the availability and functioning of the Company's critical infrastructure and to promote the safety and security of its employees, including remote working arrangements for employees and investing in personal protective equipment for the future return to the office. With the surge of the Delta and Omicron variants of the virus across the U.S. during the second half of 2021 and early 2022, the Company postponed its plans for a voluntary return to the office for its employees until March 2022. The Company’s sales force is primarily working in-person and has been instructed to follow all locally required SARS-CoV-2 related precautions. The Company will continue monitoring SARS-CoV-2 infection rates and make practical decisions about voluntary reopening in compliance with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, federal, state and local guidelines.
The Company continues to evaluate and develop pipeline candidates for the potential treatment of various medical indications. The ongoing SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic may impact access to supplies necessary to conduct preclinical studies, cause delay to the timelines to initiate or complete in vitro or in vivo animal studies or may indirectly impact the operations of third parties that are necessary for the Company to advance preclinical projects. If the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time, the Company could experience significant disruptions to its clinical development timelines, which could adversely affect its business, financial condition and results of operations.
For further discussion of the risks that the Company faces as a result of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Operating Results
Revenue
Product Revenue, Net - The Company commenced generating product revenue from the sales of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray in November 2021, following the FDA approval on October 15, 2021, for the treatment of signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. Revenues from product sales are recognized net of variable consideration due to rebates, chargebacks, trade discounts and allowances, sales returns, and other incentives. Provisions for estimated reductions to revenue are provided for in the same period the related sales are recorded and are based on contractual terms, actual utilization data, forecasted payor mix, total prescriptions and industry data. The Company expects product revenue to increase if it gains market share and TYRVAYA Nasal Spray obtains insurance coverage from third-party payors.
License Revenue - Related Party - Pursuant to the License Agreement, the Company granted Ji Xing an exclusive license to develop and commercialize OC-01 (varenicline solution) nasal spray and OC-02 (simpinicline) nasal spray pharmaceutical product candidates, for all prophylactic uses for, and treatment of, ophthalmology diseases or disorders. The Company recognizes license revenue when the licensee has the ability to direct the use of and benefit from the licensed intellectual property.
Milestone Revenue - Related Party - Under the License Agreement, the Company is eligible to receive development- and sales-based milestone payments that are tiered based on future net sales of OC-01 and OC-02 in the greater China region. The Company recognizes development and sales-based milestone revenue when the development and sales milestones occur.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue includes material costs, direct and indirect third-party manufacturing costs, freight, royalties, reserves for excess, damaged and obsolete inventory, and other manufacturing overhead costs. Prior to FDA approval on October 15, 2021, the cost of manufacturing TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, including the build-up of anticipated launch product, was expensed
as research and development expense and therefore the cost of product revenues associated with any pre-approval inventory will be lower until the Company fully turns over product manufactured during that period.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist of expenses to develop the Company's commercialization program for TYRVAYA Nasal Spray.
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of the following:
•payroll-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, employee benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees focused on sales and marketing efforts and sales commissions (payroll-related expense)
•conference and trade shows, external marketing activities and promotional samples
•expenses related to developing the patient service programs and payor access strategy
•recruiting, travel and training expenses; and
•rent, office equipment, utilities, and information technology costs.
The Company anticipates that its sales and marketing expenses will increase as a result of continuing commercialization efforts of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses are expenditures to administer the business and are not related to the production or sale of goods or services.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following:
•certain payroll-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, employee benefits and stock-based compensation expense (payroll-related expense);
•professional fees for legal, consulting services, auditing, accounting and tax services, investor and public relations, and insurance;
•rent, office equipment, utilities, and information technology costs;
•medical affairs; and
•other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses or sales and marketing expenses.
The Company anticipates that its general and administrative expenses will increase as a result of expanded infrastructure, higher consulting, legal and accounting services costs as it continues to expand its commercial operations.
Research and Development Expenses
The Company’s research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the development of its product candidates. These expenses consist primarily of:
•payroll-related expenses, including salaries and bonuses, employee benefit costs and stock-based compensation expense for employees dedicated to the Company’s research and product development (payroll-related expense);
•fees paid to third parties to conduct certain research, development activities and investigator-initiated trials on the Company’s behalf and consulting costs;
•costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials and costs for manufacturing of pre-approval inventory of the product candidates under development; costs related to testing of preproduction samples, prototypes and models;
•costs for laboratory facilities and supplies, product acquisition and certain license costs; and
•costs related to regulatory compliance requirements.
The Company expenses both internal and external research and development expenses as they are incurred.
The Company does not allocate its costs by product candidate, as a significant amount of research and development expenses include internal costs, such as payroll and other personnel expenses, laboratory supplies, and external costs, such as fees paid to third parties to conduct research and development activities on the Company's behalf. Several of the Company's
departments support multiple product candidate research and development programs, and therefore the costs cannot be allocated to a particular product candidate or development program. The Company tracks its research and development expenses by type of activity: clinical and preclinical, chemistry, manufacturing and controls (CMC), and other costs.
The Company expects to continue incurring research and development expenses, as it seeks to initiate additional clinical trials for its product candidates, complete its clinical programs, and prepare for the potential regulatory approval of these product candidates. Predicting the timing or cost to complete the Company’s clinical programs or validation of its commercial manufacturing and supply processes is difficult, and delays may occur because of many factors, including factors outside of the Company’s control. For example, if the FDA or other regulatory authorities were to require the Company to conduct clinical trials beyond those that it currently anticipates, the Company could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development. Furthermore, the Company is unable to predict with any certainty when or if its product candidates will receive regulatory approval.
Interest Expense
The Company incurs interest expense in connection with the Credit Agreement. The interest expense includes contractual interest, as well as the amortization of loan commitment fees and accretion of other long-term debt related costs.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, consists primarily of changes in fair value of the embedded derivative, which was recorded in connection with the Company entering into the Credit Agreement and interest income earned on money market funds, which are included in cash and cash equivalents on the Company's balance sheets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the Company's results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
Product Revenue, Net
Product revenue, net was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and was related to sales of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, which was launched in November 2021. The Company did not generate any revenues from product sales during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Milestone Revenue - Related Party
Milestone revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $5.0 million. Pursuant to the license agreement with Ji Xing, the Company recognized $5.0 million in milestone revenue upon FDA approval of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray. The Company had no milestone revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
License Revenue - Related Party
License revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $18.4 million and consisted of $17.5 million recognized in connection with the License Agreement with Ji Xing and the receipt of non-cash consideration of senior common shares of Ji Xing with a fair value of $0.9 million. The Company had no license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.5 million. Cost of product revenue mainly consisted of third-party manufacturing costs, a reserve for inventory obsolescence, damaged goods and product royalty expenses. The cost of product revenue includes a reserve for inventory obsolescence of $0.9 million. In preparation of the commercial launch, the Company expensed to research and development expense all material costs related to inventory produced prior to the FDA approval date of TYRVAYA's Nasal Spray on October 15, 2021 (pre-approval inventory). Because pre-approval inventory was charged to research and development expense, the unit cost of product revenue will be lower until the Company fully utilizes product manufactured prior to the FDA approval date of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray. The Company anticipates selling the pre-
approval inventory by the end of 2022. The Company may allocate some of the expensed pre-approval inventory as samples in future reporting periods. The Company started expensing the pre-approval inventory in 2020 and recorded approximately $4.3 million and $3.5 million as research and development expense related to such pre-approval inventory during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $44.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher payroll-related expenses of $24.6 million, inclusive of sales commission expense, as well as an increase in stock-based compensation of $1.7 million, both of which were primarily driven by onboarding a commercial field force in the second half of 2021. The Company incurred higher commercial, marketing, market access, and other expenses of $20.1 million in anticipation of, and in connection with, the U.S. launch of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $19.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by additional payroll-related expenses of $9.8 million due to an increase in headcount to support the Company's commercial infrastructure, inclusive of an increase in stock-based compensation of $2.8 million. The Company also incurred higher other general and administrative expenses of $9.7 million related to accounting, medical affairs and other professional expenses, information technology costs and facilities. The increase in other general and administrative expense was driven by the Company's transitioning from a clinical-stage to a commercial stage company.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $15.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the completion of the ONSET-2 Phase 3 clinical trial for TYRVAYA Nasal Spray in May 2020. In addition, in December 2020, the Company paid a filing fee and shortly after filed a request for a refund of $2.9 million to the FDA under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) in conjunction with the filing of its New Drug Application for TYRVAYA Nasal Spray. The Company recorded the filing fee in research and development expense in the year ended December 31, 2020, and subsequently recorded the refund received as a reduction in other research and development expense during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense
The Company incurred $3.7 million of interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily related to the Credit Agreement with OrbiMed. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, includes contractual interest, as well as the amortization of loan commitment fees and accretion of other long-term debt related costs.
Other Income, net
Other income, net, consisted primarily of changes in fair value of the embedded derivative, which was recorded in connection with Company entering into the Credit Agreement with OrbiMed during the year ended December 31, 2021. Other income, net, consisted primarily of interest income earned on money market funds during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
The Company's principal sources of liquidity include cash on hand and borrowings under the Company's Credit Agreement with OrbiMed. As described in Note 10, Long-term Debt, to the Company's financial statements, the Company entered into a $125 million term loan credit facility with OrbiMed in August 2021. The Company drew upon the first and second tranches of the credit facility in the aggregate amount of $95.0 million and received proceeds of $90.1 million, net of debt discount and issuance costs during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company has $30.0 million remaining under the credit facility, which may be funded, at the option of the Company, on or prior to June 30, 2023, upon the Company having received at least $40 million in TYRVAYA Nasal Spray net recurring revenue, as defined in the Credit Agreement, in any twelve-month period prior to March 31, 2023, among other conditions.
On May 19, 2020, the Company completed a follow-on public offering selling 4,312,500 shares of common stock at a price to the public of $28.00 per share. The net proceeds from the offering were $112.6 million.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $193.4 million and $192.6 million, respectively.
The Company is party to an at-the-market sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (Agent), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100 million from time to time through the Agent. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not sold any shares of common stock pursuant to the sales agreement and $100.0 million in shares remained available under the sales agreement.
Future Funding Requirements
Based on the current business plan, management believes that its available cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund the Company's planned operations for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Since inception, the Company has incurred recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations. The Company generated net losses of $100.7 million and $70.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and had an accumulated deficit of $255.4 million as of December 31, 2021, respectively. The Company historically financed its operations primarily through the sale and issuance of its securities, however in the second half of 2021, the Company secured debt capital in the form of a long-term credit facility to finance its operations. The Company also entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Ji Xing in the second half of 2021 whereby it recognized $18.4 million of license revenue, which was inclusive of senior common shares of Ji Xing with the fair value of $0.9 million. The Company is also eligible to receive additional development and sales-based milestone payments and royalties from Ji Xing in future periods. On October 15, 2021, the Company's first product, TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, was approved by the FDA for treatment of signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. The Company commenced commercial shipments of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray in November 2021 and generated net product revenues of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company is subject to risks and uncertainties common to companies in the biopharmaceutical industry, including, but not limited to, the ability to secure sufficient capital to fund operations, competition from other companies’ products, the availability and sufficiency of third-party payor coverage and reimbursement, compliance with law and government regulations, the ability to develop and bring to market new products, protection of proprietary technology, and dependence on third parties and key personnel. Successfully commercializing TYRVAYA Nasal Spray requires significant sales and marketing efforts, and the Company’s pipeline programs may require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing. These activities will in turn require significant amounts of capital, qualified personnel and adequate infrastructure. There can be no assurance when, if ever, the Company will realize significant revenue from the sales of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray or if the development efforts supporting the Company’s pipeline, including future clinical trials, will be successful.
The future viability of the Company is dependent on its ability to fund its operations through the sales and licensing of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, its ability to draw on the $30 million third tranche of the long-term credit facility, as further described in Note 10, Long-term Debt, and raise additional capital through equity offerings or other collaborative or strategic arrangements. The Company’s ability to draw on the third tranche is contingent upon achieving at least $40 million in TYRVAYA Nasal Spray
net recurring revenue, as defined in the Credit Agreement, in any twelve-month period on or before March 31, 2023, and upon no improper promotional event having occurred, among other conditions.
The Company anticipates that it will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements for which will depend on many factors, including:
•the cost and timing associated with commercializing TYRVAYA Nasal Spray, including the costs and timing associated with marketing activities, patient services, obtaining third-party payor coverage and reimbursement and maintaining regulatory compliance;
•the scope, timing, rate of progress and costs of the Company's drug discovery efforts, preclinical development activities, laboratory testing, clinical trials and regulatory review for the Company's product candidates, and the cost and timing associated
with commercializing such product candidates, if they receive regulatory approval;
•the scope and costs of development and commercial manufacturing activities;
•the extent to which the Company acquires or in-licenses other product candidates and technologies;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing the Company's intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the Company's ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•its efforts to enhance operational systems and the Company's ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the commercialization of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray and the development and the sale of additional products, following FDA approval;
•the Company's implementation of operational, financial and management systems;
•any current or future potential effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on the Company's business, operations, preclinical and clinical development and commercialization timelines and plans; and
•the costs associated with being a public company.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the commercialization of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray or development of any of the Company's product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Furthermore, the Company's operating plans may change in the future, and it will continue to require additional capital to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. If additional funds are raised by issuing equity securities, the Company's stockholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which the Company might enter may impose upon it additional covenants that restrict the Company's operations, including limitations on its ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase its common stock, make certain investments or engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that it raises may contain terms that are not favorable to the Company or its stockholders.
Adequate funding may not be available to the Company on acceptable terms or at all, and any uncertainty and volatility in capital markets caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic, or other events may negatively impact the availability and cost of capital. The Company's failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on its financial condition and ability to pursue its business strategies. If the Company is unable to raise additional funds when needed, it may be required to delay, reduce, or eliminate certain commercial expenses, including in selling, general and administrative expenses, as well as delay, reduce, or eliminate one or more of its research or development programs. The Company may also be required to sell or license to others rights to its product candidates in certain territories or indications that it would prefer to develop and commercialize itself. The Company may seek to raise capital through private or public equity or debt offerings, or collaborative and other arrangements. If the Company chooses to enter into collaborations and other arrangements to supplement its funds, it may have to give up certain rights, thereby limiting its ability to develop and commercialize the product candidates or may have other terms that are not favorable to the Company, which could materially affect its business, results of operation and financial condition.
See the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with the Company's substantial capital requirements.
Cash Flow Discussion
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below:
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $89.4 million, which was due to net loss, adjusted for non-cash items, in the amount of $86.4 million and higher working capital needs in the amount of $3.0 million. The higher working capital needs were primarily driven by the Company's commercial launch of TYRVAYA Nasal Spray in November 2021, which resulted in higher inventory, accounts receivable and prepaid expense balances of a total value of $19.4 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of a total value of $16.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, was $58.4 million, which was due to net loss, adjusted for non-cash items, in the amount of $63.1 million, partially offset by lower working capital needs in the amount of $4.7 million. The lower working capital needs were primarily driven by the timing of payments for accrued expenses and accounts payable.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, related to payments for the laboratory equipment, as well as equipment to be used in manufacturing.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower net proceeds generated from the Company's net borrowings under the Credit Agreement during 2021 compared to the net proceeds received from the Company's follow on offering in 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Long-Term Debt
In connection with the Credit Agreement and as further described in Note 10, Long-term Debt, the Company is required to make certain contractual payments in future periods. The Credit Agreement matures on August 5, 2027 and the loan is structured for full principal repayment at maturity.
The following table identifies the Company's obligations under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(a) - The Revenue Sharing Fee is currently capped at $19 million as of December 31, 2021. The timing of future remaining payments in connection with the Revenue Sharing Fee will vary and will be based on the Company's net sales of OC-01, as defined in the Credit Agreement, through August 2027, the maturity of the Credit Agreement.
Lease Obligations
In August 2021, the Company entered into a lease agreement for office space in Boston, Massachusetts for a five-year term beginning on December 3, 2021 and ending on November 30, 2026. Total future minimum lease payments under this lease are $2.7 million as of December 31, 2021 with the first lease payment made on December 1, 2021.
In February 2021, the Company entered into a lease agreement for laboratory and office space in New Jersey for a three-year term beginning on March 1, 2021 and ending on February 29, 2024. Total future minimum lease payments under this agreement are $0.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
Purchase Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has non-cancelable commitments for the purchase of raw materials, packaging, and product manufacturing costs of approximately $9.0 million for the year ending December 31, 2022. No purchase commitments have been made beyond year 2022.
Manufacturing and Supply Commitments
In July 2021, the Company entered into a manufacturing and supply agreement with a CMO to manufacture and supply TYRVAYA Nasal Spray for an initial term of three years. Under this agreement, the Company is to pay a minimum capacity reservation fee in the amount of $2.5 million during each of the years ending December 31, 2021, 2022 and 2023. The minimum capacity reservation fee is subject to potential future credit allowances based upon the prior year's manufacturing production, as provided for in the agreement. The Company paid the $2.5 million minimum capacity reservation fee during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
The Company's financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the application of appropriate technical accounting principles and guidance as well as the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported revenues earned and
expenses incurred during the reporting periods. These estimates are based on the Company's historical experience and on various other factors that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The Company's significant accounting policies are summarized in Item 15 - Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the financial statements. The Company identifies its most critical accounting policies as those that are the most pervasive and important to the portrayal of the Company's financial position and results of operations, and that require the most difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments by management regarding estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The future effects of the SARS-CoV-2 virus pandemic on the Company's results of operations, cash flows, and financial position are unclear, however the Company believes it has used reasonable estimates and assumptions in preparing its financial statements. The Company's critical accounting policies include revenue recognition, (including gross to net revenue deductions, as described below), fair value measurements, stock-based compensation, and income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue - The Company recognizes revenue based on transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue is recognized when the Company transfers control of a good or service to the customer in an amount that reflects the transaction price allocated to the distinct goods or services.
U.S. GAAP provides a five-step model for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers:
1.Identify the contract with the customer
2.Identify the performance obligations within the contract
3.Determine the transaction price
4.Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations
5.Recognize revenue when (or as) the performance obligations are satisfied
The Company entered into a third-party logistics distribution agreement (the 3PL Agreement) to engage a logistics distribution agent (the 3PL Agent) to distribute the Company’s products to its customers. The 3PL Agent provides services to the Company that include storage, distribution, processing product returns, customer service support, logistics support, electronic data interface and system access support. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of the product to the customer.
During the second half of 2021, the Company applied for mandatory distribution licenses that some states require in order for the Company to sell its product throughout the U.S. In order for the Company to execute sales in the U.S. prior to obtaining such licenses, the Company and an affiliate of the 3PL Agent (the Title Company) entered into a Title Model Addendum (the Addendum) to the 3PL Agreement so that the Title Company may purchase and take title to the product and sell the product to the wholesale distributors who have contracted to purchase the product from the Company. Although under the Addendum the Title Company takes title to the product, the economic substance of the transaction provides that the Title Company does not possess the risk of loss or participate in the significant risks and rewards of ownership of the product or have the ability to control, direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the product. Accordingly, the Company does not recognize revenue on the transfer of the goods until the goods are sold from the Title Company to the wholesalers.
In November 2021, the Company obtained all of the necessary state distribution licenses to sell its products throughout the U.S. and, after a customary period of notice to the Title Company, intends to cease using the Addendum process in the first quarter of 2022.
Product Revenue and Gross to Net Deductions -The Company generally sells products to distributors at wholesale acquisition cost (WAC) subject to gross to net (GTN) deductions. The WAC charged to customers is considered fixed consideration as the WAC is a fixed price that is readily determinable on the invoice to distributors. The Company applies the practical expedient allowed under the ASC 606 "Revenue from Contracts with Customers" and accounts for shipping and handling costs as fulfillment activities which are recorded as operating expenses in the Company's statements of operations and comprehensive loss. GTN deductions are considered variable consideration which refer to pricing adjustments from the gross price or the WAC charged to customers to the net sales recognized. These GTN deductions are recognized within the same period as gross sales are recorded, and the Company has determined these items to be variable consideration that will require estimation
at the time of sale. The following are the typical GTN deductions the Company applies to the sales price at the time of the sale of its product:
Prompt Pay Discount - The Company offers cash discounts to its distributors, as an incentive for prompt payment. The Company accounts for cash discounts by reducing accounts receivable by the prompt pay discount amount.
Chargebacks - The Company participates in programs with government entities, the most significant of which are the U.S. Department of Defense and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, and other parties, including covered entities under the 340B Drug Pricing Program, whereby pricing on products is extended below wholesaler list price to participating entities. These entities purchase products through wholesalers at the lower program price and the wholesalers then charge the Company the difference between their acquisition cost and the lower program price. The Company records chargebacks as a reduction to the accounts receivable account on the Company's balance sheet.
Product Returns - Estimated returns for products are determined after considering information provided by external sources, and other factors such as estimated levels of inventory in the distribution channel and projected demand, introductions of generic products, and introductions of competitive new products. The estimated amount for product returns is included in current liabilities on the Company's balance sheet
Distribution Service Fees - The Company records service fees paid to its wholesaler customers for distribution and inventory management services as a reduction to revenue. The Company accrues estimated service fees based on contracted terms. Accrued service fees are recorded as a reduction to the accounts receivable account on the Company's balance sheet.
Bridge Offer and Co-Pay Offer - The Company established patient support programs to help offset patients’ out of pocket costs. The Bridge Offer program is for patients who are commercially insured and waiting on coverage; The Co-Pay Offer program is for patients who are commercially insured with coverage. The Company’s patient support programs are administered by a third-party copay vendor, which generates GTN deductions in the form of pharmacy redemptions. The estimated cost of pharmacy redemptions is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the Company's balance sheet. Any prepayments by the Company to the vendor are included in prepaid expenses on the Company's balance sheet.
Managed Care and Medicare Part D Rebates - These rebates represent programs to lower the overall cost of prescription drugs of covered patients and are based on contracted discount rates and administration fees. The rebates are amounts owed after the final dispensing of the product by a pharmacy to a benefit plan participant. The rebates are paid by the Company on a monthly or quarterly basis to managed care organizations and pharmacy benefit managers. The estimated accrual is included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the Company’s balance sheet.
Various Government Rebates - The Company participates in certain federal and state government rebate programs such as Medicaid and Tricare. These programs require the Company to enter into, and have in effect, a national rebate agreement with the U.S. Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services in exchange for coverage of the Company’s product. These rebates are paid by the Company on a quarterly basis based on actual claims. The Company also pays 70% of the cost of the product, when the Medicare Part D beneficiaries are in the coverage gap. The estimated amount of unpaid or unbilled Medicaid, Tricare and Coverage Gap rebates are included in accrued expenses and other current liabilities on the Company's balance sheet.
Fair Value Measurements
Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Non-Recurring Basis - In connection with entering into the License Agreement with Ji Xing, the Company received senior common shares of Ji Xing (Investment), which were accounted for as a non-marketable equity investment. The Investment requires management to make assumptions and apply judgement to estimate fair value, and is classified within Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy because the fair value was determined based on a market approach in which one or more significant inputs to the valuation model are unobservable. The Investment is subject to non-recurring fair value measurements for the evaluation of potential impairment losses and observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of Ji Xing.
Long-term Debt and Loan Commitments - The Company entered into the Credit Agreement for a term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $125 million. This credit facility provides loan commitments for multiple tranches of loans available to be drawn at various time intervals and based on certain conditions precedent. Loans that are drawn under the credit facility contain several financial and non-financial covenants, which if not met, may trigger mandatory early redemptions of the loans. In addition, the debt instruments contain contingent and non-contingent fees such as an early prepayment fee, an exit fee, a buyout amount and a revenue sharing fee plus several embedded features that may meet the criteria to be accounted for as
embedded derivatives (see paragraph below). The bifurcation of certain embedded derivatives creates a discount on the carrying amount of the long-term debt, which together with an original issue discount and deferred financing costs, is amortized via the effective interest method under ASC 835-30, Interest - Imputation of Interest. The many embedded features and requirements for the payments of contingent and/ or non-contingent fees included in the debt instruments requires significant judgment and assessments of the facts and circumstances in order to properly account for the debt instruments.
Embedded Derivative - The Company is required to make quarterly payments to OrbiMed in the form of a revenue sharing fee, which was evaluated under ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging, and determined to be an embedded derivative liability. In addition, the Company has the right to optionally prepay, in whole or in part, the outstanding principal amount of the term loan in an amount equal to the outstanding principal, accrued and unpaid interest, together with other fees and payments required under the term loan. The embedded derivative asset is classified as a Level 3 financial liability in the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2021. The valuation method for the embedded derivative includes certain unobservable Level 3 inputs including revenue projections, probability and timing of future cash flows, probability of regulatory approval, discount rates and risk-free rates of interest. The change in fair value due to the remeasurement of the net embedded derivative liability is recorded as other income, net in the Company’s statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company offers stock-based compensation its employees and directors in the form of stock options and restricted stock units (RSUs). In addition, and effective April 1, 2021, the Company established its first offering period under the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP). Stock-based compensation expense related to the rights to exercise stock options and purchase rights issued under the ESPP, is based on the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which is used to measure the fair value of the estimated number of stock options and ESPP awards that are expected to vest. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized using the straight-line method over the vesting period for stock options and over the offering period for ESPP awards.
The determination of the grant date fair value of stock options and shares purchased under the ESPP is affected by the estimated fair value of our common stock as well as other assumptions and judgments, which are estimated as follows:
•Expected term. The expected term for stock options is calculated using the simplified method which is used when there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. The expected term for ESPP is the beginning of the offering period to the end of each offering period.
•Expected volatility. As the Company has a limited trading history of its common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the third quartile of the range of the observed volatilities for comparable publicly traded biotechnology and pharmaceutical related companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants or in the case of ESPP awards, over the period equal to the length of the offering period. The comparable companies are chosen based on industry, stage of development, size and financial leverage of potential comparable companies.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield currently available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a remaining term equivalent to the expected term of the term of the stock award or the ESPP offering period.
•Expected dividend rate. The Company has not paid and does not anticipate paying any dividends in the near future. Accordingly, the Company has estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, using the asset and liability method whereby deferred tax asset and liability amounts are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. The differences are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that are in effect for the year in which they are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established where necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
The Company assesses all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination that the position meets the more-likely-than-not threshold and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and the Company will determine whether the factors underlying the more-likely-than-not threshold assertion have changed and the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available. The Company's policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to the underpayment of income taxes as a component of income tax expense or benefit. To date, there have been no interest or penalties charged in relation to unrecognized tax benefits.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (JOBS Act) permits an “emerging growth company” such as the Company to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, the Company has chosen to irrevocably “opt out” of such extended transition period, and as a result, it will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. The Company intends to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.
The Company will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of its first fiscal year in which it has total annual revenues of more than $1.07 billion; (2) the date it qualifies as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which it has issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of its initial public offering.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recently issued accounting guidance applicable to the Company, see Item 15 - Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Financial Statements.