ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 16, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We have not selected any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt, or a combination of the foregoing.
Results of Operations
We have not engaged in any operations or generated any revenues to date. All activity for the period from March 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to the Company’s formation and the initial public offering, which is described below, and, since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, a search for a business combination candidate. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until the completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. Until the completion of our initial business combination, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company, including legal, financial reporting, accounting, and auditing compliance expenses, as well as for due diligence and other expenses related to locating an initial business combination target and consummating the initial business combination.
For the period from March 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of approximately $381,894 which consisted of approximately $158,906 of franchise tax expenses, approximately $224,171 of formation and operational costs, net of a gain of $1,183 on investments held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $281,521,183 in cash currently held in the Trust Account and $2,579,658 in cash that can be used for working capital (not taking into account tax obligations of approximately $1,000 that may be paid using investment income earned from the Trust Account).
Prior to the consummation of the Public Offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and the loan proceeds of $110,000 from the Note from our Sponsor. We fully repaid the Note on December 6, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account.
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. We will be using these funds to pay existing accounts payable, identify and evaluate prospective initial Business Combination candidates, perform due diligence on prospective Business Combination candidates, pay travel expenditures, select the target business to merge with or acquire, and structure, negotiate, and consummate the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On March 31, 2021, the Sponsor received 5,750,000 of the Company’s Class B common stock (the “Founder Shares”) for a payment of $25,000 made on May 4, 2021. On November 30, 2021, the Company effected a 1.2:1 stock split for each outstanding share of Class B common stock, resulting in the Sponsor holding an aggregate number of 6,900,000 Founder Shares. As of December 3, 2021, there was 6,900,000 shares of Class B common stock issued and outstanding, of which 6,440,000 are held by our Sponsor and the remaining 460,000 are held by certain funds and accounts managed by BlackRock, Inc. (collectively referred to herein as “BlackRock”). The number of Founder Shares outstanding was determined based on the Company’s expectation that the total size of the Public Offering would be a maximum of 27,600,000 Units if the underwriters’ over-allotment option was exercised in full, and therefore, that the Founder Shares would represent 20% of the outstanding shares after the Public Offering. The underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full on December 3, 2021.
The Sponsor and Blackrock agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign, or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (ii) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, or other similar transaction after the initial Business Combination that results in all of the stockholders having the right to exchange their Class A common stock for cash, securities, or other property; except to certain permitted transferees and under certain circumstances. Any permitted transferees will be subject to the same restrictions and other agreements with respect to any Founder Shares. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if (1) the closing price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations, and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination or (2) if we consummate a transaction after the initial Business Combination which results in the stockholders having the right to exchange their shares for cash, securities, or other property, the Founder Shares will be released from the lock-up.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 15,226,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor and Blackrock, generating proceeds of $15,226,000.
Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor was added to the proceeds from the Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
The purchasers of the Private Placement Warrants agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign, or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants (except to permitted transferees) until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On March 31, 2021, the Company, as maker, issued an unsecured promissory note to our Sponsor (the “Promissory Note”), pursuant to which the Company may borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $300,000. The Promissory Note was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) March 31, 2022 or (ii) the consummation of the Public Offering. In 2021, the Company borrowed $110,000 on this note, which was subsequently repaid from the proceeds of the Public Offering on December 6, 2021.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans could be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lenders’ discretion, up to $1.5 million of the Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Pursuant to the terms of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation and the Trust Agreement entered into between us and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, in order to extend the time available for us to consummate our initial business combination, our Sponsor or its affiliates or designees, upon five days advance notice to us prior to the applicable deadline, must deposit into the Trust Account $2,760,000 ($0.10 per Public Share) on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline for each of the available three month extensions. A total deposit of $5,520,000 must be deposited to reach an aggregate business combination period of 24 months and the deposit may be made in cash or in the form of a non-interest bearing, unsecured promissory notes (“Extension Promissory Notes”). Neither our Sponsor nor its affiliates or designees is required to fund the initial extension, and if the initial extension is funded, neither our Sponsor nor its affiliates or designees is required to fund the second extension. The Extension Promissory Notes may be converted into warrants to purchase our Class A common stock, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Extension Promissory Notes issued that are not converted to warrants will be non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of our initial business combination. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay the Extension Promissory Notes out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. If we do not complete a business combination, we will not repay the Extension Promissory Notes. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Extension Promissory Notes, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to Extension Promissory Notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any (and any shares of common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares), were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Administrative Services Agreement
We entered into an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team. Upon completion of the Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. We incurred $10,000 of such fees for the period ending December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Class A common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our outstanding Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, 27,600,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Share of Common Stock
The Company has two classes of common stock, Class A v and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding during the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 29,026,000, of the Company’s Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted net loss per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period from March 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Re-measurement associated with the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we have determined to rely on the other exemptions from reporting requirements contained in the JOBS Act. As an “emerging growth company” we have chosen to rely on exemptions so that we are not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)” (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for the Company on January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements.