ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on October 21, 2020. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a Business Combination. Our sponsor is Pioneer Merger Sponsor LLC, a Cayman limited liability company.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 7, 2021. On January 12, 2021, we consummated its Initial Public Offering of 40,250,000 Units, including 5,250,000 Over-Allotment Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $402.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $22.8 million, of which approximately $14.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 6,700,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $10.1 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, management agreed that an amount equal to at least $10.00 per Unit sold in the Initial Public Offering, including the proceeds of the Private Placement Warrants, will be held in the Trust Account, located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to the Company to pay its taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our activity from October 21, 2020 through December 31, 2021, includes preparation for our Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance) as well as expenses for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $8.5 million, which consisted of by approximately $16.5 million change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $39,000 income from investments held in Trust Account offset by approximately $737,000 loss on excess of fair value over cash received for Private Placement warrants, $1.1 million in offering costs associated with derivative liabilities and approximately $6.3 million in general and administrative expenses.
For the period from October 21, 2020 through December 31, 2021, we had a loss of approximately $35,012 which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Proposed Business Combination and Termination
On May 26, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement, by and among us, Pioneer SPAC Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Pioneer Merger Sub”), and Acorns Grow Incorporated, a Delaware corporation (“Acorns”). On January 15, 2022, the Company and Pioneer Merger Sub became party to that certain Termination Fee Agreement (the “Termination Fee Agreement”), dated as of January 3, 2022, by and between the Sponsor and Acorns. Pursuant to the Termination Fee Agreement, the parties agreed to mutually terminate the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of May 26, 2021 (as amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among us, Acorns and Pioneer Merger Sub, subject to the conditions set forth in the Termination Fee Agreement.
The Termination Fee Agreement provides for deferred payments from Acorns to us. Acorns is required to pay an aggregate sum of $17,500,000 to us in monthly payments through December 15, 2022. In March 2022, we received payments under the Termination Fee Agreement so that a total of $17,500,000 has been paid pursuant to the Termination Fee Agreement. If we (i) have not consummated an initial business combination on or before December 15, 2022 and (ii) determine to redeem its public shares (and does not withdraw such determination), Acorns is required to pay to us $15,000,000 no later than December 22, 2022.
We intend to continue our search for an initial Business Combination. As previously disclosed, if we do not complete an initial Business Combination, any funds remaining, after paying expenses including those incurred in our search for a Business Combination, from payments under the Termination Fee Agreement, are expected to remain outside of the trust account and not be part of liquidating distributions with respect to the pubic shares. See “Item 1. Business -- Redemption of Public Shares and Liquidation If No Initial Business Combination.”
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $14,000 in cash and a working capital deficit of approximately $4.9 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover for certain offering costs in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, the loans of approximately $141,000 prior to the Initial Public Offering and $375,000 from our Sponsor pursuant to a second promissory note of up to $500,000 available, and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We repaid the first promissory note of approximately $141,000 in full on January 15, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $375,000 is outstanding from our Sponsor’s second promissory note, and $125,000 remains available. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan. In addition, the Termination Fee Agreement provides for deferred payments from Acorns to us in an aggregate sum of $17.5 million in monthly payments through December 15, 2022. In March 2022, we received payments under the Termination Fee Agreement so that a total of $17,500,000 has been paid pursuant to the Termination Fee Agreement.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” we have until January 12, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 12, 2023. Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriter a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 5,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 12, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option.
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $8.1 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $14.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income on investments held in the Trust Account in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features
that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially and subsequently measured at fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model as of the reporting date. The fair value of the Public Warrants has subsequently been determined using listed prices in an active market for such warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, 40,250,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheet. There were no Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding at December 31, 2020.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares were charged to the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We classify deferred underwriting commissions as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, "Earnings Per Share." The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 20,116,667 shares of ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. The number of weighted average Class B ordinary shares for calculating basic net income (loss) per ordinary share was reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 1,312,500 Class B ordinary shares that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or part by the underwriters.
Since the contingency was satisfied as of December 31, 2021, the Company included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the consolidated financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.