Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.” We have acquired and initiated a number of businesses during the periods presented and addressed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Our financial statements include the results of operations of those businesses from the date acquired or when they commenced operations. Our period to period results of operations may vary depending on the dates of acquisitions or disposals.
Overview
We are a diversified international transportation services company and one of the world's premier automotive and commercial truck retailers. We operate dealerships principally in the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, Italy, and Japan, and we are one of the largest retailers of commercial trucks in North America for Freightliner. We also distribute and retail commercial vehicles, diesel and gas engines, power systems, and related parts and services principally in Australia and New Zealand. Additionally, we own 28.9% of Penske Transportation Solutions, a business that manages a fleet of over 360,000 vehicles providing innovative transportation, supply chain, and technology solutions to North American fleets. We employ nearly 25,000 people worldwide.
COVID-19 Disclosure - The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic across the globe adversely impacted each of our markets and the global economy, leading to disruptions in our business. While the COVID-19 pandemic continued in all of our markets, we have experienced improved business conditions and improved financial results primarily driven by our cost cutting measures and increased gross profit on vehicles sold due in part to increased demand, coupled with lower inventory due to production shortages experienced by our vehicle manufacturers.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the U.K. reinstated shelter-in-place orders which required our dealership showrooms to remain closed during the first quarter of 2021. These shelter-in-place orders largely expired on April 12, 2021, and most of the remaining restrictions expired on July 19, 2021. We continued to conduct sales through our online tools, which allowed vehicle sales without showroom access. If shelter-in-place orders are re-enacted or other restrictions are placed on our business, we may be adversely impacted.
The full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business cannot be predicted at this time due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the outbreak, travel restrictions, business closures, the effectiveness of actions taken to contain the disease, the distribution rate and acceptance rate of a vaccine, the effect of government assistance programs, production levels from our manufacturing partners, and other unintended consequences. This impact could include changes in customer demand, our relationship with, and the financial and operational capacities of, vehicle manufacturers, captive finance companies and other suppliers, workforce availability, risks associated with our indebtedness (including available borrowing capacity, compliance with financial covenants and ability to refinance or repay indebtedness on favorable terms), the adequacy of our cash flow and earnings and other conditions which may affect our liquidity, and disruptions to our technology network and other critical systems, including our dealer management systems and software or other facilities or equipment. We believe that business disruption relating to the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to negatively impact the global economy and may affect our businesses as outlined above, or in other manners including global supply chain disruptions resulting in lower levels of vehicles and parts available for sale, all of which would adversely impact our business and results of operations.
Business Overview
In 2021, our business generated $25.6 billion in total revenue, which is comprised of approximately $22.5 billion from retail automotive dealerships, $2.5 billion from retail commercial truck dealerships, and $575.7 million from commercial vehicle distribution operations. We generated $4.4 billion in gross profit, which is comprised of $3.9 billion from retail automotive dealerships, $416.9 million from retail commercial truck dealerships, and $153.7 million from commercial vehicle distribution operations.
Retail Automotive. We are one of the largest global automotive retailers as measured by the $22.5 billion in total retail automotive dealership revenue we generated in 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we operated 320 retail automotive franchised dealerships, of which 146 are located in the U.S. and 174 are located outside of the U.S. The franchised dealerships outside the U.S. are located primarily in the U.K. As described below, we also operate 23 used vehicle dealerships in the U.S. and U.K. under the CarShop brand. Through these franchised and used vehicle dealerships, we retailed and wholesaled more than 553,000 vehicles in 2021. We are diversified geographically with 58% of our total retail automotive dealership revenues in 2021 generated in the U.S. and Puerto Rico and 42% generated outside the U.S. We offer over 35 vehicle brands with 71% of our retail automotive franchised dealership revenue in 2021 generated from premium brands, such as Audi, BMW, Land Rover, Mercedes-Benz, and Porsche. Each of our franchised dealerships offers a wide selection of new and used vehicles for sale. In addition to selling new and used vehicles, we generate higher-margin revenue at each of our dealerships through maintenance and repair services, the sale and placement of third-party finance and insurance products, third-party extended service and maintenance contracts, and replacement and aftermarket automotive products. We operate our franchised dealerships under franchise agreements with a number of automotive manufacturers and distributors that are subject to certain rights and restrictions typical of the industry.
As of December 31, 2021, we operated 23 used vehicle dealerships in the U.S. and the U.K. which retail and wholesale used vehicles under a one price, “no-haggle” methodology under the CarShop brand. Our operations consist of eight retail dealerships in the U.S. and 15 retail dealerships and a vehicle preparation center in the U.K. During 2021, we opened four CarShop dealerships in the U.K. and two CarShop dealerships in the U.S., representing a 35% increase in locations compared to 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our used vehicle dealerships retailed 63,403 units and generated $1.5 billion in revenue. Retail automotive dealerships represented 88.1% of our total revenues and 87.2% of our total gross profit in 2021.
Retail Commercial Truck Dealership. We operate Premier Truck Group (“PTG”), a heavy- and medium-duty truck dealership group offering primarily Freightliner and Western Star trucks (both Daimler brands) with locations in Texas, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Georgia, Utah, Idaho, Kansas, Missouri, Oregon, and Canada. In 2021, we acquired Kansas City
Freightliner (“KCFL”), a retailer of heavy- and medium-duty commercial trucks in Kansas and Missouri. KCFL added four full-service dealerships, four parts and service centers, and two collision centers to PTG’s operations. We also acquired McCoy Freightliner ("McCoy"), a retailer of heavy- and medium-duty commercial trucks in Oregon. McCoy adds two full-service dealerships and a remarketing center to PTG's existing operations. As of December 31, 2021, PTG operated 37 locations which sell new and used trucks, parts and service, and collision repair services. This business represented 9.6% of our total revenues and 9.4% of our total gross profit in 2021.
Penske Australia. Penske Australia is the exclusive importer and distributor of Western Star heavy-duty trucks (a Daimler Truck brand), MAN heavy- and medium-duty trucks and buses (a VW Group brand), and Dennis Eagle refuse collection vehicles, together with associated parts, across Australia, New Zealand, and portions of the Pacific. In most of these same markets, we are also a leading distributor of diesel and gas engines and power systems, principally representing MTU (a Rolls-Royce solution), Detroit Diesel, Allison Transmission, and Bergen Engines. Penske Australia offers products across the on- and off-highway markets, including in the mining, power generation, defense, marine, rail, and construction sectors and supports full parts and aftersales service through a network of branches, field service locations, and dealers across the region. These businesses represented 2.3% of our total revenues and 3.4% of our total gross profit in 2021.
Penske Transportation Solutions. We hold a 28.9% ownership interest in Penske Truck Leasing Co., L.P (“PTL”). PTL is owned 41.1% by Penske Corporation, 28.9% by us, and 30.0% by Mitsui & Co., Ltd. (“Mitsui”). We account for our investment in PTL under the equity method, and we therefore record our share of PTL’s earnings on our statements of income under the caption “Equity in earnings of affiliates,” which also includes the results of our other equity method investments. Penske Transportation Solutions (“PTS”) is the universal brand name for PTL’s various business lines through which it is capable of meeting customers’ needs across the supply chain with a broad product offering that includes full-service truck leasing, truck rental, and contract maintenance along with logistic services, such as dedicated contract carriage, distribution center management, transportation management, lead logistics provider services, and dry van truckload carrier services. We recorded $365.8 million in equity earnings from this investment in 2021.
Outlook
Please see “Outlook” in Part I, Item 1 for a discussion of our outlook in our markets.
Operating Overview
Automotive and commercial truck dealerships represent over 95% and 75% of our revenue and our earnings before taxes, respectively. Income from our PTS investment represents over 20% of our earnings before taxes. New and used vehicle revenues typically include sales to retail customers, fleet customers, and leasing companies providing consumer leasing. We generate finance and insurance revenues from sales of third-party extended service contracts, sales of third-party insurance policies, commissions relating to the sale of finance and lease contracts to third parties, and the sales of certain other products. Service and parts revenues include fees paid by customers for repair, maintenance and collision services, and the sale of replacement parts and other aftermarket accessories as well as warranty repairs that are reimbursed directly by various vehicle manufacturers.
Our gross profit tends to vary with the mix of revenues we derive from the sale of new vehicles, used vehicles, finance and insurance products, and service and parts transactions. Our gross profit varies across product lines with vehicle sales usually resulting in lower gross profit margins and our other revenues resulting in higher gross profit margins. Factors such as inventory and vehicle availability, customer demand, consumer confidence, unemployment, general economic conditions, seasonality, weather, credit availability, fuel prices, and manufacturers’ advertising and incentives also impact the mix of our revenues and therefore, influence our gross profit margin.
The results of our commercial vehicle distribution business in Australia and New Zealand are principally driven by the number and types of products and vehicles ordered by our customers.
Aggregate revenue and gross profit increased $5,110.8 million, or 25.0%, and $1,256.3 million, or 39.5%, respectively, during 2021 compared to 2020.
As exchange rates fluctuate, our revenue and results of operations as reported in U.S. Dollars fluctuate. For example, if the British Pound were to weaken against the U.S. Dollar, our U.K. results of operations would translate into less U.S. Dollar reported results. Foreign currency average rate fluctuations increased revenue and gross profit by $754.2 million and $118.5 million, respectively, in 2021. Foreign currency average rate fluctuations increased earnings per share from
continuing operations by approximately $0.24 per share in 2021. Excluding the impact of foreign currency average rate fluctuations, revenue and gross profit increased 21.3% and 35.7%, respectively, in 2021.
Our selling expenses consist of advertising and compensation for sales personnel, including commissions and related bonuses. General and administrative expenses include compensation for administration, finance, legal and general management personnel, rent, insurance, utilities, and other expenses. As the majority of our selling expenses are variable and a significant portion of our general and administrative expenses are subject to our control, we believe our expenses can be adjusted over time to reflect economic trends.
Equity in earnings of affiliates principally represents our share of the earnings from PTS, along with our investments in joint ventures and other non-consolidated investments.
Floor plan interest expense relates to financing incurred in connection with the acquisition of new and used vehicle inventories that are secured by those vehicles. Other interest expense consists of interest charges on all of our interest-bearing debt, other than interest relating to floor plan financing, and includes interest relating to our retail commercial truck dealership and commercial vehicle distribution operations. The cost of our variable rate indebtedness is based on the prime rate, defined London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), the Bank of England Base Rate, the Finance House Base Rate, the Euro Interbank Offered Rate, the Canadian Prime Rate, the Tokyo Interbank Offered Rate, the Australian Bank Bill Swap Rate, or the New Zealand Bank Bill Benchmark Rate.
Regulatory authorities in the U.S. have announced their intention to stop compelling banks to submit rates for the calculation of LIBOR, ending after June 30, 2023 for the LIBOR tenors that are relevant to our business. Our senior secured revolving credit facility in the U.S. and many of our floorplan arrangements, utilize LIBOR as a benchmark for calculating the applicable interest rate, although some of our floorplan arrangements have already transitioned to utilizing an alternative benchmark rate. Our U.K. credit agreement transitioned from LIBOR to the Sterling Overnight Index Average as of December 31, 2021. We cannot predict the effect of the potential changes to or elimination of LIBOR or the establishment and use of alternative rates or benchmarks and the corresponding effects on our cost of capital.
The future success of our business is dependent upon, among other things, general economic and industry conditions, including the effect of COVID-19 on the global economy; the distribution rate and acceptance of vaccines for COVID-19; our ability to react effectively to changing business conditions in light of the COVID-19 pandemic; our ability to consummate and integrate acquisitions; the level of vehicle sales in the markets where we operate; our ability to obtain vehicles and parts from our manufacturers, especially in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and global shortages in microchip availability or other vehicle components; changes in the retail model either from direct sales by manufacturers, sales by online competitors, or from the expansion of electric vehicles; our ability to realize returns on our significant capital investment in new and upgraded dealership facilities; our ability to navigate a rapidly changing automotive and truck landscape; the success of our distribution of commercial vehicles, engines, and power systems; and the return realized from our investments in various joint ventures and other non-consolidated investments. See Item 1A. Risk Factors above and Forward-Looking Statements below.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires the application of accounting policies that often involve making estimates and employing judgments. Such judgments influence the assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses recognized in our financial statements. Management, on an ongoing basis, reviews these estimates and assumptions. Management may determine that modifications in assumptions and estimates are required, which may result in a material change in our results of operations or financial position.
The following are the accounting policies applied in the preparation of our financial statements that management believes are most dependent upon the use of estimates and assumptions.
Revenue Recognition
Dealership Vehicle, Parts, and Service Sales. We record revenue for vehicle sales at a point in time when vehicles are delivered, which is when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership, and control are considered passed to the customer. We record revenue for vehicle service and collision work over time as work is completed and when parts are delivered to our customers. Sales promotions that we offer to customers are accounted for as a reduction of revenues at the time of sale. Rebates and other incentives offered directly to us by manufacturers are recognized as a reduction of cost of sales. Reimbursements of qualified advertising expenses are treated as a reduction of selling, general, and administrative
expenses. The amounts received under certain manufacturer rebate and incentive programs are based on the attainment of program objectives, and such earnings are recognized either upon the sale of the vehicle for which the award was received or upon attainment of the particular program goals if not associated with individual vehicles. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are recorded on a net basis (excluded from revenue). During 2021, 2020, and 2019, we earned $635.7 million, $588.7 million, and $698.4 million, respectively, of rebates, incentives, and reimbursements from manufacturers, of which $620.3 million, $575.4 million, and $679.2 million, respectively, was recorded as a reduction of cost of sales. The remaining $15.4 million, $13.3 million, and $19.2 million was recorded as a reduction of selling, general, and administrative expenses during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Dealership Finance and Insurance Sales. Subsequent to the sale of a vehicle to a customer, we sell installment sale contracts to various financial institutions on a non-recourse basis (with specified exceptions) to mitigate the risk of default. We receive a commission from the lender equal to either the difference between the interest rate charged to the customer and the interest rate set by the financing institution or a flat fee. We also receive commissions for facilitating the sale of various products to customers, including guaranteed vehicle protection insurance, vehicle theft protection, and extended service contracts. These commissions are recorded as revenue at a point in time when the customer enters into the contract. Payment is typically due and collected within 30 days subsequent to the execution of the contract with the customer. In the case of finance contracts, a customer may prepay or fail to pay their contract, thereby terminating the contract. Customers may also terminate extended service contracts and other insurance products, which are fully paid at purchase, and become eligible for refunds of unused premiums. In these circumstances, a portion of the commissions we received may be charged back based on the terms of the contracts. The revenue we record relating to these transactions is net of an estimate of the amount of chargebacks we will be required to pay. Our estimate is based upon our historical experience with similar contracts, including the impact of refinance and default rates on retail finance contracts and cancellation rates on extended service contracts and other insurance products. Aggregate reserves relating to chargeback activity were $33.7 million and $28.7 million as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Commercial Vehicle Distribution. We record revenue from the distribution of vehicles, engines, and other products at a point in time when delivered, which is when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership, and control are considered passed to the customer. We record revenue for service or repair work over time as work is completed and when parts are delivered to our customers. For our long-term power generation contracts, we record revenue over time as services are provided in accordance with contract milestones.
Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 2 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail on revenue recognition.
Impairment Testing
Other indefinite-lived intangible assets are assessed for impairment annually on October 1 and upon the occurrence of an indicator of impairment through a comparison of its carrying amount and estimated fair value. These indefinite-lived intangible assets relate to franchise agreements with vehicle manufacturers and distributors, which represent the estimated value of franchises acquired in business combinations, and distribution agreements with commercial vehicle manufacturers and other manufacturers, which represent the estimated value for distribution rights acquired in business combinations. An indicator of impairment exists if the carrying value exceeds its estimated fair value, and an impairment loss may be recognized up to that excess. The fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow approach, which includes assumptions about revenue and profitability growth, profit margins, and the cost of capital. We also evaluate in connection with the annual impairment testing whether events and circumstances continue to support our assessment that the other indefinite-lived intangible assets continue to have an indefinite life.
Goodwill impairment is assessed at the reporting unit level annually on October 1 and upon the occurrence of an indicator of impairment. Our operations are organized by management into operating segments by line of business and geography. We have determined that we have four reportable segments as defined in generally accepted accounting principles for segment reporting: (i) Retail Automotive, consisting of our retail automotive dealership operations; (ii) Retail Commercial Truck, consisting of our retail commercial truck dealership operations in the U.S. and Canada; (iii) Other, consisting of our commercial vehicle and power systems distribution operations; and (iv) Non-Automotive Investments, consisting of our equity method investments in non-automotive operations which includes our investment in PTS and other various investments. We have determined that the dealerships in each of our operating segments within the Retail Automotive reportable segment are components that are aggregated into six reporting units for the purpose of goodwill impairment testing as they (A) have similar economic characteristics (all are automotive dealerships having similar margins), (B) offer similar products and services (all sell new and/or used vehicles, service, parts, and third-party finance and insurance products), (C) have similar target markets and customers (generally individuals), and (D) have similar
distribution and marketing practices (all distribute products and services through dealership facilities that market to customers in similar fashions). The reporting units are Eastern, Central, and Western United States, Used Vehicle Dealerships United States, International, and Used Vehicle Dealerships International. Our Retail Commercial Truck reportable segment has been determined to represent one operating segment and reporting unit. The goodwill included in our Other reportable segment relates primarily to our commercial vehicle distribution operating segment. There is no goodwill recorded in our Non-Automotive Investments reportable segment.
For our Retail Automotive, Retail Commercial Truck, and Other reporting units, we prepared a qualitative assessment of the carrying value of goodwill using the criteria in ASC 350-20-35-3 to determine whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value. If it were determined through the qualitative assessment that a reporting unit’s fair value is more likely than not greater than its carrying value, additional analysis would be unnecessary. During 2021, we concluded that for each of our reporting units their fair values were more likely than not greater than their carrying values. If additional impairment testing was necessary, we would have estimated the fair value of our reporting units using an “income” valuation approach. The “income” valuation approach estimates our enterprise value using a net present value model, which discounts projected free cash flows of our business using the weighted average cost of capital as the discount rate. We would also have validated the fair value for each reporting unit using the income approach by calculating a cash earnings multiple and determining whether the multiple was reasonable compared to recent market transactions completed by the Company or in the industry. As part of that assessment, we would also have reconciled the estimated aggregate fair values of our reporting units to our market capitalization. We believe this reconciliation process is consistent with a market participant perspective. This consideration would also include a control premium that represents the estimated amount an investor would pay for our equity securities to obtain a controlling interest and other significant assumptions, including revenue and profitability growth, franchise profit margins, residual values, and the cost of capital.
Investments
We account for each of our investments under the equity method, pursuant to which we record our proportionate share of the investee’s income each period. The net book value of our investments was $1,688.1 million and $1,500.3 million as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, including $1,643.1 million and $1,419.2 million relating to PTS as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. We currently hold a 28.9% ownership interest in PTS.
Investments for which there is not a liquid, actively traded market are reviewed periodically by management for indicators of impairment. If an indicator of impairment is identified, management estimates the fair value of the investment using a discounted cash flow approach, which includes assumptions relating to revenue and profitability growth, profit margins, residual values, and our cost of capital. Declines in investment values that are deemed to be other than temporary may result in an impairment charge reducing the investments’ carrying value to fair value.
Self-Insurance
We retain risk relating to certain of our general liability insurance, workers’ compensation insurance, vehicle physical damage insurance, property insurance, employment practices liability insurance, information security risk insurance, directors and officers’ insurance, and employee medical benefits in the U.S. As a result, we are likely to be responsible for a significant portion of the claims and losses incurred under these programs. The amount of risk we retain varies by program, and for certain exposures, we either have no insurance or we have pre-determined maximum loss limits for certain individual claims and/or insurance periods. Losses, if any, above the pre-determined loss limits are paid by third-party insurance carriers. Certain insurers have limited available property coverage in response to the natural catastrophes experienced in recent years. Our estimate of future losses is prepared by management using our historical loss experience and industry-based development factors. Aggregate reserves relating to retained risk were $33.5 million and $29.7 million as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Income Taxes
Tax regulations may require items to be included in our tax return at different times than when those items are reflected in our financial statements. Some of the differences are permanent, such as expenses that are not deductible on our tax return, and some are temporary differences, such as the timing of depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that will be used as a tax deduction or credit in our tax return in future years which we have already recorded in our financial statements. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent deductions taken on our tax return that have not yet been recognized as an expense in our financial statements. We establish valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets if the amount of expected future taxable income is not more likely than not to allow for the use of the deduction or credit.
Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 17 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail on our accounting for income taxes, including additional discussion on the enactment of the Act and the resulting impact on our financial statements.
Leases
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Our operating leases primarily consist of land and facilities, including certain dealerships and office space. We also have equipment leases that primarily relate to office and computer equipment, service and shop equipment, company vehicles, and other miscellaneous items. We do not have any material leases, individually or in the aggregate, classified as a finance leasing arrangement.
Operating leases are included in “operating lease right-of-use assets,” “accrued expenses and other current liabilities,” and “long-term operating lease liabilities” on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. Operating lease right-of-use assets and liabilities are recognized at commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Our property leases are generally for an initial period between 5 and 20 years and are typically structured to include renewal options at our election. We include renewal options that we are reasonably certain to exercise in the measurement our lease liabilities and right-of-use assets. As the rate implicit in the lease is generally not readily determinable for our operating leases, the discount rates used to determine the present value of our lease liability are based on our incremental borrowing rate at the lease commencement date and commensurate with the remaining lease term. Our incremental borrowing rate for a lease is the rate of interest we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term for an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 3 and Note 12 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our operating leases.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see the disclosures provided under “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Part II, Item 8, Note 1 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements set forth below which are incorporated by reference herein.
Results of Operations
The following tables present comparative financial data relating to our operating performance in the aggregate and on a “same-store” basis. Dealership results are included in same-store comparisons when we have consolidated the acquired entity during the entirety of both periods being compared. As an example, if a dealership were acquired on January 15, 2019, the results of the acquired entity would be included in annual same-store comparisons beginning with the year ended December 31, 2021, and in quarterly same-store comparisons beginning with the quarter ended June 30, 2020.
The results for 2021 include a tax expense of $10.8 million, or $0.13 per share, related to revaluation of our U.K. deferred tax assets and liabilities due to an increase in the U.K. corporate tax rate from 19% currently to 25%, beginning on April 1, 2023. We also incurred a $17.0 million expense in connection with the redemption of our 5.50% senior subordinated notes due in 2026 during the second quarter of 2021, consisting of a $13.8 million redemption premium and the write-off of $3.2 million of unamortized debt issuance costs, resulting in an after-tax charge of $12.6 million, or $0.16 per share. In addition, we had a loss on investment for the revaluation of the Nicole Group of $9.1 million, or $0.11 per share.
The results for 2020 include a net income tax benefit of $11.4 million, or $0.14 per share, related to the CARES Act and various other U.S. and foreign tax legislation changes. The results for 2020 also include a loss on debt extinguishment of $6.4 million, or $0.08 per share and a gain on the sale of retail automotive dealerships of $3.3 million, or $0.04 per share.
The results for 2021 and 2020 have been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and each of the items mentioned below should be reviewed in light of our discussion under “COVID-19 Disclosure.”
For the discussion and analysis comparing the results of operations for 2019 to 2020, we refer you to Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the 2020 Form 10-K filed on February 19, 2021.
Retail Automotive Dealership New Vehicle Data
(In millions, except unit and per unit amounts)
Units
Retail unit sales of new vehicles increased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to an 18,073 unit, or 10.3%, increase in same-store new retail unit sales. Same-store units increased 15.2% in the U.S. and 1.2% internationally. Overall, new units increased 14.0% in the U.S. and 1.2% internationally. We believe the increase in same-store unit sales is due to a stronger economic outlook, the lifting of lockdown restrictions implemented due to COVID-19, favorable interest rates, and improved levels of consumer confidence when compared to the same period last year at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Revenues
New vehicle retail sales revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $1,730.3 million, or 21.6%, increase in same-store revenues, coupled with a $32.4 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. Excluding $220.2 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store new retail revenue increased 18.9%. The same-store revenue increase is due to the increase in same-store new retail unit sales, which increased revenue by $906.2 million, coupled with a $4,686 per unit increase in comparative average selling prices (including a $1,135 per unit increase attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations), which increased revenue by $824.1 million. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average selling price is due to increased customer demand and a lower supply of new vehicles available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Gross Profit
Retail gross profit from new vehicle sales increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $378.4 million, or 58.4%, increase in same-store gross profit, coupled with a $14.3 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. Excluding $19.5 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store gross profit increased 55.4%. The increase in same-store gross profit is
due to a $1,608 per unit increase in the average gross profit per new vehicle retailed (including a $100 per unit increase attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations), which increased gross profit by $282.8 million, coupled with the increase in same-store new retail unit sales, which increased gross profit by $95.6 million. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average gross profit per unit is attributed to increased customer demand and a lower supply of new vehicles available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Retail Automotive Dealership Used Vehicle Data
(In millions, except unit and per unit amounts)
Units
Retail unit sales of used vehicles increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a 26,918 unit, or 11.7%, increase in same-store used retail unit sales, coupled with a 4,133 unit increase from net dealership acquisitions. Same-store units increased 17.1% in the U.S. and 6.8% internationally. Same-store retail units for our U.S. and U.K. CarShop used vehicle dealerships increased 29.0% and 3.0%, respectively. Overall, used units increased 17.4% in the U.S. and 9.6% internationally. We believe the increase in same-store unit sales is due to a stronger economic outlook, the lifting of lockdown restrictions implemented due to COVID-19, favorable interest rates, and improved levels of consumer confidence when compared to the same period last year at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. We believe this increase is also related to consumers looking to acquire used vehicles to compensate for the lower supply of new vehicles available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Revenues
Used vehicle retail sales revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $2,017.6 million, or 31.8%, increase in same-store revenues, coupled with a $116.7 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. Excluding $298.1 million of
favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store used retail revenue increased 27.1%. The same-store revenue increase is primarily due to a $4,961 per unit increase in comparative average selling prices (including a $1,158 per unit increase attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations), which increased revenue by $1,143.4 million, coupled with the increase in same-store used retail unit sales, which increased revenue by $874.2 million. The average sales price per unit for our CarShop dealerships increased 22.9% to $19,549. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average selling price is primarily due to consumers looking to acquire used vehicles to compensate for the lower supply of new vehicles available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Gross Profit
Retail gross profit from used vehicle sales increased from 2020 to 2021 due to $266.5 million, or 69.0%, increase in same-store gross profit, coupled with an $11.2 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. Excluding $21.5 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store gross profit increased 63.5%. The increase in same-store gross profit is due to an $860 per unit increase in average gross profit per used vehicle retailed (including an $83 per unit increase attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations), which increased gross profit by $198.2 million, coupled with the increase in same-store used retail unit sales, which increased gross profit by $68.3 million. The average gross profit per unit for our CarShop used vehicle dealerships increased 29.4% to $1,195. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average gross profit per unit is primarily due to consumers looking to acquire used vehicles to compensate for the lower supply of new vehicles available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Retail Automotive Dealership Finance and Insurance Data
(In millions, except unit and per unit amounts)
Finance and insurance revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $198.4 million, or 34.8%, increase in same-store revenues, coupled with a $5.8 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. Excluding $19.5 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store finance and insurance revenue increased 31.4%. The same-store revenue increase is due to a $300 per unit increase in comparative average finance and insurance revenue per unit (including a $44 per unit increase attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations), which increased revenue by $121.9 million, coupled with the increase in same-store retail unit sales, which increased revenue by $76.5 million. Finance and insurance revenue per unit increased 22.1% in the U.S. and 17.3% in the U.K. We believe the increase in same-store finance and insurance revenue per unit is primarily due to our efforts to increase finance and insurance penetration, which include implementing interactive digital customer sales platforms, additional training, and targeting underperforming locations, coupled with the increase in average selling price per unit of new and used vehicles.
Retail Automotive Dealership Service and Parts Data
(In millions)
Revenues
Service and parts revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 with an increase of 13.8% in the U.S. and 17.3% internationally. The increase in service and parts revenue is primarily due to a $283.8 million, or 15.3%, increase in same-store revenues. Excluding $43.5 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store revenue increased 12.9%. The increase in same-store revenue is due to a $277.2 million, or 21.8%, increase in customer pay revenue and an $8.8 million, or 7.4%, increase in vehicle preparation and body shop revenue, partially offset by a $2.2 million, or 0.5%, decrease in warranty revenue. We believe the increase in same-store service and parts revenue is related to a stronger economic outlook, improved levels of consumer confidence, and the lifting of many COVID-19 restrictions resulting in increases in vehicle miles traveled compared to the same period last year.
Gross Profit
Service and parts gross profit increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $178.7 million, or 16.1%, increase in same-store gross profit, coupled with a $1.2 million increase from net acquisitions. Excluding $26.8 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store gross profit increased 13.6%. The same-store gross profit increase is due to the increase in same-store revenues, which increased gross profit by $171.2 million, coupled with a 0.4% increase in same-store gross margin, which increased gross profit by $7.5 million. The same-store gross profit increase is due to a $139.0 million, or 22.6%, increase in customer pay gross profit and a $40.4 million, or 16.6%, increase in vehicle preparation and body shop gross profit, partially offset by a $0.7 million, or 0.3%, decrease in warranty gross profit.
Retail Commercial Truck Dealership Data
(In millions, except unit and per unit amounts)
Units
Retail unit sales of new trucks increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a 2,017 unit increase from net dealership acquisitions, partially offset by a 341 unit, or 3.0%, decrease in same-store retail unit sales. We believe the decrease in same-store unit sales is due to a lower supply of new trucks available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Revenues
New commercial truck retail sales revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $217.8 million increase from net dealership acquisitions, coupled with a $6.4 million, or 0.5%, increase in same-store revenues. The same-store revenue increase is due to a $4,198 per unit increase in comparative average selling prices, which increased revenue by $46.1 million, partially offset by the decrease in same-store new retail unit sales, which decreased revenue by $39.7 million. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average selling price is due to increased customer demand, stronger economic outlook, and a lower supply of new trucks available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Gross Profit
New commercial truck retail gross profit increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $22.4 million, or 44.4%, increase in same-store gross profit, coupled with a $7.4 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. The increase in same-store gross profit is due to a $2,177 per unit increase in comparative average gross profit, which increased gross profit by $23.9 million, partially offset by the decrease in same-store new retail unit sales, which decreased gross profit by $1.5 million. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average gross profit per unit is attributed to increased customer demand, stronger economic outlook, and a lower supply of new trucks available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Units
Retail unit sales of used trucks decreased from 2020 to 2021 due to a 635 unit, or 16.6%, decrease in same-store retail unit sales, partially offset by a 240 unit increase from net dealership acquisitions. We believe the decrease in same-store unit sales is due to a lower supply of used trucks available for sale, which has been caused by a stronger economy which increased demand for trucks, coupled with limited availability of new trucks resulting from production disruptions from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Revenues
Used commercial truck retail sales revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $57.1 million, or 29.4%, increase in same-store revenues, coupled with a $19.3 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. The same-store revenue increase is due to a $28,019 per unit increase in comparative average selling prices, which increased revenue by $89.4 million, partially offset by the decrease in same-store used retail unit sales, which decreased revenue by $32.3 million. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average selling price is primarily due to consumers looking to acquire used trucks to compensate for the lower supply of new trucks available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Gross Profit
Used commercial truck retail gross profit increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $43.9 million increase in same-store gross profit, coupled with a $3.8 million increase from net dealership acquisitions. The increase in same-store gross profit is due to a $13,775 per unit increase in average gross profit per used truck retailed, which increased gross profit by $43.9 million. We believe the increase in same-store comparative average gross profit per unit is primarily due to consumers looking to acquire used trucks to compensate for the lower supply of new trucks available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Revenues
Service and parts revenue increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $71.4 million increase from net dealership acquisitions, coupled with a $59.5 million, or 12.4%, increase in same-store revenues. Customer pay work represents approximately 79.8% of PTG’s service and parts revenue, largely due to the significant amount of retail sales of parts and accessories. The increase in same-store revenue is due to a $57.8 million, or 15.6%, increase in customer pay revenue and a $2.2 million, or 2.6%, increase in warranty revenue, partially offset by a $0.5 million, or 2.2%, decrease in body shop revenue. We believe the increase in same-store service and parts revenue is primarily due to higher freight rates which increase utilization and coupled with the prolonged reliance on older trucks resulting from the decreased supply of new trucks, which generates additional service and parts revenues.
Gross Profit
Service and parts gross profit increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $28.7 million increase from net dealership acquisitions, coupled with a $21.0 million, or 10.1%, increase in same-store gross profit. The same-store gross profit increase is due to the increase in same-store revenues, which increased gross profit by $25.3 million, partially offset by a 0.9% decrease in gross margin, which decreased gross profit by $4.3 million. The same-store gross profit increase is due to a $21.9 million, or 16.1%, increase in customer pay gross profit and a $1.2 million, or 2.5%, increase in warranty gross profit, partially offset by a $2.1 million, or 8.9%, decrease in body shop gross profit.
Commercial Vehicle Distribution Data
(In millions, except unit amounts)
Penske Australia primarily distributes and services commercial vehicles, engines, and power systems. This business generated $575.7 million of revenue during 2021 compared to $454.2 million of revenue during 2020, an increase of 26.8%. This business generated $153.7 million of gross profit during 2021 compared to $122.3 million of gross profit during 2020, an increase of 25.7%.
These improved results from 2020 to 2021 are primarily due to an increase in commercial demand for trucks in Australia, an increase in service and parts, and increased sales to our defense and power generation product lines. Excluding $47.7 million of revenue attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations, revenues increased 16.2%. Excluding $11.8 million of gross profit attributable to favorable foreign currency fluctuations, gross profit increased 16.0%.
Selling, General and Administrative Data
(In millions)
Selling, general, and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $559.0 million, or 23.9% increase in same-store SG&A, coupled with a $39.4 million increase from net acquisitions. Excluding $71.3 million of favorable foreign currency fluctuations, same-store SG&A increased 20.9%. The decrease in SG&A as a percentage of gross profit is primarily due to increased gross profit across our various business lines, coupled with expense reductions.
SG&A expenses as a percentage of total revenue were 11.6%, 11.6%, and 11.6% in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, and as a percentage of gross profit were 66.7%, 74.3%, and 77.9%, in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Depreciation
(In millions)
Depreciation increased from 2020 to 2021 due to a $3.3 million, or 2.9%, increase in same-store depreciation, coupled with a $2.7 million increase from net acquisitions. We believe the overall increase is primarily related to our ongoing facility improvements and expansion programs.
Floor Plan Interest Expense
(In millions)
Floor plan interest expense, including the impact of swap transactions, decreased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to a $19.9 million, or 43.5%, decrease in same-store floor plan interest expense. We believe the overall decrease is primarily due to decreases in applicable rates and decreases in amounts outstanding under floor plan arrangements as new vehicle inventory declined. This inventory decline was due to a lower supply of new vehicles available for sale, which has been caused by production disruptions resulting from a shortage of microchips or other components.
Other Interest Expense
(In millions)
Other interest expense decreased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to the decrease in outstanding revolver borrowings under the U.S. and U.K. credit agreements, decreases in applicable rates, and the redemption and refinancing of certain senior subordinated notes.
Equity in Earnings of Affiliates
(In millions)
Equity in earnings of affiliates increased from 2020 to 2021 due primarily to a $201.3 million, or 122.4%, increase in earnings from our investment in PTS, coupled with the increase in earnings from our retail automotive joint ventures. The increase in our PTS equity earnings is attributed to strong economic conditions in North America, which is driving higher demand for PTS full-service leasing and logistics services, increased utilization of the rental fleet, and higher gains on sale from remarketing activities on used trucks.
Income Taxes
(In millions)
Income taxes increased from 2020 to 2021 primarily due to a $900.1 million increase in our pre-tax income compared to the prior year. Our effective tax rate was 25.9% during 2021 compared to 23.0% during 2020 primarily due to fluctuations in our geographic pre-tax income mix, partially offset by the increase in net income tax expense of $10.8 million related to U.K. tax legislation changes, and a net income tax benefit of $11.4 million from various U.S. and foreign tax legislation changes during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash requirements are primarily for working capital, inventory financing, the acquisition of new businesses, the improvement and expansion of existing facilities, the purchase or construction of new facilities, building additional CarShop used vehicle dealerships, debt service and repayments, dividends, and potential repurchases of our outstanding securities under the program discussed below. Historically, these cash requirements have been met through cash flow from operations, borrowings under our credit agreements and floor plan arrangements, the issuance of debt securities, sale-leaseback transactions, mortgages, and dividends and distributions from joint venture investments.
We have historically expanded our operations through organic growth and the acquisition of dealerships and other businesses. We believe that cash flow from operations, dividends and distributions from PTS and our joint venture investments, and our existing capital resources, including the liquidity provided by our credit agreements and floor plan financing arrangements, will be sufficient to fund our existing operations and current commitments for at least the next twelve months. In the event that economic conditions remain impacted for longer than we expect due to the COVID-19 pandemic or vehicle shortages resulting from supply chain difficulties, we pursue significant acquisitions or other expansion opportunities, pursue significant repurchases of our outstanding securities, or refinance or repay existing debt, we may need to raise additional capital either through the public or private issuance of equity or debt securities or through additional borrowings, which sources of funds may not necessarily be available on terms acceptable to us, if at all. In addition, our liquidity could be negatively impacted in the event we fail to comply with the covenants under our various financing and operating agreements or in the event our floor plan financing is withdrawn. Future events, including acquisitions, divestitures, new or revised operating lease agreements, borrowings or repayments under our credit agreements and our floor plan arrangements, raising capital, and purchases or refinancing of our securities, may also impact our liquidity.
We expect that scheduled payments of our debt instruments will be funded through cash flows from operations or borrowings under our credit agreements. In the case of payments upon the maturity or termination dates of our debt instruments, we currently expect to be able to refinance such instruments in the normal course of business or otherwise fund them from cash flows from operations or borrowings under our credit agreements. Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 10 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements set forth below for a detailed description of our long-term debt obligations and scheduled interest payments.
Floor plan notes payable are revolving financing arrangements. Payments are generally made as required pursuant to the floor plan borrowing agreements. Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 9 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed description of financing for the vehicles we purchase, including discussion of our floor plan and other revolving arrangements.
Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 12 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our off-balance sheet arrangements which includes a repurchase commitment related to our floor plan credit agreement with Mercedes Benz Financial Services Australia.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $100.7 million of cash available to fund our operations and capital commitments. In addition, we had $800.0 million, £162.0 million ($219.2 million), and AU $50.0 ($36.3) available for borrowing under our U.S. credit agreement, U.K. credit agreement, and Australian working capital loan agreement, respectively.
Securities Repurchases
From time to time, our Board of Directors has authorized securities repurchase programs pursuant to which we may, as market conditions warrant, purchase our outstanding common stock or debt on the open market, in privately negotiated transactions, via a tender offer, through a pre-arranged trading plan, pursuant to the terms of an accelerated share repurchase program, or by other means. We have historically funded any such repurchases using cash flow from operations, borrowings under our U.S. credit agreement, and borrowings under our U.S. floor plan arrangements. The decision to make repurchases will be based on factors such as the market price of the relevant security versus our view of its intrinsic value, the potential impact of such repurchases on our capital structure, and our consideration of any alternative uses of our capital, such as for acquisitions and strategic investments in our current businesses, in addition to any then-existing limits imposed by our finance agreements and securities trading policy. On December 16, 2021, our Board of Directors approved a new $250 million securities repurchase authorization. We had $230.4 million and $194.3 million in repurchase authorization remaining under the securities repurchase program as of December 31, 2021, and February 8, 2022, respectively. Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 15 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of shares repurchased during 2021.
Dividends
We paid the following cash dividends on our common stock in 2020 and 2021:
Per Share Dividends
We also announced a cash dividend of $0.47 per share payable on March 1, 2022, to stockholders of record as of February 10, 2022, which represents a dividend yield of 1.8% using our January 31, 2022, closing stock price. While future quarterly or other cash dividends will depend upon a variety of factors considered relevant by our Board of Directors, which may include our expectations regarding the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, earnings, cash flow, capital requirements, restrictions relating to any then-existing indebtedness, financial condition, alternative uses of capital, and other factors, we currently expect to continue to pay comparable dividends in the future.
Vehicle Financing
Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 9 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a detailed description of financing for the vehicles we purchase, including discussion of our floor plan and other revolving arrangements.
Long-Term Debt Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had the following long-term debt obligations outstanding:
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under our credit agreements, and we believe we will remain in compliance with such covenants for the next twelve months. Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 10 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements set forth below for a detailed description of our long-term debt obligations.
Short-Term Borrowings
We have four principal sources of short-term borrowings: the revolving portion of the U.S. credit agreement, the revolving portion of the U.K. credit agreement, our Australian working capital loan agreement, and the floor plan agreements that we utilize to finance our vehicle inventories. We are also able to access availability under the floor plan agreements to fund our cash needs, including payments made relating to our higher interest rate revolving credit agreements.
During 2021, outstanding revolving commitments varied between $0.0 million and $250.0 million under the U.S. credit agreement, between £0.0 million and £71.0 million ($0.0 million and $96.0 million) under the U.K. credit agreement’s revolving credit line (excluding the overdraft facility), and between AU $0.0 million and AU $26.0 million ($0.0 million and $18.9 million) under the Australia working capital loan agreement. The amounts outstanding under our floor plan agreements varied based on the timing of the receipt and expenditure of cash in our operations, driven principally by the levels of our vehicle inventories.
Interest Rate Swaps
The Company periodically uses interest rate swaps to manage interest rate risk associated with the Company’s variable rate floor plan debt. In April 2020, we entered into a five-year interest rate swap agreement pursuant to which the LIBOR portion of $300.0 million of our U.S. floating rate floor plan debt was fixed at 0.5875% This arrangement was in effect through April 2025. However, we terminated this arrangement in November 2021 resulting in a realized gain of $3.0 million. The fair value of the swap designated as a hedging instrument was estimated to be a net liability of $4.3 million as of December 31, 2020.
PTS Dividends
We hold a 28.9% ownership interest in PTS as noted above. Their partnership agreement requires PTS, subject to applicable law and the terms of its credit agreements, to make quarterly distributions to the partners with respect to each fiscal year by no later than 45 days after the end of each of the first three quarters of the year and by April 15 of the following year. PTS’ partnership agreement and certain of its debt agreements allow partner distributions only as long as it is not in default under those agreements and the amount it pays does not exceed 50% of its consolidated net income, unless its debt-to-equity ratio is less than 3.0 to 1, in which case its distributions may not exceed 80% of its consolidated net income. We receive pro rata cash distributions relating to this investment, typically in April, May, August, and November of each year. During 2021, 2020, and 2019, we received $165.5 million, $72.2 million, and $71.9 million, respectively, of pro rata cash distributions relating to this investment. We currently expect to continue to receive future distributions from PTS quarterly, subject to its financial performance.
Sale/Leaseback Arrangements
We have in the past and may in the future enter into sale-leaseback transactions to finance certain property acquisitions and capital expenditures, pursuant to which we sell property and/or leasehold improvements to third parties and agree to lease those assets back for a certain period of time. Such sales generate proceeds that vary from period to period.
Operating Leases
We estimate the total rent obligations under our operating leases, including any extension periods that we are reasonably certain to exercise at our discretion and assuming constant consumer price indices, to be $5.5 billion. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under these leases consisting principally of leases for dealership and other properties, and we believe we will remain in compliance with such covenants for the next twelve months. Refer to the disclosures provided in Part II, Item 8, Note 3 and Note 12 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our operating leases.
Discontinued Operations
We had no entities newly classified as held for sale in 2021, 2020, or 2019 that met the criteria to be classified as discontinued operations. As such, results from discontinued operations represent only retail automotive dealerships and our car rental business that were classified as discontinued operations prior to the adoption of ASU No. 2014-08 on January 1, 2015.
Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information
The following is a description of the terms and conditions of the guarantees with respect to senior subordinated notes of Penske Automotive Group, Inc. (“PAG”) as the issuer of the 3.50% Notes and the 3.75% Notes (collectively the “Senior Subordinated Notes”).
Each of the Senior Subordinated Notes are unsecured, senior subordinated obligations and are guaranteed on an unsecured senior subordinated basis by our 100% owned U.S. subsidiaries. Each of the Senior Subordinated Notes also contain customary negative covenants and events of default. If we experience certain “change of control” events specified in their respective indentures, holders of these Senior Subordinated Notes will have the option to require us to purchase for cash all or a portion of their Senior Subordinated Notes at a price equal to 101% of the principal amount of the Senior Subordinated Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, if we make certain asset sales and do not reinvest the proceeds thereof or use such proceeds to repay certain debt, we will be required to use the proceeds of such asset sales to make an offer to purchase the Senior Subordinated Notes at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Senior Subordinated Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
Guarantor subsidiaries are directly or indirectly 100% owned by PAG, and the guarantees are full and unconditional and joint and several. The guarantees may be released under certain circumstances upon resale or transfer by us of the stock of the related guarantor or all or substantially all of the assets of the guarantor to a non-affiliate. Non-wholly owned and foreign subsidiaries of PAG do not guarantee the Senior Subordinated Notes (“Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”). The following tables present summarized financial information for PAG and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis. The financial information of PAG and Guarantor Subsidiaries is presented on a combined basis; intercompany balances and transactions between PAG and Guarantor Subsidiaries have been eliminated; PAG’s or Guarantor Subsidiaries’ amounts due from, amounts due to, and transactions with non-issuer and Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries and related parties are disclosed separately.
Condensed income statement information:
Condensed balance sheet information:
_______________
(1)Includes $529.9 million and $509.9 million as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, due from Non-Guarantors.
During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, PAG received $93.5 million and $77.1 million, respectively, from Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the changes in our cash provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities. The major components of these changes are discussed below.
Cash Flows from Continuing Operating Activities
Cash flows from continuing operating activities includes net income, as adjusted for non-cash items and the effects of changes in working capital.
We finance substantially all of the commercial vehicles we purchase for distribution, new vehicles for retail sale, and a portion of our used vehicle inventories for retail sale under floor plan and other revolving arrangements with various lenders, including the captive finance companies associated with automotive manufacturers. We retain the right to select which, if any, financing source to utilize in connection with the procurement of vehicle inventories. Many vehicle manufacturers provide vehicle financing for the dealers representing their brands; however, it is not a requirement that we utilize this financing. Historically, our floor plan finance source has been based on aggregate pricing considerations.
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles relating to the statement of cash flows, we report all cash flows arising in connection with floor plan notes payable with the manufacturer of a particular new vehicle as an operating activity in our statement of cash flows, and we report all cash flows arising in connection with floor plan notes payable to a party other than the manufacturer of a particular new vehicle, all floor plan notes payable relating to pre-owned vehicles, and all floor plan notes payable related to our commercial vehicles in Australia and New Zealand as a financing activity in our statement of cash flows. Currently, the majority of our non-trade vehicle financing is with other manufacturer captive lenders. To date, we have not experienced any material limitation with respect to the amount or availability of financing from any institution providing us vehicle financing.
We believe that changes in aggregate floor plan liabilities are typically linked to changes in vehicle inventory and therefore, are an integral part of understanding changes in our working capital and operating cash flow. As a result, we prepare the following reconciliation to highlight our operating cash flows with all changes in vehicle floor plan being classified as an operating activity for informational purposes:
Cash Flows from Continuing Investing Activities
Cash flows from continuing investing activities consist primarily of cash used for capital expenditures, proceeds from the sale of dealerships, proceeds from the sale of equipment and improvements, net expenditures for acquisitions and other investments, and proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions. Capital expenditures were $248.9 million, $185.9 million, and $245.3 million during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Capital expenditures relate primarily to improvements to our existing dealership facilities, the construction of new facilities, the acquisition of the property or buildings associated with existing leased facilities, and the acquisition of land for future development. We currently expect to finance our retail automotive segment and retail commercial truck segment capital expenditures with operating cash flows or borrowings under our U.S. or U.K. credit agreements. Proceeds from the sale of dealerships were $4.3 million, $40.6 million, and
$22.8 million during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Proceeds from the sale of equipment and improvements were $54.9 million, $19.8 million, and $8.6 million during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We had $431.8 million and $326.9 million of cash used in acquisitions and other investments, net of cash acquired, during 2021 and 2019, respectively, and included cash used to repay sellers’ floor plan liabilities in such business acquisitions of $43.0 million and $138.5 million, respectively, compared to no cash used in acquisitions and other investments, net of cash acquired, during 2020. We had no proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions during 2021 and 2020 compared to $18.9 million during 2019.
Cash Flows from Continuing Financing Activities
Cash flows from continuing financing activities include issuance and net repayments or borrowings of long-term debt, net borrowings or repayments of floor plan notes payable non-trade, repurchases of common stock, dividends, payments for contingent consideration, and payments for debt issuance costs.
We issued $500.0 million of senior subordinated notes due 2029 in June 2021 and subsequently repaid $500.0 million of senior subordinated notes due 2026. We had net repayments of other long-term debt of $212.2 million and $81.4 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively, and net borrowings of other long-term debt of $130.4 million during 2019. We had net borrowings of floor plan notes payable non-trade of $38.9 million and $177.5 million during 2021 and 2019, respectively, and net repayments of floor plan notes payable non-trade of $230.2 million during 2020. In 2021, 2020, and 2019, we repurchased 3.1 million, 0.9 million, and 3.9 million shares of common stock under our securities repurchase program for $280.6 million, $29.4 million, and $169.2 million, respectively. In 2021, 2020, and 2019, we repurchased 0.1 million, 0.1 million, and 0.1 million shares from employees in connection with a net share settlement feature of employee equity awards for $12.9 million, $5.0 million, and $4.9 million, respectively. We also paid $142.5 million, $68.1 million, and $130.8 million of cash dividends to our stockholders during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We made no payments to settle contingent consideration to sellers related to previous acquisitions during 2021 and 2019 compared to $31.6 million during 2020. We made payments of $6.3 million, $8.1 million, and $0.4 million for debt issuance costs during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Related Party Transactions
Stockholders Agreement
Several of our directors and officers are affiliated with Penske Corporation or related entities. Roger Penske, our Chair of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, is also Chair of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Penske Corporation and through entities affiliated with Penske Corporation is our largest stockholder owning approximately 45% of our outstanding common stock. Mitsui & Co., Ltd. and Mitsui & Co. (USA), Inc. (collectively, “Mitsui”) own approximately 17% of our outstanding common stock. Mitsui, Penske Corporation, and certain other affiliates of Penske Corporation are parties to a stockholders agreement pursuant to which the Penske affiliated companies agreed to vote their shares for up to two directors who are representatives of Mitsui. In turn, Mitsui agreed to vote their shares for up to fourteen directors voted for by the Penske affiliated companies. This agreement terminates in March 2030, upon the mutual consent of the parties, or when either party no longer owns any of our common stock.
Other Related Party Interests and Transactions
Robert Kurnick, Jr., our President and a director, is also the Vice Chair and a director of Penske Corporation. Bud Denker, our Executive Vice President, Human Resources, is also the President of Penske Corporation. Greg Penske, one of our directors, is the son of our chair and is also a director of Penske Corporation. Michael Eisenson, one of our directors, is also a director of Penske Corporation. Kota Odagiri, one of our directors, is also an employee of Mitsui & Co.
We sometimes pay to and/or receive fees from Penske Corporation, its subsidiaries, and its affiliates for services rendered in the ordinary course of business or to reimburse payments made to third parties on each other’s behalf. These transactions are reviewed periodically by our Audit Committee and reflect the provider’s cost or an amount mutually agreed upon by both parties.
We own a 28.9% interest in PTS. PTS, discussed previously, is owned 41.1% by Penske Corporation, 28.9% by us, and 30.0% by Mitsui. We have also entered into other joint ventures with certain related parties as more fully discussed in Part II, Item 8, Note 13 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Cyclicality
Unit sales of motor vehicles, particularly new vehicles, have been cyclical historically, fluctuating with general economic cycles. During economic downturns, the automotive and truck retailing industries tend to experience periods of decline and recession similar to those experienced by the general economy. We believe that these industries are influenced by general economic conditions and particularly, by consumer confidence, the level of personal discretionary spending, fuel prices, interest rates, and credit availability.
Our business is dependent on a number of factors, including general economic conditions, fuel prices, interest rate fluctuations, credit availability, labor availability, environmental and other government regulations, and customer business cycles. U.S. light vehicle sales have ranged from a low of 10.4 million units in 2009 to a high of 17.5 million units in 2016. Unit sales of new commercial vehicles have historically been subject to substantial cyclical variation based on these general economic conditions. According to data published by ACT Research, in recent years, total U.S. retail sales of new Class 8 commercial vehicles have ranged from a low of approximately 97,000 in 2009, to high of approximately 334,000 in 2019. Through geographic expansion, concentration on higher margin regular service and parts revenues, and diversification of our customer base, we have attempted to reduce the negative impact of adverse general economic conditions or cyclical trends affecting any one industry or geographic area on our earnings.
Seasonality
Dealership. Our business is modestly seasonal overall. Our U.S. operations generally experience higher volumes of vehicle sales in the second and third quarters of each year due in part to consumer buying trends and the introduction of new vehicle models. Also, vehicle demand, and to a lesser extent demand for service and parts, is generally lower during the winter months than in other seasons, particularly in regions of the U.S. where dealerships may be subject to severe winters. Our U.K. operations generally experience higher volumes of new vehicle sales in the first and third quarters of each year, due primarily to new vehicle registration practices in the U.K.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements and information set forth herein, as well as other written or oral statements made from time to time by us or by our authorized officers on our behalf, constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Federal Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “goal,” “plan,” “seek,” “project,” “continue,” “will,” “would,” and variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. We intend for our forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, and we set forth this statement in order to comply with such safe harbor provisions. You should note that our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report or when made, and we undertake no duty or obligation to update or revise our forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. Forward-looking statements include, without limitation, statements with respect to:
•our expectations regarding the COVID-19 pandemic;
•our future financial and operating performance;
•future dealership openings, acquisitions, and dispositions;
•future potential capital expenditures and securities repurchases;
•our ability to realize cost savings and synergies;
•our ability to respond to economic cycles;
•trends and sales levels in the automotive retail industry, commercial vehicles industries, and in the general economy in the various countries in which we operate;
•our ability to access the remaining availability under our credit agreements;
•our liquidity;
•performance of joint ventures, including PTS;
•future foreign exchange rates and geopolitical events;
•the outcome of various legal proceedings;
•results of self-insurance plans;
•trends affecting the automotive or trucking industries generally and our future financial condition or results of operations; and
•our business strategy.
Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks and uncertainties and are not assurances of future performance. Actual results may differ materially from anticipated results due to a variety of factors, including the factors identified under Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations include those mentioned in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors and the following:
•we depend on the success, popularity and availability of the brands we sell, and adverse conditions affecting one or more of these vehicle manufacturers, including the adverse impact on the vehicle and parts supply chain due to natural disasters or other disruptions that interrupt the supply of vehicles and parts to us (including any disruptions resulting from the shortage of microchips or other components or the COVID-19 pandemic discussed in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Part II, Item 1A. Risk Factors), may negatively impact our revenues and profitability;
•our business and the automotive retail and commercial vehicles industries in general are susceptible to adverse economic and geo-political conditions, including changes in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, customer demand, customer confidence, fuel prices, unemployment rates and credit availability (including any adverse impact from the COVID-19 pandemic discussed in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors);
•increased tariffs, import product restrictions, and foreign trade risks that may impair our ability to sell foreign vehicles profitably;
•the number of new and used vehicles sold in our markets, which impacts our ability to generate new and used vehicle gross profit;
•the effect on our businesses of the changing retail environment due to certain manufacturers selling direct to consumers outside the franchise system, the potential change to an agency model of distribution in the U.K and Europe which would negatively impact revenues (although other impacts to our results of operations remain uncertain), and the growing number of electric vehicles;
•the effect on our business of new mobility technologies such as shared vehicle services, such as Uber and Lyft, and the eventual availability of driverless vehicles
•vehicle manufacturers exercise significant control over our operations, and we depend on them and the continuation of our franchise and distribution agreements in order to operate our business;
•we are subject to the risk that a substantial number of our new or used inventory may be unavailable due to recall or other reasons;
•the success of our commercial vehicle distribution operations and engine and power systems distribution operations depends upon continued availability of the vehicles, engines, power systems, and other parts we distribute, demand for those vehicles, engines, power systems, and parts and general economic conditions in those markets;
•a restructuring of any significant vehicle manufacturer or supplier;
•our operations may be affected by severe weather, or other periodic business interruptions;
•we have substantial risk of loss not covered by insurance;
•we may not be able to satisfy our capital requirements for acquisitions, facility renovation projects, financing the purchase of our inventory, or refinancing of our debt when it becomes due;
•our level of indebtedness may limit our ability to obtain financing generally and may require that a significant portion of our cash flow be used for debt service;
•non-compliance with the financial ratios and other covenants under our credit agreements and operating leases;
•higher interest rates may significantly increase our variable rate interest costs and because many customers finance their vehicle purchases, decrease vehicle sales;
•our operations outside of the U.S. subject our profitability to fluctuations relating to changes in foreign currency values;
•with respect to PTS, changes in the financial health of its customers, labor strikes or work stoppages by its employees, a reduction in PTS’ asset utilization rates, continued availability from truck manufacturers and suppliers of vehicles and parts for its fleet, changes in values of used trucks which affects PTS’ profitability on truck sales, compliance costs in regard to its trucking fleet and truck drivers, its ability to retain qualified drivers and technicians, risks associated with its participation in multi-employer pension plans, conditions in the capital markets to assure PTS’ continued availability of capital to purchase trucks, the effect of changes in lease accounting rules on PTS customers’ purchase/lease decisions, and industry competition, each of which could impact distributions to us;
•we are dependent on continued security and availability of our information technology systems, which systems are increasingly threatened by ransomware and other cyberattacks, and we may be subject to fines, penalties, and other costs under applicable privacy laws if we do not maintain our confidential customer and employee information properly;
•if we lose key personnel, especially our Chief Executive Officer, or are unable to attract additional qualified personnel;
•new or enhanced regulations relating to automobile dealerships including those enacted in certain European countries, California, Massachusetts, and New York banning the sale of new vehicles with gasoline engines (with regulation in Europe starting as early as 2030);
•changes in tax, financial or regulatory rules, or requirements;
•we could be subject to legal and administrative proceedings which, if the outcomes are adverse to us, could have a material adverse effect on our business;
•if state dealer laws in the U.S. are repealed or weakened or new manufacturers such as those selling electric vehicles are able to conduct significant vehicle sales outside of the franchised automotive system, our automotive dealerships may be subject to increased competition and may be more susceptible to termination, non-renewal, or renegotiation of their franchise agreements;
•some of our directors and officers may have conflicts of interest with respect to certain related party transactions and other business interests; and
•shares of our common stock eligible for future sale may cause the market price of our common stock to drop significantly, even if our business is doing well.
We urge you to carefully consider these risk factors and further information under Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors in evaluating all forward-looking statements regarding our business. Readers of this report are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this report. All forward-looking statements attributable to us are qualified in their entirety by this cautionary statement. Except to the extent required by the federal securities laws and the Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and regulations, we have no intention or obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
Additional Information
Investors and others should note that we may announce material financial information using our company website (www.penskeautomotive.com), our investor relations website (investors.penskeautomotive.com), SEC filings, press releases, public conference calls, and webcasts. Information about Penske Automotive Group, its business, and its results of operations may also be announced by posts on the following social media channels from time to time:
•Penske Automotive Group’s Twitter feed (www.twitter.com/penskecars)
•Penske Automotive Group’s Facebook page (www.facebook.com/penskecars)
•Penske Automotive Group’s Instagram page (www.instagram.com/penskecars)
•Penske Automotive Group’s Social website (www.penskesocial.com)
The information that we post on these social media channels could be deemed to be material information. As a result, we encourage investors, the media, and others interested in Penske Automotive Group to review the information that we post on these social media channels. These channels may be updated from time to time on Penske Automotive Group’s investor relations website. The information on or accessible through our websites and social media channels is not incorporated by reference in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and our references to such content are intended to be inactive textual or oral references only.