Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following discussion is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our financial condition and results of our operations and should be read in conjunction with our historical Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” and “PAGP” are intended to mean the business and operations of PAGP and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Our discussion and analysis includes the following:
•Executive Summary
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Executive Summary
Company Overview
We are a Delaware limited partnership formed in 2013 that has elected to be taxed as a corporation for United States federal income tax purposes. As of December 31, 2021, our sole cash-generating assets consisted of (i) a 100% managing member interest in GP LLC, an entity that has also elected to be taxed as a corporation for United States federal income tax purposes and (ii) an approximate 81% limited partner interest in AAP through our direct ownership of approximately 193.2 million AAP units and indirect ownership of approximately 1.0 million AAP units through GP LLC. GP LLC is a Delaware limited liability company that also holds the non-economic general partner interest in AAP. AAP is a Delaware limited partnership that, as of December 31, 2021, directly owned a limited partner interest in PAA through its ownership of approximately 241.5 million PAA common units (approximately 31% PAA’s total outstanding common units and Series A preferred units combined). AAP is the sole member of PAA GP, a Delaware limited liability company that directly holds the non-economic general partner interest in PAA.
PAA’s business model integrates large-scale supply aggregation capabilities with the ownership and operation of critical midstream infrastructure systems that connect major producing regions to key demand centers and export terminals. As one of the largest midstream service providers in North America, PAA owns an extensive network of pipeline transportation, terminalling, storage and gathering assets in key crude oil and NGL producing basins (including the Permian Basin) and transportation corridors and at major market hubs in the United States and Canada. PAA’s assets and the services it provides are primarily focused on crude oil and NGL.
Segment Changes
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we reorganized our historical operating segments: Transportation, Facilities and Supply and Logistics into two operating segments: Crude Oil and Natural Gas Liquids (“NGL”). The change in our segments stems primarily from (i) a multi-year transition in the midstream energy industry driven by increased competition that has reduced the stand alone earnings opportunities of our supply and logistics activities such that those activities now primarily support our effort to increase the utilization of our Crude Oil and NGL assets and (ii) internal changes regarding the oversight and reporting of our assets and related results of operations.
Additionally, during the fourth quarter of 2021, we modified our definition of Segment Adjusted EBITDA to exclude amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests in consolidated joint ventures. In connection with the Permian JV formation in October 2021, our CODM determined this modification resulted in amounts that were more meaningful to evaluate segment performance. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Permian JV.
All segment data and related disclosures for earlier periods presented herein have been recast to reflect the new segment reporting structure and the modification to our definition of Segment Adjusted EBITDA. See Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Market Overview and Outlook
Crude oil and other petroleum liquids are supplied by producers around the world, including the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (“OPEC”) and North American producers, among others. The chart below depicts the relationship between global supply of crude oil and other petroleum liquids and demand since the beginning of 2017 and the U.S. Energy Information Administration’s (“EIA”) Short-Term Energy Outlook as of February 2022:
World Liquid Fuels Production and Consumption Balance (1)
(in millions of barrels per day)
(1)Barrels produced and consumed per quarter.
Global crude oil demand at the end of 2021 was near pre-COVID levels, with the EIA and other third parties forecasting demand to exceed 2019 levels by late 2022 and continue to grow for the foreseeable future. We believe this demand growth combined with the multi-year backdrop of reduced upstream investment and a continuation of OPEC discipline could further exacerbate many of the supply concerns that emerged in 2021. This includes tight global markets and continued commodity price volatility. As a result, we expect North American energy supply to play a critical long-term role in meeting global demand and the Permian Basin to drive the vast majority of U.S. production growth in the coming years. It is against this macro backdrop that we expect to generate significant positive free cash flow on a multi-year basis, supported by our existing base and integrated business model.
Building on the actions we took in 2020 to ensure that we were well positioned to manage through the pandemic, in 2021 we continued to build momentum and reinforce our long-term positioning. This included further optimizing our asset portfolio including, but not limited to, exceeding our asset sales target, substantially completing our multi-year capital program, and closing a highly strategic joint-venture in the Permian Basin through a cashless and debt-free transaction. Additionally, we reduced debt by $1 billion, meaningfully reduced capital expenditures by $230 million versus our initial 2021 guidance, and further streamlined our U.S. and Canadian operations and organizational cost structure.
While each of these actions should contribute to a stronger balance sheet and enhanced liquidity and long-term financial flexibility, we can provide no assurance that we will be able to effect certain future actions (such as additional capital reductions, asset sales and expense reductions) and additional actions may be necessary to achieve our balance sheet, liquidity and financial security objectives. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to PAA’s Business” in Item 1A.
While some modifications in our operations continue to be necessary to deal with risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we have not experienced any material constraints on our ability to continue our essential business functions and have not incurred any significant additional operating costs as a result of the pandemic. We remain focused on the health and safety of our workforce, and have modified our operations in ways that we believe are prudent and appropriate in order to protect our employees while continuing to operate our assets in an effective, safe and responsible manner.
Many governments have enacted or are contemplating measures to provide aid and economic stimulus in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. These measures include actions by both the United States federal government and the government of Canada. There has been no material direct impact to our financial position, results of operations or cash flows resulting from these measures. However, our Canadian subsidiary participated in a wage subsidy program during 2021 and 2020 for subsidies totaling approximately $7 million and $23 million, respectively. The impact of such subsidies and incremental COVID-19 costs is included in the line items “Field operating costs” and “General and administrative expenses”. See “-Results of Operations” for further discussion.
Overview of Operating Results
We recognized net income of $600 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss of $2.440 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 and net income of $2.062 billion for the year ended December 31, 2019. The net loss for the 2020 period was primarily driven by the macroeconomic and industry specific challenges discussed above which resulted in goodwill impairment losses and non-cash impairment charges related to the write-down of certain pipeline and other long-lived assets, certain of our investments in unconsolidated entities, and assets upon classification as held for sale totaling approximately $3.4 billion. In addition, we recognized approximately $233 million of inventory valuation adjustments due to declines in commodity prices during the first quarter of 2020. The 2021 period includes a net loss on asset sales and asset impairments of $592 million, a majority of which was related to the write-down of our natural gas storage facilities, which were classified as held for sale in the second quarter and sold in the third quarter.
Results from our reporting segments were lower for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to less favorable crude oil market conditions.
Results from our reporting segments were lower for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to less favorable crude oil differentials and NGL sales margins and lower volumes, partially offset by the favorable impact of contango market conditions.
See the “-Results of Operations” section below for further discussion.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results
The following table sets forth an overview of our consolidated financial results calculated in accordance with GAAP (in millions, except per share amounts):
** Indicates that variance as a percentage is not meaningful.
Revenues and Purchases
Fluctuations in our consolidated revenues and purchases and related costs are primarily associated with our merchant activities and generally explained in large part by changes in commodity prices. Our crude oil and NGL merchant activities are not directly affected by the absolute level of prices because the commodities that we buy and sell are generally indexed to the same pricing indices. Both product sales revenues and purchases and related costs will fluctuate with market prices; however, the absolute margins related to those sales and purchases will not necessarily have a corresponding increase or decrease. Additionally, product sales revenues include the impact of gains and losses related to derivative instruments used to manage our exposure to commodity price risk associated with such sales and purchases.
A majority of our sales and purchases are indexed to West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”). The following table presents the range of the NYMEX WTI benchmark price of crude oil over the last three years (in dollars per barrel):
Product sales revenues and purchases increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher prices and volumes in the 2021 period.
Product sales revenues and purchases decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to lower prices and volumes in the 2020 period.
Revenues from services decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the sale of assets, partially offset by the recognition of revenues associated with deficiencies under minimum volume commitments in 2020.
Revenues from services decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to lower pipeline volumes, a portion of which were covered by minimum volume commitments for which the associated revenue was deferred to future periods.
See further discussion of our net revenues in the “-Analysis of Operating Segments” section below.
Field Operating Costs
See discussion of field operating costs in the “-Analysis of Operating Segments” section below.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses for the year the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to (i) transaction-related costs incurred in connection with the formation of the Permian JV (which impacts our general and administrative expenses but are excluded in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Segment Adjusted EBITDA), (ii) increased information systems costs and (iii) reduced wage subsidies received by our Canadian subsidiary, partially offset by other lower employee-compensation related items during the 2021 period.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to (i) lower equity-based compensation costs on liability-classified awards (which is not excluded in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA and Segment Adjusted EBITDA), due to a decrease in PAA’s common unit price, (ii) decreased travel and entertainment costs, (iii) lower compensation costs including the benefit of wage subsidies received by our Canadian subsidiary and (iv) general cost reductions associated with exiting low margin, high administrative cost businesses. Such items were partially offset by an overall increase in compensation costs related to severance costs associated with our efforts to streamline our organization.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 largely driven by (i) a reduction in the useful lives of certain assets and (ii) additional depreciation expense associated with acquired assets, partially offset by a reduction in depreciation expense associated with assets sold. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 largely driven by additional depreciation expense associated with acquired assets, the completion of various investment capital projects and a reduction in the useful lives of certain assets, partially offset by a reduction in depreciation expense associated with assets sold.
Gains/Losses on Asset Sales and Asset Impairments, Net
The net losses on asset sales and asset impairments for 2021 primarily included (i) an approximate $220 million non-cash impairment charge recognized in the third quarter related to the write-down of certain crude oil storage terminal assets as a result of decreased demand for our services due to changing market conditions, (ii) an approximate $475 million non-cash impairment charge related to the write-down of our Pine Prairie and Southern Pines natural gas storage facilities upon classification as held for sale during the second quarter (these assets were sold in August 2021), and (iii) a gain of $106 million recognized in the second quarter related to the asset exchange agreement (the “Asset Exchange”) involving the sale of our Milk River crude oil pipeline in exchange for additional interests in certain of the Empress gas processing plants.
The net loss on asset sales and asset impairments for the year ended December 31, 2020 included (i) non-cash impairment losses on held and used assets of approximately $541 million related to the write-down of (a) certain pipeline and other long-lived assets due to the current macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions including the collapse of oil prices driven by both the decrease in demand caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and excess supply, as well as changing market conditions and expected lower crude oil production in certain regions, and (b) idled or underutilized assets for which is it has been determined that it is unlikely that opportunities will exist in the future to recover our investment in these assets and (ii) net losses of approximately $178 million related to the sale of assets, including non-cash impairments recognized upon classification as assets held for sale.
The net loss on asset sales and asset impairments for the year ended December 31, 2019 was largely driven by a loss on the sale of a storage terminal in North Dakota.
See Note 6 and Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these asset sales and asset impairments.
Goodwill Impairment Losses
During the first quarter of 2020, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $2.5 billion, representing the entire balance of goodwill. See Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Gain on/(Impairment of) Investments in Unconsolidated Entities, Net
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized losses of $202 million related to the write-down of certain of our investments in unconsolidated entities. Additionally, we recognized a gain of $21 million related to our sale of a 10% interest in Saddlehorn Pipeline Company, LLC.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a non-cash gain of $269 million related to a fair value adjustment resulting from the accounting for the contribution of our undivided joint interest in the Capline pipeline system for an equity interest in Capline Pipeline Company LLC. See Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our unconsolidated entities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is primarily impacted by:
•our weighted average debt balances;
•the level and maturity of fixed rate debt and interest rates associated therewith;
•market interest rates and our interest rate hedging activities; and
•interest capitalized on capital projects.
The following table summarizes the components impacting the interest expense variance (in millions, except percentages):
(1)Excludes commitment and other fees.
See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our debt and related activities during the periods presented.
Other Income, Net
The following table summarizes the components impacting Other income, net (in millions):
(1)See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(2)The activity during the years presented was primarily related to the impact from the change in the USD to CAD exchange rate on the portion of our intercompany net investment that is not long-term in nature.
Income Tax (Expense)/Benefit
The net unfavorable income tax variance for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the impact of higher earnings.
The net favorable income tax variance for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to (i) lower taxable earnings from our Canadian operations, (ii) the impact of lower earnings at PAA on income attributable to PAGP and (iii) lower year-over-year income as impacted by fluctuations in the derivative mark-to-market valuations in our Canadian operations, partially offset by (iv) the recognition of a deferred tax benefit of approximately $60 million during the second quarter of 2019 as a result of the reduction of the provincial tax rate in Alberta, Canada.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, management uses additional measures known as “non-GAAP financial measures” in its evaluation of past performance and prospects for the future.
The primary additional measures used by management are earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (including our proportionate share of depreciation and amortization, including write-downs related to cancelled projects, of unconsolidated entities), gains and losses on asset sales and asset impairments, goodwill impairment losses and gains on and impairments of investments in unconsolidated entities, adjusted for certain selected items impacting comparability (“Adjusted EBITDA”) and Adjusted EBITDA attributable to PAA, which excludes the portion of Adjusted EBITDA attributable to noncontrolling interests in consolidated joint venture entities.
Our definition and calculation of certain non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA attributable to PAA are reconciled to Net Income/(Loss), the most directly comparable measures as reported in accordance with GAAP, and should be viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes.
Management believes that the presentation of such additional financial measures provides useful information to investors regarding our performance and results of operations because these measures, when used to supplement related GAAP financial measures, (i) provide additional information about our core operating performance, (ii) provide investors with the same financial analytical framework upon which management bases financial, operational, compensation and planning/budgeting decisions and (iii) present measures that investors, rating agencies and debt holders have indicated are useful in assessing us and our results of operations. These non-GAAP measures may exclude, for example, (i) charges for obligations that are expected to be settled with the issuance of equity instruments, (ii) gains and losses on derivative instruments that are related to underlying activities in another period (or the reversal of such adjustments from a prior period), gains and losses on derivatives that are related to investing activities (such as the purchase of linefill) and inventory valuation adjustments, as applicable, (iii) long-term inventory costing adjustments, (iv) items that are not indicative of our core operating results and/or (v) other items that we believe should be excluded in understanding our core operating performance. These measures may further be adjusted to include amounts related to deficiencies associated with minimum volume commitments whereby we have billed the counterparties for their deficiency obligation and such amounts are recognized as deferred revenue in “Other current liabilities” in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Such amounts are presented net of applicable amounts subsequently recognized into revenue. We have defined all such items as “selected items impacting comparability.” We do not necessarily consider all of our selected items impacting comparability to be non-recurring, infrequent or unusual, but we believe that an understanding of these selected items impacting comparability is material to the evaluation of our operating results and prospects.
Although we present selected items impacting comparability that management considers in evaluating our performance, you should also be aware that the items presented do not represent all items that affect comparability between the periods presented. Variations in our operating results are also caused by changes in volumes, prices, exchange rates, mechanical interruptions, acquisitions, divestitures, investment capital projects and numerous other factors as discussed, as applicable, in “-Analysis of Operating Segments.”
The following table sets forth the reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial performance measures Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA attributable to PAA from Net Income/(Loss) (in millions):
** Indicates that variance as a percentage is not meaningful.
(1)We exclude our proportionate share of the depreciation and amortization expense (including write-downs related to cancelled projects) of unconsolidated entities when reviewing Adjusted EBITDA, similar to our consolidated assets.
(2)Represents general and administrative expenses incremental to those of PAA, which are not allocated to our reporting segments in determining Segment Adjusted EBITDA and are excluded in the non-GAAP financial performance measures utilized by management.
(3)For a more detailed discussion of these selected items impacting comparability, see the footnotes to the Segment Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation table in Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(4)The Preferred Distribution Rate Reset Option of PAA’s Series A preferred units is accounted for as an embedded derivative and recorded at fair value in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The associated gains and losses are not
integral to our results and were thus classified as a selected item impacting comparability. See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the Preferred Distribution Rate Reset Option.
(5)During the periods presented, there were fluctuations in the value of CAD to USD, resulting in the realization of foreign exchange gains and losses on the settlement of foreign currency transactions as well as the revaluation of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency. The associated gains and losses are not integral to our results and thus were classified as a selected item impacting comparability.
(6)Includes net gains recognized in connection with the repurchase of our outstanding senior notes on the open market. See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(7)Other income/(expense), net per our Consolidated Statements of Operations, adjusted for selected items impacting comparability (“Adjusted other income/(expense), net”) is included in Adjusted EBITDA and excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
(8)Reflects amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests in the Permian JV and Red River Pipeline LLC. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these noncontrolling interests.
Analysis of Operating Segments
We manage our operations through two operating segments: Crude Oil and NGL. Our CODM (our Chief Executive Officer) evaluates segment performance based on a variety of measures including Segment Adjusted EBITDA, segment volumes and maintenance capital investment.
We define Segment Adjusted EBITDA as revenues and equity earnings in unconsolidated entities less (a) purchases and related costs, (b) field operating costs and (c) segment general and administrative expenses, plus (d) our proportionate share of the depreciation and amortization expense (including write-downs related to cancelled projects) of unconsolidated entities, further adjusted for (e) certain selected items including (i) the mark-to-market of derivative instruments that are related to underlying activities in another period (or the reversal of such adjustments from a prior period), gains and losses on derivatives that are related to investing activities (such as the purchase of linefill) and inventory valuation adjustments, as applicable, (ii) long-term inventory costing adjustments, (iii) charges for obligations that are expected to be settled with the issuance of equity instruments, (iv) amounts related to deficiencies associated with minimum volume commitments, net of applicable amounts subsequently recognized into revenue and (v) other items that our CODM believes are integral to understanding our core segment operating performance and (f) to exclude the portion of all preceding items that is attributable to noncontrolling interests in consolidated joint venture entities (“Adjusted EBITDA attributable to noncontrolling interests in consolidated joint ventures”). See Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a reconciliation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA to Net income/(loss) attributable to PAGP.
In connection with our merchant activities, our Crude Oil and NGL segments may enter into intersegment transactions for the purchase or sale of products, along with services such as the transportation, terminalling or storage of products. Intersegment transactions are conducted at rates similar to those charged to third parties or rates that we believe approximate market. Intersegment activities are eliminated in consolidation and we believe that the estimates with respect to these rates are reasonable. Also, our segment operating and general and administrative expenses reflect direct costs attributable to each segment; however, we also allocate certain operating expenses and general and administrative overhead expenses between segments based on management’s assessment of the business activities for the period. The proportional allocations by segment require judgment by management and may be adjusted in the future based on the business activities that exist during each period. We believe that the estimates with respect to these allocations are reasonable.
Revenues and expenses from our Canadian based subsidiaries, which use CAD as their functional currency, are translated at the prevailing average exchange rates for the month.
Crude Oil Segment
Our Crude Oil segment operations generally consist of gathering and transporting crude oil using pipelines, gathering systems, trucks and at times on barges or railcars, in addition to providing terminalling, storage and other facilities-related services utilizing our integrated assets across the United States and Canada. Our assets serve third parties and are also supported by our merchant activities. Our merchant activities include the purchase of crude oil supply and the movement of this supply on our assets to sales locations, including our terminals, third-party connecting carriers, regional hubs or to refineries. Our merchant activities are subject to our risk management policies and may include the use of derivative instruments to hedge our exposure.
Our Crude Oil segment generates revenue through a combination of tariffs, pipeline capacity agreements and other transportation fees, month-to-month and multi-year storage and terminalling agreements and the sale of gathered and bulk-purchased crude oil. Tariffs and other fees on our pipeline systems are typically based on volumes transported and vary by receipt point and delivery point. Fees for our terminalling and storage services are based on capacity leases and throughput volumes. Generally, results from our merchant activities are impacted by (i) increases or decreases in our lease gathering crude oil purchases volumes and (ii) the overall strength, weakness and volatility of market conditions, including regional differentials and time spreads. In addition, the execution of our risk management strategies in conjunction with our assets can provide upside in certain markets. The segment results also include the direct fixed and variable field costs of operating the crude oil assets, as well as an allocation of indirect operating costs.
The following tables set forth our operating results from our Crude Oil segment:
** Indicates that variance as a percentage is not meaningful.
(1)Revenues and costs and expenses include intersegment amounts.
(2)Segment general and administrative expenses reflect direct costs attributable to each segment and an allocation of other expenses to the segments. The proportional allocations by segment require judgment by management and are based on the business activities that exist during each period.
(3)Represents adjustments included in the performance measure utilized by our CODM in the evaluation of segment results. See Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of such adjustments.
(4)Average daily volumes in thousands of barrels per day calculated as the total volumes (attributable to our interest for pipelines owned by unconsolidated entities or undivided joint interests) for the year divided by the number of days in the year. Volumes associated with acquisitions represent total volumes for the number of days we actually owned the assets divided by the number of days in the period.
(5)Includes volumes (attributable to our interest) from assets owned by unconsolidated entities.
(6)Average monthly capacity in millions of barrels per day calculated as total volumes for the year divided by the number of months in the year.
(7)Of this amount, approximately 1,038 thousand barrels per day (“MBbls/d”), 862 MBbls/d and 767 MBbls/d were purchased in the Permian Basin for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Crude Oil Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to less favorable crude oil market conditions for our merchant activities in 2021 (largely associated with decreased contango margins and continuing compressed regional basis differentials). In addition, the 2021 period was negatively impacted by asset sales. These impacts were partially offset by lower field operating costs and slightly higher volumes on our pipeline assets.
Crude Oil Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to overall less favorable crude oil market conditions for our merchant activities during 2020 (compressed regional basis differentials, partially offset by the favorable impact of contango margins) and lower pipeline volumes caused by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by lower field operating costs.
The various components of Segment Adjusted EBITDA are discussed further below.
Revenues, Net of Purchases and Related Costs (“net revenues”) and Equity Earnings in Unconsolidated Entities. The following is a discussion of the significant items impacting net revenues and equity earnings in unconsolidated entities for the comparable 2021, 2020 and 2019 periods.
•COVID-19 Impact. Crude oil production in the U.S. stabilized in 2021 and while it began increasing in the second half of the year, on average, U.S. crude oil production was slightly lower than the 2020 average. In 2020, crude oil production in the U.S. was nearly 1 million barrels per day lower than the 2019 average, as the pandemic significantly reduced demand for crude oil.
These factors resulted in lower pipeline transportation net revenues across the majority of the regions in which we operate in 2020 as compared to 2019 and unfavorable market conditions and lower earnings from our merchant activities during 2020 and 2021 highlighted by less favorable crude oil differentials, particularly the differential between the value of crude oil in the Permian Basin compared to the Gulf Coast market. Those negative conditions were partially offset by the favorable impact of contango market conditions during 2020 and, to a lesser extent, during 2021.
•Winter Storm Uri. The extreme winter weather event that occurred in February 2021 (“Winter Storm Uri”) resulted in shut-ins that further compounded the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic-related reset to production on our pipeline volumes. The resulting unfavorable impact on our revenues was more than offset by the favorable impact from lower power costs on equity earnings and field operating costs, as discussed further below.
•Equity Earnings in Unconsolidated Entities. Volumes on pipelines owned by unconsolidated entities were also negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic-related production declines and, for the pipelines located in the Permian Basin and South Texas/Eagle Ford regions, the effects of Winter Storm Uri in 2021. The unfavorable impact of the lower volumes on equity earnings was partially offset by lower power costs, including the impact of gains related to hedged power costs resulting from Winter Storm Uri.
In addition, equity earnings for the 2021 period were negatively impacted by (i) the write-off of costs associated with the cancellation of capital projects and (ii) depreciation expense and transition costs associated with phase one of the Wink to Webster pipeline being placed into service during the first quarter of 2021. Such costs are included in the line item “Depreciation and amortization of unconsolidated entities” in the table above as an adjustment to arrive at Segment Adjusted EBITDA.
•Minimum Volume Commitments. A portion of the lower volumes experienced on our pipelines, and pipelines owned by unconsolidated entities, in 2020 were covered by minimum volume commitments, some of which had make-up rights. For contracts that have make-up rights, although payment has been received associated with the volume deficiency, the earnings are not recognized until future periods when either the shortfall is made up or when the shipper’s make-up rights expire or it is determined that their ability to utilize the make-up right is remote. Such deficiencies are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above as discussed further below under “-Adjustments-Deficiencies under minimum volume commitments, net.”
•Asset Sales. Storage and terminalling fees for 2021 compared to 2020 were unfavorably impacted by the sale of (i) our natural gas storage facilities in August 2021 and (ii) our Los Angeles Basin terminals in October 2020.
Field Operating Costs. The decrease in field operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to (i) lower power costs, including the impact of gains related to hedged power costs resulting from Winter Storm Uri, (ii) lower compensation costs resulting from lower headcount and the sales of our natural gas storage facilities in August 2021 and Los Angeles Basin terminals in October 2020, (iii) lower long-haul third-party trucking costs and a decrease in company personnel and truck costs as more of our supply was connected to pipelines and taken off trucks and (iv) streamlining efforts which have resulted in decreases in variable costs. These favorable impacts were partially offset by (i) incremental operating costs from the Permian JV and (ii) additional estimated costs associated with the Line 901 incident (which impact field operating costs but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above).
The decrease in field operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to (i) a decrease in variable costs due to lower volumes, (ii) a decrease of maintenance and integrity management activities, primarily due to interval changes facilitated through risk-based data application, (iii) reduced activity at our rail terminals, (iv) a decrease in long-haul third-party trucking costs and a decrease in company personnel and truck costs as more of our supply was connected to pipelines and taken off trucks and (v) additional estimated costs recognized in 2019 associated with the Line 901 incident (which impact field operating costs but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above). Such favorable impacts were partially offset by higher property taxes attributable to assets placed in service in 2020 and increased property valuations.
Segment General and Administrative Expenses. See the “-Consolidated Results” section above for a discussion of general and administrative expenses.
Adjustments. The following is a discussion of adjustments included in the calculation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA, the performance measure utilized by our CODM in the evaluation of segment results.
• Deficiencies under minimum volume commitments, net. Many industry infrastructure projects developed and completed over the last several years were underpinned by long-term minimum volume commitment contracts whereby the shipper agreed to either: (i) ship and pay for certain stated volumes or (ii) pay the agreed upon price for a minimum contract quantity. Some of these agreements include make-up rights if the minimum volume is not met. If a counterparty has a make-up right associated with a deficiency, we bill the counterparty and defer the revenue attributable to the counterparty’s make-up right but record an adjustment to reflect such amount associated with the current period activity in Segment Adjusted EBITDA. We subsequently recognize the revenue, and record a corresponding reversal of the adjustment, at the earlier of when the deficiency volume is delivered or shipped, when the make-up right expires or when it is determined that the counterparty’s ability to utilize the make-up right is remote. The amount presented as an “Adjustment” in the table above reflects the net adjustment for revenues deferred during the period and the reversal of previously deferred revenues that were recognized during the period.
•Impact from Certain Derivative Activities and Inventory Valuation Adjustments. The impact from certain derivative activities on our net revenues includes mark-to-market and other gains and losses resulting from certain derivative instruments that are related to underlying activities in another period (or the reversal of mark-to-market gains and losses from a prior period), gains and losses on derivatives that are related to investing activities (such as the purchase of linefill) and inventory valuation adjustments, as applicable. See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a comprehensive discussion regarding our derivatives and risk management activities. These gains and losses impact our net revenues but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above.
•Long-Term Inventory Costing Adjustments. Our net revenues are impacted by changes in the weighted average cost of our crude oil inventory pools that result from price movements during the periods. These costing adjustments relate to long-term inventory necessary to meet our minimum inventory requirements in third-party assets and other working inventory that is needed for our commercial operations. We consider this inventory necessary to conduct our operations and we intend to carry this inventory for the foreseeable future. These costing adjustments impact our net revenues but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above.
•Foreign Exchange Impacts. Our net revenues are impacted by fluctuations in the value of CAD to USD, resulting in the realization of foreign exchange gains and losses on the settlement of foreign currency transactions as well as the revaluation of monetary assets and liabilities denominated in a foreign currency within our Canadian operations. These gains and losses impact our net revenues but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above.
Maintenance Capital. Maintenance capital consists of capital expenditures for the replacement and/or refurbishment of partially or fully depreciated assets in order to maintain the operating and/or earnings capacity of our existing assets. The decrease in maintenance capital for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the comparable period for 2020 and 2019 was due to timing changes, the completion of multi-year reliability improvement programs, application of updated regulatory guidance and lower tractor trailer lease buyouts, among other factors. The decrease for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was also due to the sales of our natural gas storage facilities and Los Angeles Basin terminals.
NGL Segment
Our NGL segment operations involve natural gas processing and NGL fractionation, storage, transportation and terminalling. Our NGL revenues are primarily derived from a combination of (i) providing gathering, fractionation, storage, and/or terminalling services to third-party customers for a fee, and (ii) extracting NGL mix supply from the gas stream processed at our Empress straddle plant facility as well as acquiring NGL mix supply, which mix supply is then transported, stored and fractionated into finished products and sold to customers.
Generally, our segment results are impacted by (i) increases or decreases in our NGL sales volumes, (ii) the overall strength, weakness and volatility of market conditions, including the differential between the price of natural gas and the extracted NGL, as well as location differentials and time spreads, and (iii) the effects of competition on our NGL margins. In addition, we utilize various risk management strategies to manage our commodity exposure.
Our NGL operations are sensitive to weather-related demand, particularly during the approximate five-month peak heating season of November through March, and temperature differences from period-to-period may have a significant effect on NGL demand and thus our financial performance as well as the impact of comparative performance between financial reporting periods that bisect the five-month peak heating season.
The following tables set forth our operating results from our NGL segment:
** Indicates that variance as a percentage is not meaningful.
(1)Revenues and costs and expenses include intersegment amounts.
(2)Segment general and administrative expenses reflect direct costs attributable to each segment and an allocation of other expenses to the segments. The proportional allocations by segment require judgment by management and are based on the business activities that exist during each period.
(3)Represents adjustments included in the performance measure utilized by our CODM in the evaluation of segment results. See Note 20 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion of such adjustments.
(4)Average daily volumes calculated as the total volumes (attributable to our interest for pipelines and facilities in which we have undivided joint interests) for the year divided by the number of days in the year.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
NGL Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to (i) higher power costs and (ii) lower wage subsidies received by our Canadian subsidiary in the 2021 period, partially offset by (iii) the favorable impact of higher realized fractionation spreads between the price of natural gas and the extracted NGL (“frac spreads”).
NGL Segment Adjusted EBITDA decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to less favorable NGL sales margins as a result of (i) warmer weather during the fourth quarter of 2020, (ii) weaker frac spreads and (iii) lower NGL supply. Such unfavorable impacts were partially offset by the favorable impact of wage subsidies received by our Canadian subsidiary in the 2020 period.
The various components of Segment Adjusted EBITDA are discussed further below:
Net Revenues. The following is a discussion of the significant items impacting net revenues for the comparable 2021, 2020 and 2019 periods.
•Net revenues from our NGL activities, excluding the impact of derivative activities and inventory valuation and long-term inventory costing adjustments, increased slightly for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher realized frac spreads, partially offset by the absence of the favorable impact of a deficiency payment in 2020 upon the expiration of a multi-year contract.
•Net revenues from our NGL activities decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to (i) warmer weather during the fourth quarter of 2020, (ii) weaker frac spreads, (iii) less NGL supply as a result of lower border flows through our Empress straddle plants, (iv) the impact of the sale of certain NGL storage terminals in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the second quarter of 2020 and (v) the absence of the favorable impact from certain non-recurring items recorded in the second quarter of 2019, partially offset by (vi) the favorable impact of the receipt of a deficiency payment in 2020 upon the expiration of a multi-year contract.
Field Operating Costs. The increase in field operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to (i) increased power costs related to increased ownership in our Empress straddle plants as well as higher power prices, (ii) higher compensation costs including lower wage subsidies received by our Canadian subsidiary, and (iii) costs associated with an operational incident at our Fort Saskatchewan facility that occurred in late September 2021.
The decrease in field operating costs for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 was primarily due to (i) lower power costs as a result of favorable natural gas and electricity price movements, (ii) reductions in compensation costs, primarily due to the benefit of wage subsidies received by our Canadian subsidiary, (iii) the divestiture of certain NGL storage terminals, and (iv) lower integrity management and maintenance activities due to interval changes facilitated through risk-based data application. Such favorable impacts were partially offset by lower mark-to-market gains in the 2020 period on fuel hedges (which impacts field operating costs but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above).
Segment General and Administrative Expenses. See the “-Consolidated Results” section above for a discussion of general and administrative expenses.
Adjustments. The following is a discussion of adjustments included in the calculation of Segment Adjusted EBITDA, the performance measure utilized by our CODM in the evaluation of segment results.
•Impact from Certain Derivative Activities and Inventory Valuation Adjustments. The impact from certain derivative activities on our net revenues includes mark-to-market and other gains and losses resulting from certain derivative instruments that are related to underlying activities in another period (or the reversal of mark-to-market gains and losses from a prior period), gains and losses on derivatives that are related to investing activities (such as the purchase of linefill) and inventory valuation adjustments, as applicable. See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a comprehensive discussion regarding our derivatives and risk management activities. These gains and losses impact our net revenues but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above.
•Long-Term Inventory Costing Adjustments. Our net revenues are impacted by changes in the weighted average cost of our NGL inventory pools that result from price movements during the periods. These costing adjustments relate to long-term inventory necessary to meet our minimum inventory requirements in third-party assets and other working inventory that is needed for our commercial operations. We consider this inventory necessary to conduct our operations and we intend to carry this inventory for the foreseeable future. These costing adjustments impact our net revenues but are excluded from Segment Adjusted EBITDA and thus are reflected as an “Adjustment” in the table above.
Maintenance Capital. The increase in maintenance capital spending for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to (i) repair costs at the Fort Saskatchewan facility, (ii) additional projects related to increased ownership in our Empress straddle plants and (iii) various maintenance capital projects at our Sarnia facility, identified through out of service inspections.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
Our primary sources of liquidity are (i) cash flow from operating activities and (ii) borrowings under PAA’s credit facilities or commercial paper program. In addition, we may supplement these primary sources of liquidity with proceeds from asset sales, and in the past have utilized funds received from sales of equity and debt securities. Our primary cash requirements include, but are not limited to, (i) ordinary course of business uses, such as the payment of amounts related to the purchase of crude oil, NGL and other products, other expenses and interest payments on outstanding debt, (ii) investment and maintenance capital activities, (iii) acquisitions of assets or businesses, (iv) repayment of principal on long-term debt and (v) distributions to our Class A shareholders and noncontrolling interests. In addition, we may use cash for repurchases of common equity. We generally expect to fund our short-term cash requirements through cash flow generated from operating activities and/or borrowings under PAA’s commercial paper program or credit facilities. In addition, we generally expect to fund our long-term needs, such as those resulting from investment capital activities or acquisitions and refinancing long-term debt, through a variety of sources (either separately or in combination), which may include the sources mentioned above as funding for short-term needs and/or the issuance of additional equity or debt securities and the sale of assets.
As of December 31, 2021, although we had a working capital deficit of $94 million, we had over $3 billion of liquidity available to meet our ongoing operating, investing and financing needs, subject to continued covenant compliance, as noted below (in millions):
(1)Represents availability prior to giving effect to borrowings outstanding under the PAA commercial paper program, which reduce available capacity under the facilities.
(2)Available capacity under the PAA senior unsecured revolving credit facility and the PAA senior secured hedged inventory facility was reduced by outstanding letters of credit of $54 million and $44 million, respectively.
Usage of PAA’s credit facilities, which provide the financial backstop for PAA’s commercial paper program, is subject to ongoing compliance with covenants, as discussed further below. PAA’s borrowing capacity and borrowing costs are also impacted by its credit rating. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors-Risks Related to PAA’s Business-Loss of PAA’s investment grade credit rating or the ability to receive open credit could negatively affect its borrowing costs, ability to purchase crude oil, NGL and natural gas supplies or to capitalize on market opportunities.”
We believe that we have, and will continue to have, the ability to access PAA’s commercial paper program and credit facilities, which we use to meet our short-term cash needs. We believe that our financial position remains strong and we have sufficient liquid assets, cash flow from operating activities and borrowing capacity under PAA’s credit agreements to meet our financial commitments, debt service obligations, contingencies and anticipated capital expenditures. We are, however, subject to business and operational risks that could adversely affect our cash flow, including extended disruptions in the financial markets and/or energy price volatility resulting from current macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and/or actions by OPEC. A prolonged material decrease in our cash flows would likely produce an adverse effect on our borrowing capacity and cost of borrowing. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for further discussion regarding risks that may impact our liquidity and capital resources.
Credit Agreements, Commercial Paper Program and Indentures
PAA has three primary credit arrangements, which we use to meet our short-term cash needs. These include PAA’s $1.35 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility maturing in 2026, $1.35 billion senior secured hedged inventory facility maturing in 2024 and $2.7 billion unsecured commercial paper program that is backstopped by PAA’s revolving credit facility and its hedged inventory facility. The credit agreements for PAA’s revolving credit facilities (which impact PAA’s ability to access its commercial paper program because they provide the financial backstop that supports PAA’s short-term credit ratings) and the indentures governing its senior notes contain cross-default provisions. A default under PAA’s credit agreements or indentures would permit the lenders to accelerate the maturity of the outstanding debt. As long as PAA is in compliance with the provisions in its credit agreements, its ability to make distributions of available cash is not restricted. PAA was in compliance with the covenants contained in its credit agreements and indentures as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
The primary drivers of cash flow from operating activities are (i) the collection of amounts related to the sale of crude oil, NGL and other products, the transportation of crude oil and other products for a fee, and the provision of storage and terminalling services for a fee and (ii) the payment of amounts related to the purchase of crude oil, NGL and other products and other expenses, principally field operating costs, general and administrative expenses and interest expense.
Cash flow from operating activities can be materially impacted by the storage of crude oil in periods of a contango market, when the price of crude oil for future deliveries is higher than current prices. In the month we pay for the stored crude oil, we borrow under the PAA credit facilities or commercial paper program (or use cash on hand) to pay for the crude oil, which negatively impacts operating cash flow. Conversely, cash flow from operating activities increases during the period in which we collect the cash from the sale of the stored crude oil. Similarly, the level of NGL and other product inventory stored and held for resale at period end affects our cash flow from operating activities.
In periods when the market is not in contango, we typically sell our crude oil during the same month in which we purchase it and we do not rely on borrowings under the PAA credit facilities or commercial paper program to pay for the crude oil. During such market conditions, our accounts payable and accounts receivable generally move in tandem as we make payments and receive payments for the purchase and sale of crude oil in the same month, which is the month following such activity. In periods during which we build inventory, regardless of market structure, we may rely on the PAA credit facilities or commercial paper program to pay for the inventory. In addition, we use derivative instruments to manage the risks associated with the purchase and sale of our commodities. Therefore, our cash flow from operating activities may be impacted by the margin deposit requirements related to our derivative activities. See Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion regarding our derivatives and risk management activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was approximately $2.0 billion, $1.5 billion and $2.5 billion, respectively, and primarily resulted from earnings from our operations. Additionally, as discussed further below, changes during these periods in our inventory levels and associated margin balances required as part of our hedging activities impacted our cash flow from operating activities.
During 2021, we decreased the volume of both our crude oil inventory due to fewer storage opportunities in the contango market and our NGL inventory as well as the margin balances required as part of our hedging activities, all of which reduced required funding by short-term debt. The cash inflows associated with these activities were partially offset by higher prices for inventory purchased and stored at the end of the current period compared to the end of 2020.
During 2020, we increased the volume of both our crude oil inventory to be stored during the contango market and our NGL inventory in anticipation of the 2020-2021 heating season as well as the margin balances required as part of our hedging activities, all of which was funded by short-term debt. The cash outflows associated with these activities were partially offset by lower prices for inventory purchased and stored at the end of the current period compared to the end of 2019. Cash provided by operating activities was favorably impacted by cash received for transactions for which the revenue has been deferred pending the completion of future performance obligations. See Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
During 2019, our cash provided by operating activities was positively impacted by the proceeds from the sale of NGL and crude oil inventory that we held and also by the lower weighted average price of NGL inventory compared to prior year amounts.
Investing Activities
Capital Expenditures
In addition to our operating needs, we also use cash for our investment capital projects, maintenance capital activities and acquisition activities. We fund these expenditures with cash generated by operating activities, financing activities and/or proceeds from asset sales. In the near term, we do not plan to issue common equity to fund such expenditures. The following table summarizes our investment, maintenance and acquisition capital expenditures (in millions):
(1)Capital expenditures made to expand the existing operating and/or earnings capacity of our assets are classified as “Investment capital.” Capital expenditures for the replacement and/or refurbishment of partially or fully depreciated assets in order to maintain the operating and/or earnings capacity of our existing assets are classified as “Maintenance capital.”
(2)Includes contributions to unconsolidated entities, accounted for under the equity method of accounting, related to investment capital projects by such entities.
(3)Acquisition capital for 2021 represents the cash consideration paid as part of the Asset Exchange transaction. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Acquisition capital for 2020 primarily includes consideration paid in connection with the acquisition of Felix Midstream LLC, a crude oil gathering system located in the Delaware Basin.
Investment Capital Projects
Our investment capital programs consist of investments in midstream infrastructure projects that build upon our core assets and operations. The majority of this investment capital consists of highly-contracted projects that complement our broader system capabilities and support the long-term needs of the upstream and downstream sectors of the industry value chain. The following table summarizes our investment in capital projects (in millions):
(1)Represents pipeline projects with takeaway capacity out of the Permian Basin, including (i) our 16% interest in Wink to Webster Pipeline and (ii) our 65% interest in the Cactus II Pipeline.
(2)Includes projects associated with assets included in the Permian JV.
(3)Includes projects at our St. James, Cushing and Fort Saskatchewan terminals.
Projected 2022 Capital Expenditures. Total investment capital for the year ending December 31, 2022 is projected to be approximately $330 million ($275 million net to our interest). Approximately half of our projected investment capital expenditures are expected to be invested in the Permian JV assets. Additionally, maintenance capital for 2022 is projected to be $220 million ($210 million net to our interest). We expect to fund our 2022 investment and maintenance capital expenditures primarily with retained cash flow.
Divestitures
Proceeds from the sale of assets have generally been used to fund our investment capital projects and reduce debt levels. The following table summarizes the proceeds received from divestitures during the last three years (in millions):
(1)Represents proceeds, including working capital adjustments, net of transaction costs.
(2)Amounts for 2020 include proceeds from a multi-year supply agreement related to the sale of certain NGL terminals in April 2020. Amounts for 2019 include proceeds associated with the formation of Red River Pipeline Company LLC in May 2019. See Note 7 and Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Ongoing Activities Related to Strategic Transactions
We are continuously engaged in the evaluation of potential transactions that support our current business strategy. In the past, such transactions have included the sale of non-core assets, the sale of partial interests in assets to strategic joint venture partners, acquisitions and large investment capital projects. With respect to a potential divestiture or acquisition, we may conduct an auction process or participate in an auction process conducted by a third party or we may negotiate a transaction with one or a limited number of potential buyers (in the case of a divestiture) or sellers (in the case of an acquisition). Such transactions could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
We typically do not announce a transaction until after we have executed a definitive agreement. In certain cases, in order to protect our business interests or for other reasons, we may defer public announcement of a transaction until closing or a later date. Past experience has demonstrated that discussions and negotiations regarding a potential transaction can advance or terminate in a short period of time. Moreover, the closing of any transaction for which we have entered into a definitive agreement may be subject to customary and other closing conditions, which may not ultimately be satisfied or waived. Accordingly, we can give no assurance that our current or future efforts with respect to any such transactions will be successful, and we can provide no assurance that our financial expectations with respect to such transactions will ultimately be realized. See Item 1A. “Risk Factors-Risks Related to PAA’s Business-Divestitures and acquisitions involve risks that may adversely affect PAA’s business.”
Financing Activities
Our financing activities primarily relate to funding investment capital projects, acquisitions and refinancing of debt maturities, as well as short-term working capital (including borrowings for NYMEX and ICE margin deposits) and hedged inventory borrowings related to our NGL business and contango market activities.
Borrowings and Repayments Under Credit Arrangements
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net repayments under the PAA credit facilities and commercial paper program of $712 million. The net repayments resulted primarily from cash flow from operating activities and proceeds from asset sales, which offset borrowings during the period related to funding needs for capital investments, inventory purchases and other general partnership purposes.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net borrowings under the PAA credit facilities and commercial paper program of $296 million. The net borrowings resulted primarily from borrowings during the period related to funding needs for inventory purchases and general partnership purposes.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we had net borrowings under the PAA credit facilities and commercial paper program of $418 million. The net borrowings resulted primarily from borrowings during the period related to funding needs for general partnership purposes.
In connection with the sale of our Pine Prairie and Southern Pines natural gas storage facilities in August 2021, we repaid our two GO Zone term loans totaling $200 million. See Note 7 for additional information regarding the sale of our natural gas storage facilities.
Senior Notes
Issuances of PAA Senior Notes. PAA did not issue any senior unsecured notes during 2021.During 2020 and 2019, PAA issued senior unsecured notes as summarized in the table below (in millions):
(1)Face value of notes less the applicable premium or discount (before deducting for initial purchaser discounts, commissions and offering expenses).
(2)Face value of notes less the applicable premium or discount, initial purchaser discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
(3)PAA used the net proceeds from the offering to repay the principal amounts of its 5.00% senior notes due February 2021.
(4)PAA used the net proceeds from the offering to partially repay the principal amounts of its 2.60% senior notes due December 2019 and 5.75% senior notes due January 2020 and for general partnership purposes.
Repayments of PAA Senior Notes. PAA did not repay any senior unsecured notes during 2021.During 2020 and 2019, PAA repaid the following senior unsecured notes in full (in millions):
(1)PAA repaid these senior notes with proceeds from its 3.80% senior notes issued in June 2020 and cash on hand.
(2)PAA repaid these senior notes with proceeds from its 3.55% senior notes issued in September 2019 and cash on hand.
Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2020, PAA repurchased $17 million of its outstanding senior notes on the open market and recognized a gain of $3 million on these transactions.
In January 2022, PAA provided notice of its intention to redeem its 3.65% senior notes due June 2022 early, on March 1, 2022.
Registration Statements
PAGP Registration Statements. We have filed with the SEC a shelf registration statement that, subject to effectiveness at the time of use, allows us to issue up to an aggregate of $939 million of equity securities (“PAGP Traditional Shelf”). At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $939 million of unsold securities available under the PAGP Traditional Shelf. We also have access to a universal shelf registration statement (“PAGP WKSI Shelf”), which provides us with the ability to offer and sell an unlimited amount of equity securities, subject to market conditions and its capital needs. We did not conduct any offerings under the PAGP Traditional Shelf or PAGP WKSI Shelf during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 or 2019.
PAA Registration Statements. PAA periodically accesses the capital markets for both equity and debt financing. PAA has filed with the SEC a universal shelf registration statement that, subject to effectiveness at the time of use, allows PAA to issue up to a specified amount of debt or equity securities (“PAA Traditional Shelf”), under which PAA had approximately $1.1 billion of unsold securities available at December 31, 2021. PAA also has access to a universal shelf registration statement (“PAA WKSI Shelf”), which provides it with the ability to offer and sell an unlimited amount of debt and equity securities, subject to market conditions and capital needs. The offerings of PAA’s $750 million, 3.80% senior notes in June 2020 and $1.0 billion, 3.55% senior notes in September 2019 were conducted under the PAA WKSI Shelf.
Common Equity Repurchase Program
In November 2020, the board of directors of our general partner approved a $500 million common equity repurchase program (the “Program”) to be utilized as an additional method of returning capital to investors. The Program authorizes the repurchase from time to time of up to $500 million of PAA’s common units and/or our Class A shares via open market purchases or negotiated transactions conducted in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements. Ultimately, the amount, timing and pace of potential repurchase activity will be determined by a number of factors, including market conditions, PAA’s financial performance and flexibility, PAA’s actual and expected Free Cash Flow after distributions, the absolute and relative equity prices of PAA’s common units and our Class A shares, and the extent to which PAA is positioned to achieve and maintain its targeted leverage ratio. No time limit has been set for completion of the Program, and the Program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. The Program does not obligate PAA or us to acquire a particular number of common units or Class A shares. Any PAA common units or Class A shares that are repurchased will be canceled.
PAA repurchased 18.1 million and 6.2 million common units under the Program through open market purchases that settled during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for a total purchase price of $178 million and $50 million respectively, including commissions and fees. The remaining available capacity under the Program as of December 31, 2021 was $272 million.
Distributions to Our Class A Shareholders
We distribute 100% of our available cash to our Class A shareholders of record within 55 days following the end of each quarter. Available cash is generally defined as all of our cash and cash equivalents on hand at the end of each quarter less reserves established in the discretion of our general partner for future requirements. Our levels of financial reserves are established by our general partner and include reserves for the proper conduct of our business (including future capital expenditures and anticipated credit needs), compliance with legal or contractual obligations and funding of future distributions to our shareholders. See Item 5. “Market for Registrant’s Shares, Related Shareholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities-Cash Distribution Policy” for additional discussion regarding distributions.
On February 14, 2022, we paid a quarterly distribution of $0.18 per Class A share ($0.72 per Class A share on an annualized basis). The distribution was paid to Class A shareholders of record as of January 31, 2022, with respect to the quarter ended December 31, 2021. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for details of distributions paid during the three years ended December 31, 2021.
Distributions to Noncontrolling Interests
Distributions to noncontrolling interests represent amounts paid on interests in consolidated entities that are not owned by us. As of December 31, 2021, noncontrolling interests in our subsidiaries consisted of (i) limited partner interests in PAA including a 69% interest in PAA’s common units and PAA’s Series A preferred units combined and 100% of PAA’s Series B preferred units, (ii) an approximate 19% limited partner interest in AAP, (iii) a 35% interest in the Permian JV and (iv) a 33% interest in Red River Pipeline LLC. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for details of distributions paid to noncontrolling interests during the three years ended December 31, 2021.
The initial distribution from the Permian JV of approximately $155 million was paid during the first quarter of 2022, with 65% of the distribution paid to PAA and 35% to noncontrolling interests. Subsequent distributions will be allocated based on a modified sharing arrangement. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Distributions to PAA’s Series A preferred unitholders. Holders of PAA’s Series A preferred units are entitled to receive quarterly distributions, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, of $0.525 per unit ($2.10 per unit annualized). Subject to certain limitations, following January 28, 2021, the holders of PAA’s Series A preferred units may make a one-time election to reset the distribution rate. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Distributions to PAA’s Series B preferred unitholders. Holders of PAA’s Series B preferred units are entitled to receive, when, as and if declared by PAA’s general partner out of legally available funds for such purpose, cumulative cash distributions, as applicable. Through and including November 15, 2022, holders are entitled to a distribution equal to $61.25 per unit per year, payable semiannually in arrears on the 15th day of May and November. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of PAA’s Series B preferred units, including distribution rates and payment dates after November 15, 2022.
Distributions to PAA’s common unitholders. On February 14, 2022, PAA paid a quarterly distribution of $0.18 per common unit ($0.72 per common unit on an annualized basis). The total distribution of $127 million was paid to common unitholders of record as of January 31, 2022, with respect to the quarter ended December 31, 2021. See Note 12 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for details of distributions paid during the three years ended December 31, 2021.
Contingencies
For a discussion of contingencies that may impact us, see Note 19 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Commitments
See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding our debt obligations and Note 19 for information regarding our leases and other commitments.
Purchase Obligations
In the ordinary course of doing business, we purchase crude oil and NGL from third parties under contracts, the majority of which range in term from thirty-day evergreen to five years, with a limited number of contracts with remaining terms extending up to 14 years. We establish a margin for these purchases by entering into various types of physical and financial sale and exchange transactions through which we seek to maintain a position that is substantially balanced between purchases on the one hand and sales and future delivery obligations on the other. We do not expect to use a significant amount of internal capital to meet these obligations, as the obligations will be funded by corresponding sales to entities that we deem creditworthy or who have provided credit support we consider adequate.
The following table includes our best estimate and the timing of these payments as of December 31, 2021 (in millions):
(1)Amounts are primarily based on estimated volumes and market prices based on average activity during December 2021. The actual physical volume purchased and actual settlement prices will vary from the assumptions used in the table. Uncertainties involved in these estimates include levels of production at the wellhead, weather conditions, changes in market prices and other conditions beyond our control.
Letters of Credit. In connection with our merchant activities, we provide certain suppliers with irrevocable standby letters of credit to secure our obligation for the purchase and transportation of crude oil, NGL and natural gas. Our liabilities with respect to these purchase obligations are recorded in accounts payable on our balance sheet in the month the product is purchased. Generally, these letters of credit are issued for periods of up to seventy days and are terminated upon completion of each transaction. Additionally, we issue letters of credit to support insurance programs, derivative transactions, including hedging-related margin obligations, and construction activities. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding letters of credit of approximately $98 million and $129 million, respectively.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by Item 303 of Regulation S-K.
Investments in Unconsolidated Entities
We have invested in entities that are not consolidated in our financial statements. Certain of these entities are borrowers under credit facilities. We are neither a co-borrower nor a guarantor under these credit facilities. We may elect at any time to make additional capital contributions to any of these entities. The following table sets forth selected information regarding these entities as of December 31, 2021 (unaudited, dollars in millions):
(1)We serve as operator of the asset.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP and rules and regulations of the SEC requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements. Such estimates and assumptions also affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Although we believe these estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for our (i) estimated fair value of assets and liabilities acquired and identification of associated goodwill and intangible assets, (ii) fair value of derivatives, (iii) accruals and contingent liabilities, (iv) property and equipment, depreciation and amortization expense and asset retirement obligations, (v) impairment assessments of property and equipment, investments in unconsolidated entities and intangible assets and (vi) inventory valuations have the greatest potential impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules which require us to make judgments and estimates. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates, which are discussed further as follows. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value of Assets and Liabilities Acquired and Identification of Associated Goodwill and Intangible Assets. In accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) guidance regarding business combinations, with each acquisition, we allocate the cost of the acquired entity to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. If the initial accounting for the business combination is incomplete when the combination occurs, an estimate will be recorded. We also expense the transaction costs as incurred in connection with each acquisition, except for acquisitions of equity method investments. In addition, we are required to recognize intangible assets separately from goodwill.
Determining the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired, as well as intangible assets that relate to such items as customer relationships, acreage dedications and other contracts, involves professional judgment and is ultimately based on acquisition models and management’s assessment of the value of the assets acquired and, to the extent available, third-party assessments.
In October 2021, we and Oryx Midstream completed the formation of the Permian JV. See Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for discussion of the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the determination of the fair value of the assets and liabilities acquired and identification of associated intangible assets.
Fair Value of Derivatives. The fair value of a derivative at a particular period end does not reflect the end results of a particular transaction, and will most likely not reflect the gain or loss at the conclusion of a transaction. We reflect estimates for these items based on our internal records and information from third parties. We have commodity derivatives, interest rate derivatives and foreign currency derivatives that are accounted for as assets and liabilities at fair value on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The valuations of our derivatives that are exchange traded are based on market prices on the applicable exchange on the last day of the period. For our derivatives that are not exchange traded, the estimates we use are based on indicative broker quotations or an internal valuation model. Our valuation models utilize market observable inputs such as price, volatility, correlation and other factors and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled due to the lack of a liquid market. Less than 1% of total annual revenues are based on estimates derived from internal valuation models.
We also have embedded derivatives that are recorded at fair value on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. These embedded derivatives are valued using models that contain inputs, some of which involve management judgment.
Although the resolution of the uncertainties involved in these estimates has not historically had a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition, we cannot provide assurance that actual amounts will not vary significantly from estimated amounts. See