Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Our actual results, performance or achievements could differ materially from any future results, performance or achievements discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors.”
OVERVIEW
The Company is a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company advancing oral therapies that aid patients suffering with acute and chronic gastrointestinal (GI) complications stemming from post-operative digestive enzyme damage. Palisade Bio’s innovative lead asset, LB1148, which has been advanced to phase 3 clinical trials for the return of bowel function indication, is a protease inhibitor with the potential to both help restore bowel function and reduce abdominal adhesions following surgery.
The year ended December 31, 2021 was a transformative year for the Company. In April, the Company completed the merger of Seneca and Leading BioSciences. This milestone was followed just a few months later with what the Company believes was the most important clinical data in its history-the positive phase 2 clinical trial results of LB1148. This data demonstrated a statistically significant acceleration of the return of GI function by more than one day following GI surgery. These positive findings informed the Company’s decision to progress to phase 3 pivotal clinical studies for the return of bowel function following surgery. The Company is also continuing to build additional pipeline assets to treat the wide array of health complications caused by the inflammation and tissue damage produced by rogue digestive enzymes.
Clinical and Regulatory Overview
In July 2021, the Company released positive top-line phase 2 clinical trial results demonstrating that LB1148 accelerated the time to return of bowel function by 1.1 days in patients undergoing GI surgery. This data allowed the Company to achieve alignment with the FDA to proceed with phase 3 study of LB1148 for accelerating the return of bowel function in patients undergoing abdominal surgery.
A pooled-study analysis showed LB1148 was successful in reducing the risk of adhesions by 72% and reducing the extent and severity of adhesions by 92%. The Company’s phase 2 GI surgery study of LB1148 in the U.S. has been amended to deliver 70 or more patients that may have an adhesion assessment to further inform the Company’s development program to prevent post-surgical adhesions.
During 2021 the Company received FDA Fast Track designation for LB1148 for two indications (i) the treatment of postoperative gastrointestinal dysfunction associated with pediatric cardiovascular surgery, and (ii) the reduction of adhesions following abdominal and pelvic surgery.
Financial Overview
In August 2021, Yuma Regional Medical Center invested an additional $5.2 million in the Company.
Operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $41.9 million, of which $30.1 million was attributable to in-process research and development expense associated with the Merger. Also contributing to the operating loss, research and development expense and general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.4 million and $9.3 million, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities was $14.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $4.8 million of cash usage was attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in quarantines, restrictions on travel and other business and economic disruptions, and had a negative impact on the Company's ability to conduct clinical trials of its lead drug candidate, LB1148. Supply chain constraints associated with the COVID-19 pandemic have impacted the availability of the components needed in the manufacture of LB1148 and, depending on the duration and extent of the pandemic or new strains, could impact the components and production capacity required for a commercial scale-up of LB1148. The Company believes it has sufficient supply or plans for supply to meet its clinical and nonclinical development needs through 2022. However, depending on the duration and impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on local and global supply chains, our suppliers could be adversely impacted, which may result in delays or disruptions in our current or future supply chain. The ongoing rollout of vaccines and a decreasing trend in new cases domestically is driving optimism for economic recovery, and specific to the Company's business operations, availability of clinical trial sites and patients to enroll in the ongoing clinical trials of LB1148. The Company will continue to actively evaluate the impact of the pandemic on its business operations and plans, including but not limited to the impact on access to capital, planned and ongoing clinical trials, cash management and its investment policies regarding cash as well as the long-term effects in the medical and drug development fields.
Refer to Note 1 in Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statement and Supplemental Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of COVID-19 and the impact it has had on the Company's business operations. For further discussion of the risks related to COVID-19, see Item 1A. "Risk Factors" in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
FINANCIAL OVERVIEW
Amounts discussed herein related to the Company's financial condition and results of operations prior to the closing of the Merger are representative of LBS’s operations. The financial condition and results of operations subsequent to the closing of the Merger include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries, Leading Biosciences, Inc. and Suzhou Neuralstem Biopharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
Revenue
The Company generated no revenues from the sale of its proposed therapies for any of the periods presented.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the clinical development of the Company's lead product candidate LB1148, which include:
•salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation;
•laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical and clinical trials;
•expenses under agreements with third-party contract research organizations, investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on the Company’s behalf, and consultants;
•costs related to develop and manufacture preclinical study and clinical trial material; and
•regulatory expenses.
The Company’s direct research and development expenses are tracked by product candidate and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid under third-party license agreements and to outside consultants, CROs, clinical site, contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) and research laboratories in connection with its preclinical development, process development, manufacturing, clinical development, and regulatory activities. The Company does not allocate employee costs and costs associated with its discovery efforts, laboratory supplies and facilities, including other indirect costs, to specific product candidates because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and, as such, are not separately classified. The Company primarily uses internal resources to conduct its research as well as for managing its preclinical development, process development, and clinical development activities.
The Company's cash research and development expenses were approximately $0.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2021. The Company expects research and development expenses to increase in 2022. In particular, the Company expects the costs associated with investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on the Company's behalf to increase as the Company accepts new sites and new patients into its clinical trials. Similarly, the Company expects the laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of preclinical and clinical trials to increase in 2022, as well as costs related to the development and manufacture LB1148.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salary and employee-related costs and benefits, professional fees for legal, intellectual property, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services, insurance costs, director's fees and stipends, and general corporate expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in the full year 2022 compared to those in 2021 of our accounting predecessor, LBS, as we: (i) incur a full year of post-Merger costs, including the additional audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance premiums; and investor relations costs, (ii) hire additional personnel to support the growth and operational strategy of the Company, and (iii) protect our intellectual property. The Company's cash general and administrative expenses were approximately $2.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Going Concern
The Company’s management has evaluated whether there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern and has determined that substantial doubt existed as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This determination was based on the following factors: (i) the Company’s available cash as of the date of this filing will not be sufficient to fund its anticipated level of operations for the next 12 months; (ii) the Company will require additional financing by the second half of 2022 to continue at its expected level of operations; and (iii) if the Company fails to obtain the needed capital, it will be forced to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of its development activities or perhaps cease operations. In the opinion of management, these factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about the ability of the Company to continue as a going concern as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and for one year from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The decrease in research and development expenses of approximately $0.7 million, or 22%, from $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to $0.7 million net decrease in clinical trial activities due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, as well as a decrease in research and development activity in an effort to conserve liquidity going into the Merger. Higher trailing enrollment from the period immediately prior to the onset of COVID-19 led to higher research and development expenses in 2020 compared to 2021 as clinical trial activities for non-essential surgical procedures were virtually halted in the second half of 2020 and into 2021. The Company resumed its clinical trials in the first quarter of 2022. A $0.5 million decrease in research and development payroll and employee-related expenses in 2021, due primarily to a decrease in the permanent workforce with the halting of clinical trial activities, and lower share-based compensation expense, was offset by a $0.5 million increase in consultants and contract labor and an increase in manufacturing and storage costs in preparation for resumption of clinical trials in 2022.
In-process research and development
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized an in-process research and development expense of $30.1 million associated with the Merger. See Note 3 in Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statement and Supplemental Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for further details regarding this expense.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $3.1 million, or 50%, from $6.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily related to higher general and administrative expenses associated with operating as a public company, as compared to those of our accounting predecessor, LBS, including (i) a $1.1 million increase in accounting and legal costs associated with regulatory, compliance and governance fees required since the Merger, (ii) a $0.7 million increase in investor relations and shareholder services costs, (iii) a $0.7 million increase in insurance costs associated with being a public company, (iv) $0.4 million of costs associated with the winddown of Seneca-related operations after the Merger, and (v) a $0.3 million net increase in net payroll and employee related costs coinciding with the increased staffing needs after becoming a public company and expected staffing needs in line with the Company's strategy and operating plan. These increases in the year ended 2021 compared to 2020 were partially offset by a $0.1 million decrease in share-based compensation expense.
Other income (expense)
Other income, net increased by $16.3 million from an expense of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to income of $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due a reduction in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $23.0 million in 2021, a portion of which was due to an agreement entered into in July 2021 between the Company and Altium Growth Fund, L.P. (the "Investor") whereby the Investor agreed to waive certain provisions of the previous Security Purchase Agreement entered into between the parties (the "Waiver Agreement"), which resulted in a $3.9 million favorable change in the fair value of the underlying warrants. Also contributing to the increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a $0.3 million gain on the forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan.
The gross increase in other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was partially offset by (i) a $2.2 million increase in interest expense mostly due to the non-cash debt discount accretion related to the pre-Merger senior secured debt financing that was accelerated when this debt was converted to equity at the close of the Merger, (ii) a $1.9 million loss on the issuance of LBS Series 1 Preferred Stock due to fair value of the liability classified warrants being in excess of the equity proceeds, (iii) $3.2 million of costs associated with the issuance of warrants in the period, including a $1.7 million loss associated with the issuance of warrants as a condition of the Waiver Agreement, and (iv) a $0.1 million decrease in the loss recorded on the issuance of secured debt in connection with the discount given for the pre-Merger senior secured debt from a loss of $0.8 million on the senior secured debt issued in 2020 to a loss of $0.7 million on the senior secured debt issued in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financial Condition
Since the Company's inception, it has financed its operations through the sales of its securities, issuance of long-term debt, the exercise of investor warrants, and to a lesser degree grants and research contracts as well as the licensing of its intellectual property to third parties. Refer to the paragraph under the heading "Going Concern" in the Financial Overview section above for management's assessment of the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Sources of Liquidity
Management expects the Company to incur substantial operating losses for the foreseeable future in order to complete clinical trials and launch and commercialize any product candidates for which it may receive regulatory approval. The Company will need to raise additional capital through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, and other similar arrangements. The Company’s ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by general political, economic conditions or a resurgence of COVID-19, COVID-19 variants, or another pandemic. In the event the Company is unable to access additional capital, it may need to curtail or greatly reduce its operations, which could have an adverse impact its business, financial condition, and results of operations. In addition, pursuant to an agreement with the Investor, the Company's ability to conduct a primary offering of its securities is restricted prior to March 18, 2022.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2021 the Company had $10.5 million in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash. The following table shows a summary of the Company's cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflects a $26.6 million loss for the year adjusted for $4.8 million of net cash outflows related to changes in operating assets and liabilities, and certain non-cash items including: (i) a $0.3 million gain on forgiveness of the Company's Paycheck Protection Program loan ("PPP loan"), (ii) $1.7 million in costs allocated to warrant issuances not associated with the Merger, (iii) a $1.9 million expense recognized for stock-based compensation, (iv) a $23.0 million gain recorded for the change in the fair market value of the warrant liabilities, of which $3.9 million resulted from the Waiver Agreement, (v) a $0.7 million loss on the issuance of the senior secured debt, and (vi) a $0.2 million lease expense recognized. Additionally, the following net non-cash expenses of $35.7 million were incurred in connection with the Merger transaction:
a)$30.1 million expense related to in-process research and development solely related to the Merger.
b)$2.2 million relating to the accelerated debt accretion as a result of the Merger
c)$1.9 million loss recorded in connection with the issuance of LBS Series 1 Preferred Stock
d)$1.6 million issuance cost allocated to the warrant liabilities incurred as a result of the transaction costs associated with the Merger.
e)$0.1 million non-cash benefit for transaction costs shared with Seneca.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $10.3 million loss for the year adjusted for $2.4 million of net cash inflows related to changes in operating assets and liabilities, a $2.0 million non-cash expense recognized for stock-based compensation, and a $0.8 million non-cash loss on issuance of senior secured debt.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used investing activities consisted of $3.3 million in cash acquired in connection with the Merger that was offset by $3.3 million of cash used to pay for acquisition related costs in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities consisted of $6,000 of property and equipment purchases.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $24.6 million, which was primarily generated as follows: (i) $19.9 million in net proceeds from the issuance of LBS Series 1 Preferred Stock, (ii) $5.2 million from the issuance of common stock and warrants, and (iii) $1.3 million in proceeds from the issuance of senior secured debt. These increases were partially offset by payments on debt of $1.4 million, redemption of warrants of $0.1 million, payment of debt issuance costs of $0.2 million and payment of equity issuance costs of $0.1 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was primarily attributable to $1.2 million from the issuance of common stock and warrants, and $0.8 million from the issuance of debt, partially offset by payments of debt and debt issuance costs of $0.1 million.
Future Liquidity and Needs
The Company has incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. To date, the Company has not been able to generate significant revenues nor achieve operating profitability. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repaid the outstanding principal and accrued interest on its outstanding unsecured promissory note and related party note using cash on hand. Also during the year ended December 31, 2021, the outstanding principal and interest on both tranches of the senior secured promissory notes were cancelled for shares of Series 1 Preferred Stock of the Company.
The Company’s available cash as of the date of this filing will not be sufficient to fund its anticipated level of operations for the next 12 months and the Company will require additional financing by the second half of 2022 to continue at its expected level of operations. If the Company fails to obtain the needed capital, it will be forced to delay, scale back, or eliminate some or all of its development activities or perhaps cease operations.
Other than payments due under the facility lease of its corporate headquarters of approximately $0.1 million and the final insurance financing arrangements payments due of approximately $0.1 million and cash to fund its normal operations, as of December 31, 2021 the Company has no other significant contractual cash commitments required in 2022 or thereafter. The Company intends to enter into insurance financing arrangements when the associated insurance contracts renew in the second quarter of 2022. The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company's consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the Company to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions that impact the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. The Company’s estimates are based on historical experience, known trends, events and various other factors that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. In making estimates and judgments, management employs critical accounting policies.
The Company's significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statement are described in more detail in Note 2 in Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statement and Supplemental Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, the Company believes that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations:
Accrued research and development expenses
The Company is required to make estimates of our accrued expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with CROs, clinical sites, manufacturers, vendors and consultants, in connection with conducting research and development activities. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with Company personnel and consultants to identify services that have been performed on the Company's behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when the Company has not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of the Company's service providers invoice the Company monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. The Company makes estimates of its accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to it at that time.
The financial terms of the Company's contracts with CROs, clinical sites, manufacturers, vendors and consultants are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. The Company reflects research and development expenses associated with its clinical trial activities by matching those expenses with the period in which the Company estimates services and efforts are expended. The Company accounts for research and development expenses according to the progress of the underlying study as measured by the timing of various aspects of the study or related activities, such as the successful enrollment of subjects and the completion of clinical study milestones. In accruing service fees, the Company estimates the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period and adjusts accordingly. There may be instances in which payments made to the Company's vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense.
Other examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•investigative sites in connection with clinical studies;
•vendors in connection with preclinical development activities; and
•vendors related to the development, manufacturing, and distribution of clinical trial materials.
Although the Company does not expect its estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if the Company's estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in the Company reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Stock-based compensation
The Company issues stock-based awards to employees and non-employees, generally in the form of stock options. The Company accounts for its stock-based awards in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standard Codification ("ASC") Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, or ASC 718. ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options and modifications to existing stock options, to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their fair values. The Company's stock-based awards are subject to service-based vesting conditions only. The stock-based compensation expense recognized represents the cost of the grant date fair value of equity awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. The Company estimates the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognizes forfeitures as they occur. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including (i) the risk-free interest rate, (ii) the expected volatility of the Company's common stock, (iii) the expected term of award, and (iv) the expected dividend yield. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require judgment to develop. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the option are based on the yields of zero-coupon U.S. treasury securities. Due to the lack of an adequate history of a public market for the trading of the Company's common stock and a lack of adequate company-specific historical and implied volatility data, the Company has based its estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. For these analyses, the Company has selected companies with comparable characteristics to it, including enterprise value, risk profiles, and position within the industry, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. The Company computes the historical volatility data using the daily close prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the
calculated expected term of its own stock-based awards. The Company will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of its common stock price becomes available. The Company has estimated the expected term of its stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. See Note 9 in Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statement and Supplemental Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information and specific assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Stock-based compensation expense totaled approximately $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates its financial instruments, including warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. The Company values its derivatives using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model or other acceptable valuation models, including Monte-Carlo simulations. Derivative instruments are valued at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Company reviews the terms of debt instruments, equity instruments and other financing arrangements to determine whether there are embedded derivative features, including embedded conversion options that are required to be bifurcated and accounted for separately as a derivative financial instrument. Additionally, in connection with the issuance of financing instruments, the Company may issue freestanding options and warrants, including options or warrants to non-employees in exchange for consulting or other services performed.
The Company accounts for its common stock warrants in accordance with ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). Based upon the provisions of ASC 815, the Company accounts for common stock warrants as liabilities if the warrant requires net cash settlement or gives the holder the option of net cash settlement or it fails the equity classification criteria. The Company accounts for common stock warrants as equity if the contract requires physical settlement or net physical settlement or if the Company has the option of physical settlement or net physical settlement and the warrants meet the requirements to be classified as equity. Common stock warrants classified as liabilities are initially recorded at fair value and remeasured at fair value each balance sheet date with the offset adjustments recorded in change in fair value of warrant liability within the consolidated statements of operations. See Note 9 in Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statement and Supplemental Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information and specific assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Common stock warrants classified as equity are initially measured at fair value on the grant date and are not subsequently remeasured.
See Note 5 in Part II, Item 8. "Financial Statement and Supplemental Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information and specific assumptions used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation valuation model to determine the estimated fair value of the Company's liability classified warrants issued in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company's liability classified warrants had a fair value of $2.7 million and $1.8 million, respectively, and in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recognized gains associated with the change in fair value of warrants of $23.0 million and less than $0.1 million, respectively.
Common Stock Fair Value
Prior to becoming a publicly traded company, the Company was required to periodically estimate the fair value of common stock when issuing stock options and computing its estimated stock-based compensation expense. The fair value of common stock was determined on a periodic basis, with the assistance of an independent third-party valuation expert. The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of significant levels of management judgment.
The fair value of the common stock underlying the Company’s stock options was estimated at each grant date. The Company's board of directors intended all options granted with an exercise price per share no less than the estimated fair value per share of common stock underlying those options on the date of grant.
In order to determine the fair value, Palisade considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of the Company's common stock, the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations, including related industry trends affecting its operations; the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale, given prevailing market conditions; the lack of marketability of the LBS common stock (pre-Merger); the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and U.S. and global economic and capital market conditions.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.