Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Our fiscal quarters end on April 30, July 31, and October 31, and our fiscal year ends January 31. References to fiscal years 2022, 2021, and 2020 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K refer to our fiscal years ended January 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, respectively. A discussion regarding our financial condition and our results of operations for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021 is presented below. A discussion regarding our results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 is presented in the Final Prospectus under the section titled "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations."
Overview
We are at the forefront of technology innovation and thought leadership in automation, creating an end-to-end platform that provides automation with user emulation at its core. Our platform leverages computer vision and artificial intelligence ("AI") to empower software robots to emulate human behavior and execute specific business processes, eliminating the need for employees to execute certain manual and mundane tasks. Our platform allows employees to focus on more value-added work and enables organizations to seamlessly automate business processes ranging from those in legacy information technology ("IT") systems and on-premises applications to new
cloud-native infrastructure and applications without requiring significant changes to the organization’s underlying technology infrastructure. Our platform is purpose-built to be used by employees throughout a company and to address a wide variety of use cases, from simple tasks to long-running, complex business processes.
Our platform is designed to transform the way humans work. We provide our customers with a robust set of capabilities to discover automation opportunities and to build, manage, run, engage, measure, and govern automations across departments within an organization. Our platform leverages the power of AI-based computer vision to enable our robots to perform a vast array of actions as a human would when executing business processes. These actions include, but are not limited to, logging into applications, extracting information from documents, moving folders, filling in forms, and updating information fields and databases. Our robots’ ability to replicate humans’ steps in executing business processes drives continuous improvements in operational efficiencies and enables companies to deliver on key digital initiatives with greater speed, agility, and accuracy.
Our platform is designed to interact with and automate processes across a company’s existing enterprise stack. As a result, our customers can leverage the power of our platform without the need to replace or change existing business applications and with lower overall IT infrastructure cost. Our platform enables employees to quickly build automations for both existing and new processes. Employees can seamlessly maintain and scale automations across multiple deployment options, constantly improve and evolve automations, and continuously track and measure the performance of automations, all without substantial technical experience.
At the core of our automation platform is a set of capabilities that emulates human behavior, which provides our customers with the ability to automate both simple and complex use cases. Automations on our platform can be built, consumed, managed, and governed by any employee who interacts with computers, resulting in the potential for broad applicability of our platform across departments within an organization. Society is at a turning point in how organizations execute work, and we believe the ability to leverage software to enrich the employee experience will unlock tremendous value and efficiency opportunities. While we are still in the early days of a multi-year journey to the fully automated enterprise, momentum is growing as organizations across the world are only now beginning to understand the power of automation.
Founded in a Bucharest, Romania apartment in 2005, UiPath was incorporated in 2015 as a company principally focused on building automation scripts and developing computer vision technology, which remains the foundation of our platform today. Since that time, we have developed and enhanced our robotic process automation ("RPA") capabilities, launched new products, and expanded our operations across the globe.
We now offer a comprehensive range of automation solutions via a suite of interrelated software offerings. We generate revenue from the sale of licenses for our proprietary software, maintenance and support for our software, right to access certain products that are hosted by us (i.e., software as a service, or "SaaS"), and other services, including professional services. Our license fees are based primarily on the number of users who access our software and the number of automations running on our platform. Our license agreements generally have annual terms, and some of our license agreements have multi-year terms. We generally do not sell standalone licenses with a term of less than one year. However, during the term of an annual contract or the last year of a multi-year contract, our customers may enter into an additional license agreement with a termination date that is coterminous with the anniversary date of such annual contract. Additionally, we provide maintenance and support for our software as well as non-recurring professional services such as training and implementation services to facilitate the adoption of our platform. Our professional services complement the capabilities of our customers and partners as they improve customers’ time-to-market and optimize business outcomes using our platform. Our non-recurring professional services include use case development and deployment, solutions architecting, implementation consulting, and training. We have an efficient go-to-market model, which consists primarily of an enterprise field sales force supplemented by an inside sales team focused on small and mid-sized customers, as well as a global strategic sales team focused on the largest global customers. We had over 10,100 and over 7,900 customers as of January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Many of our customers expand the scope and size of use cases of our platform across their organizations as they quickly realize the power of our platform. We believe that the success of our land-and-expand business model is centered on our ability to deliver significant value in a very short time. We grow with our customers as they identify and expand the number of business processes to automate, which increases the number of robots deployed and the number of users interacting with our robots.
A crucial component of our go-to-market strategy is our partner and channel ecosystem, which extends our local and global reach and helps to ensure that customers are able to rapidly build, deploy, and scale automations on our platform. Our business partners include more than 5,100 global and regional system integrators, value-added resellers, and business consultants. We provide tiering recognition through Diamond, Gold, Silver, and Registered levels for partners that meet competency requirements and deliver and maintain a specified number of satisfied customers. These partnerships enhance our market presence and drive greater sales efficiencies. In addition, we have built strong technology partnerships and alliances to enable a large number of connectors and other technical capabilities necessary to meet the breadth of our customer needs.
We have experienced rapid growth. We generated revenue of $892.3 million and $607.6 million, representing a growth rate of 47%, and net losses of $525.6 million and $92.4 million for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Our operating cash flows were $(55.0) million and $29.2 million for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Impact of COVID-19
When the COVID-19 pandemic began to unfold, we took decisive action across our internal and customer operations to ensure the resilience of our company and the safety of our employees. We temporarily shut down all offices and offered our employees technology stipends to encourage remote working, postponed most of our physical conferences and other customer and promotional events, implemented global travel restrictions, reduced headcount and expenses related to event marketing, and engaged in other discretionary cost-saving measures. Although we have recently selectively reopened certain of our offices and have begun permitting some travel and in-person meetings and events in compliance with applicable government orders and public health guidelines, the majority of our employees continue to work remotely. We have a distributed workforce and our employees are accustomed to remote work. Our operational rigor, digital infrastructure, and global footprint have enabled us to support our customers navigating new challenges presented by the pandemic and existing needs to automate. Global demand for automation has continued to accelerate as automation becomes ever more critical for business execution and performance in a remote working environment, and we have continued to invest in the development and marketing of our automation platform to meet that demand. For further information, see the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Performance Metric
We monitor annualized renewal run-rate ("ARR") to help us measure and evaluate the effectiveness of our operations.
ARR is the key performance metric we use in managing our business because it illustrates our ability to acquire new subscription customers and to maintain and expand our relationship with existing subscription customers. We define ARR as annualized invoiced amounts per solution SKU from subscription licenses and maintenance obligations assuming no increases or reductions in their subscriptions. ARR does not include the costs we may incur to obtain such subscription licenses or provide such maintenance, and does not reflect any actual or anticipated reductions in invoiced value due to contract non-renewals or service cancellations other than for specific bad debt or disputed amounts. At January 31, 2022 and 2021, our ARR was $925.3 million and $580.5 million, respectively, representing a growth rate of 59%. Approximately 25% of this growth rate was due to new customers and 75% of this growth rate was due to existing customers. Our dollar-based net retention rate, which represents the net expansion of ARR from existing customers over the preceding 12 months, was 145% as of both January 31, 2022 and 2021. We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period-end ("Prior Period ARR"). We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period-end ("Current Period ARR"). Current Period ARR includes any expansion and is net of contraction or attrition over the last 12 months, but does not include ARR from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the point-in-time dollar-based net retention rate.
Our ARR may fluctuate as a result of a number of factors, including customers’ satisfaction or dissatisfaction with our platform and professional services, pricing, competitive offerings, economic conditions, or overall changes in our customers’ spending levels. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue as ARR is an operating metric and is not intended to be combined with or to replace these items. For clarity, we use annualized invoiced amounts per solution SKU rather than revenue calculated in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP"), to calculate our ARR. Our invoiced amounts are not matched to transfer of control of the performance obligations associated with the underlying subscription licenses and maintenance obligations as they are with respect to our GAAP revenue. This can result in timing differences between our GAAP revenue and ARR calculations. Our ARR calculation simply takes our invoiced amounts per solution SKU under a subscription license or maintenance agreement and divides that amount by the invoice term and multiplies by 365 days to derive the annualized value. In contrast, for our revenue calculated in accordance with GAAP, subscription licenses revenue derived from the sale of term-based licenses hosted on-premises is recognized at the point in time when the customer is able to use and benefit from our software, which is generally upon delivery to the customer or upon the commencement of the renewal term, and maintenance, support, and SaaS revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement. ARR is not a forecast of future revenue, which can be impacted by contract start and end dates, duration, and renewal rates, and does not include invoiced amounts reported as perpetual licenses or professional services revenue in our consolidated statements of operations. Investors should not place undue reliance on ARR as an indicator of our future or expected results. Moreover, our presentation of ARR may differ from similarly titled metrics presented by other companies and may not be comparable to such other metrics. For further information, see the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business, Products, Operations, and Industry" included in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A summary of ARR-related data at January 31, 2022 and 2021 is as follows:
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our results of operations and financial condition are impacted by the macro factors affecting our industry, including the proliferation of cloud-based applications, the cost of skilled human capital, and the global demand for automation solutions. While our business is influenced by these macro factors, our results of operations are more directly affected by certain Company specific factors, including:
Growing Our Global Customer Base
We believe there is a substantial opportunity to continue to grow our customer base. Additionally, we believe that as more organizations adopt our automation platform and experience quantifiable competitive advantages, other organizations will also adopt automation as a necessary tool to compete. While we sell to organizations of all sizes and across a broad range of industries, our go-to-market team’s key focus is on the largest organizations, including large enterprises and governments. We also use an inside sales team focused on small and mid-sized businesses. We plan to continue to invest in our go-to-market team to grow our customer base both domestically and internationally. We intend to continue to grow our customer base by focusing on the top 25 countries as measured by gross domestic product. Although these investments may adversely affect our operating results in the near term, we believe that they will contribute to our long-term growth. Our ability to attract new customers will also depend on a number of other factors, including our ability to drive awareness of the benefits and power of automation in the industry and at our existing and prospective customers, the effectiveness and pricing of our products, the offerings of our competitors, and competition among resellers.
We define our number of customers as the number of accounts with a unique account identifier for which we have an active subscription in the period indicated and include in our customer count entities to which we have sold our products either directly or through a channel partner. Users of our free trials or tier are not included in our customer count. A single organization with multiple divisions, segments, or subsidiaries is counted as a single customer. Our customer count is subject to adjustments for acquisitions, consolidations, spin-offs, and other market activity, and specifically excludes non-paying partners and resellers.
Expanding Within Our Existing Customer Base
Our customer base represents a significant opportunity for further sales expansion. We had over 10,100 and over 7,900 customers as of January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We employ a land-and-expand business model centered around offering products that are easy to adopt and have a short time to value. We believe there is significant opportunity for us to become a strategic partner to our customers in their automation journeys and drive further sales expansion through the following vectors:
•deploy more robots across different departments;
•provide more employees with their own robot assistants;
•increase adoption of platform products; and
•expand use cases for automation in the enterprise to drive increased usage of robots and capacity consumption of our various products.
Our customers often expand the deployment of our platform across large teams and more broadly within the enterprise as they find new use cases for our platform and their employees increasingly interact with and gain confidence working with robots. The power of our land-and-expand model is evidenced by our dollar-based net retention rate and our customers exceeding significant ARR thresholds, described in the section titled “-Key Performance Metric."
We intend to continue to invest in enhancing awareness of our brand and developing more products, features, and functionality, which we believe are important factors to achieve widespread adoption of our platform. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our solution, competition, pricing, and overall changes in our customers’ IT spending levels.
Driving Preference and Share of System Integrators, Value-Added Resellers, and Business Consultants Selling the Value Propositions and Capabilities of Digital Transformation
We are focused on maintaining and growing our ecosystem of partners that build, train, and certify skills in our technology as well as deploy our technology on behalf of their customers. We have built a global partner ecosystem of more than 5,100 systems integrators, value-added resellers, business consultants, technology partners and public cloud vendors. Our partner network includes, among others, Accenture LLP, Capgemini SE, Cognizant Technology Solutions Corporation, Deloitte, EY, Infosys Limited, International Business Machines Corporation, PwC, Tata Consultancy Services Limited, and Wipro Limited. We provide a tiering recognition through Diamond, Gold, Silver, and Registered levels for partners that meet competency requirements and deliver and maintain a tiered number of satisfied customers. In May 2020, we launched the UiPath Services Network ("USN") program to recognize an elite network of partners accredited with advanced delivery skills, and over 50 partners have earned USN certification. We also offer a professional services capability that augments our partners’ efforts where necessary. Our ability to grow our partnership base depends on the competitiveness of our platform and the profitability of our relationship for our partners and potential partners.
Sustaining Innovation and Automation Leadership
Our success is dependent on our ability to sustain innovation and automation leadership in order to maintain our competitive advantage. We believe that we have built a differentiated automation platform and intend to continually increase the value we provide to our customers by investing in extending the capabilities of our platform. We have made and will continue to make significant investments in research and development to bolster our existing technology and enhance usability to improve our customers’ productivity. In May 2021, we released version 21.4 of the UiPath Platform. Innovations included the all-new Automation Ops, designed to help customers manage
and govern high scale deployments of the UiPath Studio family of products and Attended Robots enterprise-wide. New AI-powered capabilities were also introduced to speed the discovery and prioritization of processes to automate, led by the general availability of Task Mining. In November 2021, we released version 21.10 of the UiPath Platform. Innovations in this release include UiPath Integration Service, which delivers API automation to help companies optimize the technologies they already have. Additionally, the introduction of Robot Auto-healing allows for the detection and remediation of robot issues without human intervention, and a host of other new features make our platform simpler, faster, and more gratifying for developers and end users.
We also collaborate with other leading technology companies to develop integrations that simplify the interoperability of our platform with their technology. Examples of integrations available to our customers include integrations with offerings from Amazon Web Services Inc., Adobe Inc., Alteryx Inc., Atlassian Corp Plc, Box, Inc., Crowdstrike Inc., DocuSign Inc., Microsoft Corporation, Oracle Corporation, Qlik Technologies Inc., Salesforce.com, Inc., SAP SE, ServiceNow, Inc., Snowflake, Inc., and Workday, Inc. These pre-built integrations can accelerate the adoption of our platform within our customers’ environment and speed the creation of automations that span multiple technologies.
We also maintain partnerships with leading cloud vendors, such as Amazon Web Services Inc., Google Inc., and Microsoft Corporation, to both simplify the deployment of our platform and extend our platform to offer customers the benefits of cloud-based AI capabilities. We are focused on maintaining and growing our ecosystem of partners to continue to expand our market presence and drive greater sales efficiencies.
In addition, we intend to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive product and market expansion. For example, in March 2021, we acquired Cloud Elements Inc. ("Cloud Elements"), a provider of a leading application programming interface integration platform for SaaS application providers and the digital enterprise. This acquisition brings technology and an experienced team, which we believe will accelerate our technology roadmap in areas such as native integrations and system event automation triggers. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market, and sell existing and new products to both new and existing customers and maintain and expand our relationships with leading technology partners.
Continuing to Invest to Grow and Scale Our Business
We are focused on driving our growth potential over the long term. We believe that our market opportunity is substantial. We intend to continue to invest in scaling across all organizational functions in order to grow our operations both domestically and internationally. We have a history of introducing successful new products and capabilities on our platform and we believe these investments will contribute to our long-term growth.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue from the sale of software licenses for use of our proprietary software, maintenance and support for our licenses, right to access certain software products we host (i.e., SaaS), and professional services. We offer a comprehensive range of automation solutions via a suite of interrelated software offerings. Customers can license our software and deploy our platform on-premises, in a public or private cloud, or in a hybrid environment. In addition, we offer a managed, multi-tenant, SaaS version of certain products (i.e., our SaaS products), which enables our customers to begin automating without the need to provision infrastructure, install applications or perform additional configurations. We also offer maintenance and support, training, and implementation services to our customers to facilitate their adoption of our platform.
In fiscal 2021, we began offering both hybrid solutions and SaaS products. Hybrid solutions are comprised of three performance obligations, consisting of a term license, maintenance and support, and SaaS.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2022, maintenance and support revenue was renamed subscription services revenue, and services and other revenue was renamed professional services and other revenue. We believe that that the new captions better reflect the composition of the revenue streams included in these line items on the consolidated statements of operations.
Licenses
We primarily sell term licenses, which provide customers the right to use software for a specified period of time. From time to time, we also sell perpetual licenses that provide customers the right to use software for an indefinite period of time. For both types of licenses, revenue is recognized at the point in time at which the customer is able to use and benefit from the software, which is generally upon delivery to the customer or upon commencement of the renewal term.
Subscription Services
Subscription services revenue consists of maintenance and support revenue generated through technical support and the provision of unspecified updates and upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis for both term and perpetual license arrangements. Maintenance and support for perpetual licenses is renewable, generally on an annual basis, at the option of the customer. Maintenance and support represents a stand-ready obligation for which revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the arrangement.
Subscription services revenue also consists of revenue related to our SaaS products, including those sold as part of our hybrid offerings. Our SaaS products are stand-ready obligations to provide access to our software, and the associated revenue is recognized ratably over the contractual period of the arrangement beginning when or as control of the promised service begins to transfer to the customer.
Professional Services and Other
Professional services and other revenue consists of fees associated with professional services for process automation, customer education, and training services. Our professional services contracts are structured on a time and materials or fixed price basis, and the related revenue is recognized as the services are rendered.
Cost of Revenue
Licenses
Cost of licenses revenue consists of all direct costs to deliver our licenses to customers, amortization of software development costs, direct costs related to third-party software resales, and amortization of acquired developed technology.
Subscription Services
Cost of subscription services revenue primarily consists of personnel-related expenses of our customer support and technical support teams, including salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and employee benefit costs. Cost of subscription services revenue also includes third-party consulting services, hosting costs related to our SaaS products, amortization of acquired developed technology and capitalized software development costs related to SaaS products, and allocated overhead. Overhead is allocated to cost of subscription services revenue based on applicable headcount. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred. We expect cost of subscription services revenue to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as our customer base grows. In the future, we expect further expansion of our cloud-based deployments. As cloud-based license software and services become a larger percentage of our total revenue, we expect the cloud offering to impact the timing of our recognition of revenue as well as impact our operating margins due to an increase in hosting fees and cloud infrastructure costs.
Professional Services and Other
Cost of professional services and other revenue primarily consists of personnel-related expenses of our professional services team, including salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and employee benefit costs. Cost of professional services and other revenue also includes expenses related to third-party consulting services and allocated overhead. Overhead is allocated to cost of professional services and other revenue based on applicable headcount. We recognize these expenses as they are incurred. We expect cost of professional services and other revenue to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as our customer base grows.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related expenses are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and employee benefit costs. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead. During fiscal years 2022 and 2021, certain operating expenses, such as travel and entertainment, decreased, primarily as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect a resumption of travel and entertainment and related expenses during fiscal year 2023, although the timing and magnitude of these expenses will depend on a number of factors including the trend of the pandemic and potential changes to travel restrictions and stay-at-home orders.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses associated with our sales and marketing teams and related sales support teams, including salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and employee benefit costs. Sales and marketing expenses also include sales and partner commissions, marketing event costs, advertising costs, travel, trade shows, other marketing materials, and allocated overhead. Similar to travel and entertainment, trade show expenses also decreased in fiscal year 2021 and through the first half of fiscal year 2022, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have since seen trade show expenses resume, largely in connection with our FORWARD IV user conference in October 2021. We plan to increase our investment in sales and marketing in absolute dollars over the foreseeable future as we continue to hire additional personnel and invest in sales and marketing programs. We expect that our sales and marketing expense will decrease as a percentage of our total revenue over the long term, although our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and employee benefits costs for our research and development employees. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred, with the exception of certain software development costs which are eligible for capitalization. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development efforts to develop new technology and enhance the functionality and capabilities of our existing products and platform infrastructure. Our research and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including salaries and bonuses, stock-based compensation expense, and employee benefits costs associated with our finance, legal, human resources, compliance, and other administrative teams, as well as accounting and legal professional services fees, other corporate-related expenses, and allocated overhead. Following the completion of the IPO in April 2021, we have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company. As a result, we expect the dollar amount of our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of our total revenue as our revenue grows over the longer term, although our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash deposits, cash and cash equivalents balances, and marketable securities.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net primarily consists of foreign exchange gains and losses and gains and losses associated with foreign currency forward contracts.
Provision For (Benefit From) Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. federal and state, Romanian, and U.K. deferred tax assets, as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that these deferred tax assets will not be realized. Our effective tax rate is affected by tax rates in foreign jurisdictions and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions, as well as by non-deductible expenses as permanent differences and by changes in our valuation allowances.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statement of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenue for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the period indicated:
Comparison of Fiscal Year 2022 and Fiscal Year 2021
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $284.6 million, or 47%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in licenses revenue of $135.4 million and
increase in subscription services revenue of $137.3 million. Approximately 27% of the increase in revenue was from new customers and the remainder was attributable to existing customers. As we continued to expand our sales efforts in the United States and internationally, our revenue increased across all geographical regions.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Total cost of revenue increased by $103.0 million, or 156%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. Cost of licenses revenue increased primarily due to an increase in third-party software resale costs of $5.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in amortization of software development costs. Cost of subscription services revenue increased primarily due to an increase of $26.8 million in personnel-related expenses, which included an increase of $11.7 million in stock-based compensation expense, mostly due to recognition of expense beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 as a result of the satisfaction of IPO-related performance condition for restricted stock units ("RSUs"), and the remainder of which was largely due to increased headcount. Cost of subscription services revenue was also impacted by an increase in hosting and software services of $5.5 million, an increase in depreciation and amortization expense of $2.3 million, and an increase in third-party consulting fees of $1.5 million. Cost of professional services and other revenue increased primarily due to an increase of $46.4 million, in personnel-related expenses, which included $28.0 million in stock-based compensation expense, mostly due to recognition of expense beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 as a result of the satisfaction of IPO-related performance condition for RSUs, and an increase of $4.5 million related to employer tax on settlement of equity awards, and the remainder of which was largely due to increased headcount. Cost of professional services and other revenue was also impacted by a $15.7 million increase in third-party consulting fees.
Our gross margin decreased to 81% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to 89% for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021, primarily as a result of stock-based compensation expense recognized in connection with the satisfaction of performance-based vesting conditions following our IPO.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $317.5 million, or 84%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $324.7 million in personnel-related expenses, which included an increase of $221.6 million in stock-based compensation, mostly due to recognition of expense beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 as a result of the satisfaction of IPO-related performance condition for RSUs, and an increase of $39.3 million related to employer tax on settlement of equity awards, and the remainder of which was largely due to increased headcount. Sales and marketing expense was also impacted by an increase of $22.2 million in marketing costs related to our IPO and marketing events, as well as an aggregate increase of $9.8 million related to recruiting and software service expenses. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $40.4 million in sales commissions expense due to the accounting impact of changes to our sales incentive plan for fiscal year 2022.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $166.7 million, or 152%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $157.6 million in personnel-related expenses, which included an increase of $124.3 million in stock-based compensation, mostly due to recognition of expense beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 as a result of the satisfaction of IPO-related performance condition for RSUs, and an increase of $5.8 million related to employer tax on settlement of equity awards, and the remainder of which was largely due to increased headcount. Research and development expense was also impacted by an increase of $8.2 million in third-party software service and hosting costs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $88.0 million, or 54%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $58.2 million in personnel-related expenses, which included an increase of $43.8 million in stock-based compensation, mostly due to recognition of expense beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 as a result of the satisfaction of IPO-related performance condition for RSUs, and an increase of $3.0 million related to employer tax on settlement of equity awards, and the remainder of which was largely due to increased headcount. General and administrative expense was also impacted by an increase of $12.1 million in third-party consulting fees, an increase of $9.9 million in insurance-related expenses as a result of becoming a public company, an increase of $3.9 million related to hosted business applications, and an increase of $3.3 million related to other tax expenses, partially offset by a $4.8 million aggregate decrease in bad debt and rent expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income increased by $2.4 million, or 208%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 as a result of the period-over-period increase in our cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other expense, net increased by $28.0 million, or 193%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The change was primarily attributable to foreign exchange gains recognized in the prior period, partially offset by a decrease in interest expense in the current period.
Provision For (Benefit From) Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes increased by $17.0 million, or 749%, for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021. The effective tax rate was (2.9)% and 2.4% for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and January 31, 2021, respectively. The change was primarily driven by higher foreign tax expenses resulting from higher year-over-year earnings of our cost-plus margin entities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed operations since our inception primarily through customer payments and net proceeds from sales of equity securities. Our principal uses of cash in recent periods have been funding our operations, investing in capital expenditures, and engaging in various business acquisitions. As of January 31, 2022 and 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and marketable securities totaling $1,884.7 million and $474.0 million, respectively, and we had an accumulated deficit of $1,495.9 million and $970.4 million, respectively. During the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, we had net losses of $525.6 million and $92.4 million, respectively, and net cash (used in) provided by operations of $(55.0) million and $29.2 million, respectively.
In April 2021, we completed our IPO, which resulted in the issuance of 13.0 million shares of our Class A common stock at a public offering price of $56.00 per share, including 3.6 million shares pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. Net proceeds were $687.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $35.6 million and offering expenses of $4.5 million.
In July 2020, we completed our Series E preferred stock financing with gross proceeds totaling $225.9 million. In February 2021, we completed our Series F preferred stock financing with gross proceeds totaling $750.0 million. We have also entered into the Credit Facility (as defined below) with an available borrowing capacity of $200.0 million.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, our product sales, license renewal activity, the timing and the amount of cash received from customers, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the introduction of new and enhanced products, the continuing market adoption of our products, expenses associated with our international expansion, and the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new office spaces. We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations and financial condition.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, marketable securities, payments from customers, and borrowing capacity will be sufficient to fund our anticipated cash requirements for the next twelve months.
Credit Facility
In January 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with HSBC Bank USA, N.A, HSBC Ventures USA Inc., and Silicon Valley Bank, which provided a $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. We repaid the Credit Agreement in full in July 2020. In October 2020, we entered into a new Senior Secured Credit Facility (the "Credit Facility") with HSBC Ventures USA Inc.,
Silicon Valley Bank, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, and Mizuho Bank, LTD, which provided a $200.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility with a maturity date of October 30, 2023. Our obligations under the Credit Facility are secured by substantially all of our assets, except for our intellectual property. The Credit Facility contains certain customary covenants, including, but not limited to, those relating to additional indebtedness, liens, asset divestitures, and affiliate transactions. We may use the proceeds of future borrowings under the Credit Facility for refinancing other indebtedness, working capital, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes, including permitted business acquisitions.
Borrowings under the Credit Facility bear interest at a base rate, as defined in the Credit Facility, plus a margin of 2.0% or 3.0% depending on the base rate. The Credit Facility is subject to customary fees for loan facilities of this type, including ongoing commitment fees at a rate of 0.25% per annum on the daily amount available to be drawn. As of January 31, 2022, we had no outstanding debt under the Credit Facility and were in compliance with our covenants thereunder.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash generation from sales to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, direct costs to deliver our licenses, and marketing expenses. To date, our operating cash flows have generally been negative and we have supplemented working capital requirements primarily through net proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
Net cash used in operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 of $55.0 million was driven by cash payments for operating expenditures, primarily associated with the compensation of our teams, including increased year-end fiscal 2021 sales commissions and bonuses paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 and employer payroll taxes related to employee equity transactions. Other cash operating expenditures included payments for professional services, software, and office rent. These outflows were partially offset by cash collections from our customers, which were approximately 44% higher than in the prior year.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 of $29.2 million was driven by cash collections from our customers, partially offset by cash payments for operating expenditures associated with the compensation of our teams and payments for professional services, software, and office rent.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 of $35.4 million was driven by $16.9 million in net purchases of marketable securities and other investments, $8.9 million in capital expenditures, $5.5 million in cash consideration associated with the acquisition of Cloud Elements, which is presented net of cash acquired, $3.0 million in capitalized software development costs, and $1.2 million in purchases of intangible assets.
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 of $126.0 million was driven by purchases of marketable securities of $103.1 million, deferred payments related to previous business
acquisitions of $19.7 million, capital expenditures of $2.0 million, and capitalized software development costs of $1.2 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 of $1,469.7 million was primarily driven by $749.8 million in net proceeds from issuance of Series F convertible preferred stock, $692.4 million in net proceeds from our IPO after deducting underwriting expenses and commissions, proceeds from employee stock purchase plan contributions of $19.0 million, proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $12.2 million, and net receipts of tax withholdings on sell-to-cover equity award transactions of $10.4 million, partially offset by payments of tax withholdings on net settlement of equity awards of $10.5 million and payments of IPO-related costs of $3.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2021 of $250.4 million was primarily driven by net proceeds from our Series E convertible preferred stock financing of $225.6 million and proceeds from exercises of stock options of $26.4 million.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes the aggregate effect that our material contractual obligations as of January 31, 2022 are expected to have on our cash flows in the periods indicated (in thousands):
The amounts in the table above are associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and amounts of revenue and expenses reported during the period. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. The following are the accounting estimates that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. ASC 606 requires recognition of revenue when control of promised goods or services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue recognition is inherently judgmental, particularly in the case of complex arrangements that include multiple performance obligations. Our most significant judgments relate to the identification of performance obligations within a contract (including whether those obligations are distinct or should be combined), determining the standalone selling price ("SSP") for each performance obligation, and allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations, all of which impact the pattern and timing of revenue recognition.
At the inception of a contract with a customer, we assess the goods or services promised to identify distinct performance obligations. The distinct performance obligations identified in our typical contracts include but are not limited to software license (term or perpetual), support and maintenance, when-and-if-available upgrades, training services, and professional services. If a promised good or service is determined not to be distinct, we combine that
good or service with other goods or services until the combined bundle is a distinct performance obligation, or until all goods or services in the contract have been combined into a single performance obligation.
Most of our contracts contain multiple performance obligations. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative SSP basis. Whenever possible, we refer to observable SSP, which is the price of the same good or service in standalone sales to similar customers in similar circumstances. If observable SSP is not available, we next consider our prior geographical discounting practices for transactions within the preceding twelve months to determine whether a historical SSP exists. If neither observable SSP nor historical SSP is available, we utilize information such as external market data, broader historical pricing data, or list prices, while maximizing the use of observable inputs and methodologies, or, in cases of highly variable or uncertain selling price, may use a residual approach.
For further information about our revenue recognition, refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Revenue Recognition and Note 3, Revenue Recognition, included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to employees, directors, and non-employees based on the grant date fair value of the awards.
The fair value of each RSU is equal to the fair value of our Class A common stock on the grant date. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes pricing model, which makes use of the following inputs:
•Fair value of our common stock. Subsequent to the IPO, market close price of our publicly-traded Class A common stock on the valuation date is used. Prior to the IPO, because there was no public market for our common stock, our board of directors, with the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist, determined the common stock fair value as of the valuation date. (See below for further discussion of pre-IPO valuation of our common stock.)
•Exercise price. Our current practice is to grant options with an exercise price of $0.10 in certain non-U.S. jurisdictions.
•Expected term. We do not yet have sufficient relevant historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis for estimation of expected term post-IPO; we presently use the simplified method permitted under Staff Accounting Bulletin 14, which deems the expected term to be the average of the time-to-vest and the contractual life.
•Expected volatility. As a public market for our common stock did not exist prior to the IPO, we have limited trading history on which to base expectations of volatility; we presently estimate expected volatility based on the volatility of similar publicly held entities, referred to as “guideline companies,” over a look-back period equivalent to the expected term. In evaluating the similarity of guideline companies, we consider factors such as industry, stage of life cycle, size, and degree of financial leverage.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for a period consistent with the expected term.
•Estimated dividend yield. The expected dividend is assumed to be zero, as we have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not intend to declare dividends in the foreseeable future.
Given their immaterial $0.10 exercise price, the Black-Scholes value of our recently granted stock options closely approximates intrinsic value, or fair value of common stock less exercise price; the other aforementioned inputs (expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and estimated dividend yield) have an insignificant impact on the results of the Black-Scholes model.
As a result, our stock-based compensation expense is predominantly sensitive to the fair value of our common stock as it relates to the valuation of stock options and RSUs.
Following our IPO, no estimates are involved in determining the fair value of our common stock because observable market prices are utilized. Prior to the IPO, the fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors, using contemporaneous third-party valuations and input from management, in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. In valuing our common stock, the fair value of our business, or enterprise value, was determined based on objective and subjective factors using various methods under the market approach:
•The subject company transaction method involves the utilization of a company’s own relevant stock transactions, such as the price at which a recent equity class was issued by the company or transacted between third parties.
•The guideline public company method estimates value based on a comparison of the company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple is determined and then applied to our financial results to estimate the value of the subject company.
•The rate of return method estimates value by applying a rate of return, consistent with performance and achievement of development milestones, to a previously estimated equity value, such as one determined using the other methods.
The resulting equity value was then allocated to each class of stock using the option pricing model or a hybrid method that considered both option pricing and the probability-weighted expected return method. After the equity value was determined and allocated to the various classes of stock, a discount for lack of marketability was applied to arrive at the fair value of ordinary shares, because it is assumed that a private company stockholder has limited opportunities to sell and that any such sale would involve significant transaction costs, thereby reducing overall fair market value. In assessing the fair value of common stock for grant dates occurring between formal valuations, we considered the amount of time between the valuation date and the grant date to determine whether to use the latest common stock valuation or a straight-line interpolation between the two valuation dates.
During fiscal year 2022, we granted 3.0 million equity awards that were dependent on the subjective pre-IPO valuation techniques described above. A hypothetical 10% change in the estimated fair value of our common stock would have resulted in a $16.0 million change in the total fair value of these equity awards, $9.5 million of which would have been recognized in expense during the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022.
For further information about our stock-based compensation, refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Stock-Based Compensation and Note 13, Equity Incentive Plans and Stock-based Compensation, included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an "emerging growth company", as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the "JOBS Act"), and, for so long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. In addition, pursuant to Section 107 of the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements and -Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.