Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements involving risks and uncertainties and should be read together with the “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors which could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Unless the context otherwise requires, references herein to “we”, “us”, and “our”, and to the “Company” or “PAVmed” are to PAVmed Inc. and Subsidiaries.
Overview
PAVmed Inc and Subsidiaries, referred to herein as “PAVmed” or the “Company” is comprised of PAVmed Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiary and its majority-owned subsidiaries, inclusive of Lucid Diagnostics, Inc. (“Lucid Diagnostics” or “LUCID”), Veris Health, Inc. (“Veris Health” or “VERIS”), and Solys Diagnostics, Inc. (“Solys Diagnostics” or “SOLYS”).
The Company is a highly differentiated, multi-product, commercial-stage medical technology company organized to advance a broad pipeline of innovative medical technologies from concept to commercialization, employing a business model focused on capital efficiency and speed to market. Since the inception of PAVmed Inc. on June 26, 2014, the Company’s activities have focused on advancing its lead products towards regulatory approval and commercialization, protecting its intellectual property, and building its corporate infrastructure and management team.
The Company operates in one segment as a medical technology company, with the following lines-of-business: “Medical Devices”, “Diagnostics”, “Digital Health”, and “Emerging Innovations”. The Company has ongoing operations conducted through PAVmed Inc. and its majority-owned subsidiaries of Lucid Diagnostics, Veris Health, and Solys Diagnostics.
Our multiple products and services are in various phases of development, regulatory clearances, approvals, and commercialization.
● The EsoCheck device received 510(k) marketing clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), in June 2019 and European CE Mark Certification in May 2021 as an esophageal cell collection device; and, EsoGuard has been established as a Laboratory Developed Test (“LDT”), completed European CE Mark Certification in June 2021, and was launched commercially in December 2019.
● Our CarpX device is a patented, single-use, disposable, minimally-invasive surgical device designed as a precision cutting tool to treat carpal tunnel syndrome while reducing recovery times that was cleared by the FDA under section 510(k) in April 2020.
● In May 2021, we formed Veris Health, which is our newest majority-owned subsidiary. In connection with its formation, Veris Health acquired Oncodisc Inc (“Oncodisc”), a digital health company with ground breaking tools to improve personalized cancer care through remote patient monitoring. Oncodisc’s core technologies include the first intelligent implantable vascular healthcare platform that provides patients and physicians with new tools to improve outcomes and optimize the delivery of cost-effective care through remote monitoring and data analytics. Its vascular access port contains biologic sensors capable of generating continuous data on key physiologic parameters known to predict adverse outcomes in cancer patients undergoing treatment. Wireless communication to the patient’s smartphone and its cloud-based digital healthcare platform efficiently and effectively delivers actionable real time data to patients and physicians. The technologies are the subject of multiple patent applications and one allowed patent awaiting final issuance.
As discussed in Item 1 Business Background and Overview:
● Diagnostics - EsoGuard Esophageal DNA Laboratory Developed Test, EsoCheck Esophageal Cell Collection Device, and EsoCure Esophageal Ablation Device with Caldus Technology;
● Medical Devices - CarpX Minimally Invasive Surgical Device for Carpal Tunnel Syndrome; Infusion Therapy - PortIO Implantable Intraosseous Vascular Access Device and NextFlo Highly Accurate Disposable Intravenous Infusion Platform Technology;
● Digital Health - Veris cancer healthcare platform and implantable intelligent vascular port combining remote monitoring and data analytics; and,
● Emerging Innovations - NextVent single-use ventilators; FlexMO medical circulatory support cannulas; Veris Cardiac Monitor; DisappEAR resorbable pediatric ear tubes; Solys Noninvasive glucose monitoring.
Financing
The Company’s financing transactions in the year ended December 31, 2021, resulted in approximately $117.0 million of gross proceeds, before placement agent fees and expenses and offering costs, inclusive of $62.0 gross proceeds resulting from the issue of shares of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock at an offering price of $14.00 per share in an IPO on October 14, 2021, with such gross proceeds of $62.0 million not including the purchase by PAVmed Inc. of 571,428 shares of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock at the $14.00 IPO offering price.
In the year ended December 31, 2021 a total of 4,877,484 PAVmed Inc. Series Z Warrants (“PAVMZ”) were exercised for cash at a $1.60 per share of our common stock, resulting in the issue of a corresponding number of shares of our common stock.
In December 2021, PAVmed Inc. filed Form S-3 registration statement (File No. 333-261814) with the SEC (a “Shelf Registration”) and a base prospectus to provide future financing for the Company in either common stock, shares of preferred stock, warrants, debt securities or units of one or more classes of securities not to exceed $275 million. Also included in the registration statement is a prospectus supplement (the “ATM Prospectus”) for an “at-the-market offering” for up to $50 million of our common stock that may be offered and sold under a Controlled Equity Offering Agreement between us and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co.
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, on March 31, 2022, PAVmed Inc. entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“SPA”) with an accredited institutional investor (“investor”) in a private placement, pursuant to which PAVmed Inc. agreed to sell, and the investor agreed to purchase, up to $50.0 million in initial principal amount of Secured Promissory Notes. The purchase price of the Secured Promissory Notes is $1,000 for each $1,100 in principal amount of the notes, representing an original issue discount of $100 per $1,100 in principal amount of the notes. A further discussion of the SPA dated March 31, 2022 can be found herein below under Liquidity and Capital Resources - Financings Subsequent to December 31, 2021 - PAVmed Inc - Private Placement - Securities Purchase Agreement.
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, in March 2022, Lucid Diagnostics, Inc. entered into a committed equity facility with an affiliate of Cantor. Under the terms of the facility, Cantor has committed to purchase up to $50 million of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock from time to time at the request of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. While there are distinct differences, the facility is structured similarly to a traditional at-the-market equity facility, insofar as it allows Lucid Diagnostics Inc. to raise primary capital on a periodic basis at prices based on the existing market price.
Impact of SARS-CoV-2 - COVID-19 Pandemic
Previously, in December 2019, there was an outbreak of a novel strain of a coronavirus occurred, with such coronavirus designated by the United Nations (UN) World Health Organization (“WHO”) as the “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2” - or “SARS-CoV-2”. The SARS-CoV-2 spread on a global basis to other countries, including the United States. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared a pandemic resulting from SARS-CoV-2, with such pandemic commonly referred to by its resulting illness of “COVID-19” (“coronavirus disease-2019”), and is referred to herein as the “COVID-19 pandemic”. The COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing, and we continue to monitor the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the United States national economy, the global economy, and our business.
The COVID-19 pandemic may have an adverse impact on our operations, supply chains, and distribution systems and /or those of our contractors of our laboratory partner, and increase our expenses, including as a result of impacts associated with preventive and precautionary measures being taken, restrictions on travel, quarantine polices, and social distancing. Such adverse impact may include, for example, the inability of our employees and /or those of our contractors or laboratory partner to perform their work or curtail their services provided to us.
We expect the significance of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the extent of its effect on our consolidated financial condition and consolidated operational results and cash flows, to be dictated by the success of United States and global efforts to mitigate the spread of and /or to contain the SARS-CoV-2 and the impact of such efforts.
In addition, the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 has disrupted the United States’ healthcare and healthcare regulatory systems which could divert healthcare resources away from, or materially delay United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) approval with respect to our products.
Furthermore, our clinical trials have been and may be further affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, as site initiation and patient enrollment may be delayed, for example, due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the virus and /or illness response, as well as travel restrictions imposed by governments, and the inability to access clinical test sites for initiation and monitoring.
The COVID-19 pandemic may have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including the United States, resulting in an economic downturn that could adversely affect demand for our products and services and /or our product candidates.
Although we are continuing to monitor and assess the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (or a similar health epidemic) is highly uncertain and subject to change, and therefore, its impact on our consolidated financial condition, consolidated results of operations, and /or consolidated cash flows, the adverse impact could be material.
Results of Operations
Overview
Revenue
Revenue is recognized with respect to the EsoGuard Commercialization Agreement, dated August 1, 2021, between the Company’s majority-owned subsidiary, Lucid Diagnostics Inc., and ResearchDX Inc. (“RDx”), CLIA certified commercial laboratory service provider.
Cost of revenue
The cost of revenue recognized with respect to the revenue recognized under the EsoGuard Commercialization Agreement is inclusive of: a royalty fee incurred under the Amended CWRU License Agreement; employee related costs of employees engaged in the administration to patients of the EsoCheck cell sample collection procedure (principally at the LUCID Test Centers); the EsoCheck devices and EsoGuard mailers (cell sample shipping costs) distributed to medical practitioners locations and the LUCID Test Centers; and LUCID Test Centers operating expenses, including rent expense and supplies.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees engaged in sales and marketing activities, as well as advertising and promotion expenses. We anticipate our sales and marketing expenses will increase in the future, as we anticipate an increase in payroll and related expenses related to the roll-out of our commercial sales and marketing operations as we execute on our business strategy.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, travel expenses, facility-related costs, professional fees, accounting and legal services, employees involved in third-party payor reimbursement contract negotiations and consultants and expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents within our intellectual property portfolio.
We anticipate our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future, as we anticipate an increase in payroll and related expenses related with the growth and expansion of our business operations objectives. We also anticipate continued expenses related to being a public company, including audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance as a public company, insurance premiums and investor relations costs.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses are recognized in the period they are incurred and consist principally of internal and external expenses incurred for the research and development of our products, including:
● consulting costs charged to us by various external contract research organizations we contract with to conduct preclinical studies and engineering studies;
● salary and benefit costs associated with our chief medical officer and engineering personnel;
● costs associated with regulatory filings;
● patent license fees;
● cost of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing, and manufacturing preclinical prototypes;
● product design engineering studies; and
● rental expense for facilities maintained solely for research and development purposes.
We plan to incur research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our existing products as well as new innovations. Our research and development activities are focused principally on obtaining FDA approvals and developing product improvements or extending the utility of the lead products in our pipeline, including CarpX, EsoCheck and EsoGuard, along with advancing our DisappEAR, PortIO, NextFlo, non-invasive glucose monitoring and digital health products through their respective development phase.
Other Income and Expense, net
Other income and expense, net, consists principally of changes in fair value of our convertible notes, losses on extinguishment of debt upon repayment of such convertible notes; gain on PPP loan forgiveness; and interest expense recognized in connection with one of our convertible notes.
Year ended December 31, 2021 versus December 31, 2020
Revenue
In the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue was $0.5 million as compared to no revenue in the corresponding period in the prior year. The $0.5 million increase principally relates to our EsoGuard Commercialization Agreement, dated August 1, 2021, which resulted in revenue recognition of $0.1 million per month beginning August 2021.
Cost of revenue
In the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenue was approximately $0.6 million as compared to no cost of revenue in the corresponding period in the prior year. The $0.6 million increase principally relates to costs associated with our commercialization agreement that started in August 2021.
Sales and marketing expenses
In the year ended December 31, 2021, sales and marketing costs were approximately $8.9 million, compared to $2.8 million for the corresponding period in the prior year. The net increase of $6.1 million was principally related to:
● approximately $3.7 million increase in compensation related costs principally related to an increase in headcount and severance expense incurred for 2 former employees;
● approximately $0.9 million increase in stock based compensation from RSA grants to Lucid and PAVmed employees and non-employees, and an increase in stock options granted corresponding with the increase in the number of employees; and
● approximately $1.5 million increase in outside professional services related to EsoCheck, EsoGuard and consulting and professional services fees.
General and administrative expenses
In the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative costs were approximately $25.6 million, compared to $9.6 million for the corresponding period in the prior year. The net increase of $16.0 million was principally related to:
● approximately $2.2 million increase in compensation related costs principally related to an increase in headcount;
● approximately $8.5 million increase in stock based compensation from RSA grants to Lucid and PAVmed employees and non-employees, and an increase in stock options granted corresponding with the increase in the number of employees; and
● approximately $4.2 million in consulting services related to patents, regulatory compliance, legal processes for contract review, transition of PR and IR firms, and public company expenses; and
● approximately $1.1 million in general business expenses.
Research and development expenses
In the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development costs were approximately $19.8 million as compared to $11.0 million for the corresponding period in the prior year. The net increase $8.9 million was principally related to:
● approximately $7.8 million increase in development costs, particularly in clinical trial activities and outside professional and consulting fees with respect to EsoCheck, EsoCure, CarpX, NextFlo, Port IO, a glucose monitoring project, and a digital health project;
● approximately $0.7 million increase in compensation related costs and related to expanded clinical and engineering staff; and
● approximately $0.4 million increase in stock based compensation from RSA grants to Lucid and PAVmed employees and non-employees, and an increase in stock options granted corresponding with the increase in the number of employees.
Other Income and Expense
Debt forgiveness
In the year ended December 31, 2021, our PPP loan related to the CARES Act of $0.3 million was forgiven by the Small Business Administration. No principal or interest payments were ever made and accordingly we recorded a gain of $0.3 million.
Change in fair value of convertible debt
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the non-cash income (expense) recognized for the change in the fair value of our convertible notes was approximately $1.7 million, as compared to $6.0 million of other expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in the fair value adjustment of the convertible notes is principally related to each of the convertible notes being repaid-in-full during the year ended December 31, 2021, as discussed herein below under “Other Income and Expense - Loss from Extinguishment of Debt”.
See Note 12, Financial Instruments Fair Value Measurements, and Note 13, Debt, of our consolidated financial statements for a further discussion of the change in fair value of our convertible notes, and “Liquidity and Capital Resources”, below.
Loss from Extinguishment of Debt
In the year ended December 31, 2021, a debt extinguishment loss in the aggregate of approximately $3.7 million was recognized in connection with the convertible notes, as discussed below.
● On January 5, 2021, the repayment of the remaining face value principal of the November 2019 Senior Convertible Note of approximately $956, along with the payment of interest thereon of approximately $7, were settled with the issuance of 667,668 shares of our common stock, with a fair value of approximately $1,723 (with such fair value measured as the respective conversion date quoted closing price of our common stock), resulting in the recognition of a loss from extinguishment of debt of approximately $760 in the six months ended June 30, 2021; and,
● On January 30, 2021, we paid in cash a $350 partial principal repayment of the Senior Convertible Note dated April 30, 2020 (“April 2020 Senior Convertible Note”); and on March 2, 2021, we made a cash payment of approximately $14,466, resulting in the repayment-in-full on such date of both the April 2020 Senior Convertible Note and the Senior Secured Convertible Note dated August 6, 2021, resulting in the recognition of a loss from extinguishment of debt of approximately $2,955 in the six months ended June 30, 2021.
In the prior year ended December 31, 2020, a loss from extinguishment of debt of approximately $6.5 million was recognized, with such loss resulting from the difference between: the face value principal repayments and the corresponding payments of the interest thereon; as compared to the fair value of the shares of our common stock issued upon conversion of such convertible note, with such fair value measured as the respective issue date closing quoted price per share of our common stock.
See our consolidated financial statements Note 13, Debt, for additional information with respect to the convertible notes.
Income Taxes
The Company has total estimated federal and state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforward of approximately $104.1 million and $63.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which is available to reduce future taxable income, of which approximately $13.8 million have statutory expiration dates commencing in 2036, and approximately $90.3 million which do not have a statutory expiration date. The Company has not yet conducted a formal analysis and the NOL carryforward may be subject-to limitation under U.S. Internal Revenue Code (“IRC”) Section 382 (provided there was a greater than 50% ownership change, as computed under such IRC Section 382). The State and Local NOL carryforwards of approximately 103.9 million have statutory expiration dates commencing in 2036. The Company has total estimated research and development (“R&D”) tax credit carryforward of approximately 0.4 million as of December 31, 2021 which are available to reduce future tax expense and have statutory expiration dates commencing in 2036.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the pandemic resulting from the outbreak of a novel strain of a coronavirus designated as the “Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2” - or “SARS-CoV-2”. The pandemic resulting from SARS-CoV-2 is commonly referred to by its resulting illness of “coronavirus disease-2019” (“COVID-19”), and is referred to herein as the COVID-19 pandemic.
Among other provisions, the CARES Act increases the limitation on the allowed business interest expense deduction from 30 percent to 50 percent of adjusted taxable income for tax years beginning January 1, 2019 and 2020 and allows businesses to immediately expense the full cost of Qualified Improvement Property, retroactive to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018. Additionally, the CARES Act permits net operating loss carryovers (“NOLs”) and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. The Company evaluated the impact of these CARES Act provisions and determined they did not have a material impact on the consolidated income tax provision.
See our consolidated financial statements Note 18, Income Taxes, for additional information with respect to our income tax provision, deferred tax assets, and deferred tax liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations principally through the public and private issuances of our common stock, preferred stock, common stock purchase warrants, and debt. We are subject to all of the risks and uncertainties typically faced by medical device and diagnostic and medical device companies that devote substantially all of their efforts to the commercialization of their initial product and services and ongoing R&D and clinical trials. We expect to continue to experience recurring losses from operations, and will continue to fund our operations with debt and equity financing transactions. Notwithstanding, however, together with the cash on-hand as of December 31, 2021, we expect to be able to fund our future operations for one year from the date of the issue of our consolidated financial statements as included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Common Stock
Year Ended December 31, 2021
● On January 5, 2021, a total of 6,000,000 shares of common stock of PAVmed Inc. were issued for gross proceeds of approximately $13,434, before a placement agent fee and expenses of approximately $951, and offering costs incurred by the Company of approximately $71. The shares of common stock were issued in a registered direct offering pursuant to a Prospectus Supplement dated January 5, 2021 with respect to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-248709).
● On February 23, 2021, a total of 9,782,609 shares of common stock of PAVmed Inc. were issued for proceeds of approximately $41,566, before offering costs incurred by the Company of approximately $290. The shares of common stock were issued in an underwritten registered offering pursuant to a final Prospectus Supplement dated February 23, 2021, with respect to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-248709 and File No. 333-253384).
● In January 2021, 667,668 shares of PAVmed Inc. common stock were issued upon conversion, at the election of the holder, of the November 2019 Senior Convertible Note remaining face value principal of approximately $956 along with approximately $7 of interest thereon, as discussed in Note 13, Debt.
● During the year ended December 31, 2021, 210,448 shares of PAVmed Inc. common stock were issued upon conversion of the same number of shares of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock. See Note 15, Preferred Stock, for a discussion of the Series B Convertible Preferred Stock.
● During the year ended December 31, 2021, an aggregate of 4,881,429 shares of PAVmed Inc. common stock were issued upon exercise of common stock purchase warrants, including 4,877,484 with respect to Series Z Warrants; and 3,945 with respect to Series W Warrants.
● During the year ended December 31, 2021, 621,164 shares of PAVmed Inc. common stock were issued upon exercise of stock options for cash of approximately $980. See Note 14, Stock-Based Compensation, for a discussion of the PAVmed Inc. 2014 Equity Plan.
● During the year ended, the PAVmed Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan purchased 234,592 shares of common stock of the Company. See Note 14, Stock-Based Compensation, for a discussion of the PAVmed Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
Year Ended December 31, 2020
● During 2020, a total of 10,647,500 shares of PAVmed Inc. common stock were issued for gross proceeds of approximately $17,036, before a total placement agent fee and expenses of approximately $1,004, and total offering costs of approximately $100. The shares of common stock were issued in two registered direct offerings pursuant to a respective Prospectus Supplement dated December 11, 2020 and December 18, 2020, each with respect to the Company’s effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-248709).
● In 2020, a total of 10,929,202 shares of common stock of PAVmed Inc. were issued upon partial conversions of each of the December 2018 Senior Convertible Note and the November 2019 Senior Convertible Notes, as discussed in Note 13, Debt.
● In 2020, 306,555 shares of PAVmed Inc. common stock were purchased by employees through participation in the PAVmed Inc. Employee Stock Purchase Plan, as discussed in Note 14, Stock-Based Compensation.
Debt
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repaid-in-full all of the outstanding principal balances of our convertible notes, as discussed herein above under “Other Income and Expense - Loss from Extinguishment of Debt”. See our consolidated financial statements Note 13, Debt, for additional information with respect to prior year debt funding.
Other Financings
On October 14, 2021, Lucid Diagnostics Inc. completed an initial public offering (“IPO”) of its common stock under an effective registration statement on Form S-1 (SEC File No. 333-259721), wherein a total of 5.0 million shares of common stock were issued, inclusive of 571,428 issued to PAVmed Inc., at an IPO offering price of $14.00 per share, resulting gross proceeds to Lucid Diagnostics Inc. of $70.0 million, before underwriting fees of $4.9 million, and approximately $0.7 million of offering costs incurred by Lucid Diagnostics Inc. (Lucid Diagnostics Inc. is a majority-owned subsidiary of PAVmed Inc., and PAVmed Inc. has a controlling financial interest in Lucid Diagnostics Inc., both before and after the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. IPO. In this regard, PAVmed Inc. held 81.8477% and 79.9796% of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock issued and outstanding before and after the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. IPO, respectively, with such percentages computed excluding the common shares underlying unvested restricted stock awards granted under the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. Long-Term Equity Incentive Plan.)
Lucid Diagnostics Inc - Committed Equity Facility
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, in March 2022, Lucid Diagnostics, Inc. entered into a committed equity facility with an affiliate of Cantor. Under the terms of the facility, Cantor has committed to purchase up to $50 million of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock from time to time at the request of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. While there are distinct differences, the facility is structured similarly to a traditional at-the-market equity facility, insofar as it allows Lucid Diagnostics Inc. to raise primary equity capital on a periodic basis at prices based on the existing market price.
Financings Subsequent to December 31, 2021
PAVmed Inc - Private Placement - Securities Purchase Agreement
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, on March 31, 2022, we entered into the March 2022 SPA with an accredited institutional investor , for the sale of up to $50.0 million in initial principal amount of March 2022 Notes, in a registered direct offering (which we refer to as the Offering), for a purchase price equal to $1,000 for each $1,100 in principal amount of March 2022 Notes
Pursuant to the SPA we executed the agreements for an initial closing for the sale of $27.5 million in principal amount of March 2022 Notes, of which the Investor funded and the Company received cash proceeds of $24.9 million on April 5, 2022, after deduction of lender fees. Subject to certain conditions being met or waived, from time to time after such time that stockholder approval for an increase in our authorized shares from 150 million to 250 million is obtained, but before March 31, 2024, one or more additional closings for up to the remaining principal amount of March 2022 Notes may occur, upon five trading days’ notice by us to the investor. The aggregate principal amount of March 2022 Notes that may be offered in the additional closings may not be more than $22.5 million. The investor’s obligation to purchase the notes at each additional closing is subject to certain conditions set forth in the March 2022 SPA (including minimum price and volume thresholds, maximum ratio of debt to market capitalization, and minimum market capitalization), which may be waived by the Required Holders (as defined in the March 2022 SPA). Under the March 2022 SPA, the investor will be required to purchase March 2022 Notes in the additional closings if such conditions are met or waived. In addition, from and after March 31, 2023, the investor may by written notice to us elect to require us to issue up to $22.5 million in initial principal amount of March 2022 Notes, so long as in doing so it would not cause the ratio of (a) the outstanding principal amount of the March 2022 Notes (including the additional March 2022 Notes), accrued and unpaid interest thereon and accrued and unpaid late charges to (b) our average market capitalization over the prior ten trading days, to exceed 25%. If we fail to complete the sale of the additional Notes contemplated by any such written notice, or if the investor is unable to deliver any such notice prior to March 31, 2024 as a result of the limitation described in the preceding sentence, then we will be obligated to pay a break-up fee to the investor at such time in an aggregate amount equal to $1.35 million.
We will not pay any selling commission to any party in connection with the Offering, although we will pay a financial advisory fee equal to 1.8% of the gross proceeds from the Offering to an independent financial advisor. We estimate that the net cash proceeds will be approximately $20.4 million from the additional closings of the Offering, after deducting the estimated expenses of the Offering, assuming the sale of all of the March 2022 Notes.
The March 2022 Notes have a voluntary fixed conversion price of $5.00 per share, a stated interest rate of 7.875% per annum, and a maturity of 24 months (subject to extension in certain circumstances). The March 2022 Notes will be secured by all our existing and future assets (including those of our significant subsidiaries, other than Lucid and its subsidiaries), but including only 9.99% of Lucid’s outstanding common stock held by us, pursuant to a security agreement by and between the Company and the Investor.
On the date six months after the issuance of a March 2022 Note, on the 1st and 10th trading day of each calendar month thereafter, and on the maturity date (each an “Installment Date”), the Company will make an amortization payment on the March 2022 Note in an amount equal to the initial principal balance of the note divided by the total number of such amortization payments (such that the entire initial principal balance will be repaid by the maturity date), plus any amounts that have been deferred or accelerated to the applicable installment date, plus all accrued and unpaid interest and any late charges (the “Installment Amount”). Each amortization payment will be satisfied in shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to certain customary equity conditions (including minimum price and volume thresholds) at 100% of the Installment Amount or otherwise (or at our election, in whole or in part) in cash at 115% of the Installment Amount. The conversion price for any Installment Amount so converted will be based on the then current market price, but not more than the fixed conversion price then in effect and not less than a floor price. The March 2022 Notes also may be repaid in shares of our common stock, at price per share of our common stock based on the then current market price, but not more than the fixed conversion price then in effect and not less than a floor price, upon the occurrence of certain events of default. We may be required to repay the March 2020 Notes, in cash, at a premium to the outstanding principal balance, upon the occurrence of an event of default or upon a Change of Control (as defined in the March 2020 Notes).
We will be subject to certain customary affirmative and negative covenants regarding the rank of the March 2022 Notes, the incurrence of indebtedness, the existence of liens, the repayment of indebtedness and the making of investments, the payment of cash in respect of dividends, distributions or redemptions, the transfer of assets, the maturity of other indebtedness, and transactions with affiliates, among other customary matters. We also will be subject to financial covenants requiring that (i) the amount of our available cash equal or exceed $8.0 million at all times, (ii) the ratio of (a) the outstanding principal amount of the March 2022 Notes, accrued and unpaid interest thereon and accrued and unpaid late charges to (b) our average market capitalization over the prior ten trading days, not exceed 30%, and (iii) that our market capitalization shall at no time be less than $75 million. The March 2022 Notes include certain customary events of default.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and equity, along with the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the corresponding periods. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in our consolidated financial notes, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue under the provisions of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, (“ASC 606”). At its inception, an arrangement is accounted for under the provisions of ASC 606 as a contract with a customer when there is: a legally enforceable contract between the parties; the rights of the parties are identified; the arrangement has commercial substance; and collectability of the contract consideration is deemed probable. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and include the salary and stock-based compensation of employees engaged in product research and development activities, and the costs related to the Company’s various contract research service providers, suppliers, engineering studies, supplies, and outsourced testing and consulting fees, as well as depreciation expense and rental costs for equipment used in research and development activities, and fees incurred for access to certain facilities of contract research service providers.
Financial Instruments Fair Value Measurements
FASB ASC Topic 820, Fair Value Measurement, (ASC 820) defines fair value as the price which would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at a transaction measurement date. The ASC 820 three-tier fair value hierarchy prioritizes the inputs used in the valuation methodologies, as follows:
Level Valuations based on quoted prices for identical assets and liabilities in active markets.
Level Valuations based on observable inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets which are not active, or other inputs observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level Valuations based on unobservable inputs reflecting the Company’s own assumptions, consistent with reasonably available assumptions made by other market participants. These valuations require significant judgment.
The recurring and non-recurring estimated fair value measurements are subjective and are affected by changes in inputs to the valuation models, including the Company’s common stock price, and certain Level 3 inputs, including, the assumptions regarding the estimated volatility in the value of the Company’s common stock price; the Company’s dividend yield; the likelihood and timing of future dilutive transactions, as applicable, along with the risk-free rates based on U.S. Treasury security yields. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the estimated fair values.
Fair Value Option (“FVO”) Election
The Senior Secured Convertible Notes and Senior Convertible Note are each a debt host financial instrument containing embedded features and /or options which would otherwise be required to be bifurcated from the debt-host and recognized as separate derivative liabilities subject to initial and subsequent periodic estimated fair value measurements under ASC 815. Notwithstanding, FASB ASC Topic 825, Financial Instruments, (“ASC 825”) provides for the “fair value option” (“FVO”) election. In this regard, ASC 825-10-15-4 provides for the FVO election (to the extent not otherwise prohibited by ASC 825-10-15-5) to be afforded to financial instruments, wherein the financial instrument is initially measured at its issue-date estimated fair value and then subsequently remeasured at estimated fair value on a recurring basis at each reporting period date, with changes in the estimated fair value recognized as other income (expense) in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. In this regard, as provided for by ASC 825-10-50-30(b), the estimated fair value adjustment is presented in a single line item within other income (expense) in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. Further, as required by ASC 825-10-45-5, to the extent a portion of the fair value adjustment is attributed to a change in the instrument-specific credit risk, such portion would be recognized as a component of other comprehensive income (“OCI”). Notwithstanding, there was no such portion of the fair value adjustment attributed to a change in the instrument-specific credit risk in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financial Instruments - Derivatives
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if those instruments or any embedded components of those instruments potentially qualify as derivatives required to be separately accounted for in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging (ASC 815). The accounting for warrants issued to purchase shares of common stock of the Company is based on the specific terms of the respective warrant agreement, and are generally classified as equity, but may be classified as a derivative liability if the warrant agreement provides required or potential full or partial cash settlement. A warrant classified as a derivative liability, or a bifurcated embedded conversion or settlement option classified as a derivative liability, is initially measured at its issue-date fair value, with such fair value subsequently adjusted at each reporting period, with the resulting fair value adjustment recognized as other income or expense. If upon the occurrence of an event resulting in the warrant liability or the embedded derivative liability being subsequently classified as equity, or the exercise of the warrant or the conversion option, the fair value of the derivative liability will be adjusted on such date-of-occurrence, with such date-of-occurrence fair value adjustment recognized as other income or expense, and then the derivative liability will be derecognized at such date-of-occurrence fair value.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
Stock-based awards are made to members of the board of directors of the Company, the Company’s employees and non-employees, under each of the PAVmed Inc. 2014 Long-Term Incentive Equity Plan (“PAVmed Inc. 2014 Equity Plan”) and the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Long-Term Incentive Equity Plan (“Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Equity Plan”).
The grant-date estimated fair value of the stock-based award is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective stock-based award, with such straight-line recognition adjusted, as applicable, so the cumulative expense recognized is at-least equal-to-or-greater-than the estimated fair value of the vested portion of the respective stock-based award as of the reporting date.
The Company uses the Black-Scholes valuation model to estimate the fair value of stock options granted under both the PAVmed Inc. 2014 Equity Plan and the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Equity Plan, which requires the Company to make certain weighted-average valuation estimates and assumptions for stock-based awards, principally as follows:
● With respect to the PAVmed Inc. 2014 Equity Plan, the expected stock price volatility is based on the historical stock price volatility of PAVmed Inc. common stock and the volatilities of similar entities within the medical device industry over the period commensurate with the expected term with respect to stock options granted to the board of directors and employees in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020;
● With respect to stock options granted under the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Equity Plan, the expected stock price volatility was based on the historical stock price volatility of similar entities within the medical device industry over the period commensurate with the expected term with respect to stock options granted to employees in the year ended December 31, 2021; There were no stock options granted under the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Equity Plan in the year ended December 31, 2020;
● The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate payable on U.S. Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period commensurate with either the expected term or the remaining contractual term, as applicable, of the stock option; and,
● The expected dividend yield is based on annual dividends of $0.00 as there have not been dividends paid to-date, and there is no plan to pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
The price per share of PAVmed Inc. common stock used in the computation of estimated fair value of stock options granted under the PAVmed Inc. 2014 Equity Plan is its quoted closing price per share. Prior to the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. IPO, the price per share of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock used in the computation of estimated fair value of stock options granted under the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Equity Plan was estimated using a discounted cash flow method applied to a multi-year forecast of its future cash flows. After its IPO, the price per share of Lucid Diagnostics Inc. common stock used in the computation of estimated fair value of stock options granted under the Lucid Diagnostics Inc. 2018 Equity Plan is its quoted closing price per share.
Leases
The Company adopted FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases, (“ASC 842”) effective December 31, 2021, with such adoption not having an effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. All significant lease agreements and contractual agreements with embedded lease agreements are accounted for under the provisions of ASC 842, wherein, if the contractual arrangement: involves the use of a distinct identified asset; provides for the right to substantially all the economic benefits from the use of the asset throughout the contractual period; and, provides for the right to direct the use of the asset. A lease agreement is accounted for as either a finance lease (generally with respect real estate) or an operating lease (generally with respect to equipment). Under both a finance lease and an operating lease, the Company recognizes as of the lease commencement date a lease right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and a corresponding lease payment liability.
A lease ROU asset represents the Company’s right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and the lease liability represents its contractual obligation to make lease payments. The lease ROU asset is measured at the lease commencement date as the present value of the future lease payments plus initial direct costs incurred. The Company recognizes lease expense of the amortization of the lease ROU asset for an operating lease on a straight-line basis over the lease term; and for financing leases on a straight-line basis unless another basis is more representative of the pattern of economic benefit. The lease liability is measured at the lease commencement date with the discount rate generally based on the Company’s incremental borrowing rate (to the extent the lease implicit rate is not known nor determinable), with interest expense recognized using the interest method for financing leases.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method, as required by FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, (ASC 740). Current tax liabilities or receivables are recognized for estimated income tax payable and/or refundable for the current year. Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, along with net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Changes in deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes.
Under ASC 740, a “more-likely-than-not” criterion is applied when assessing the estimated realization of deferred tax assets through their utilization to reduce future taxable income, or with respect to a deferred tax asset for tax credit carryforward, to reduce future tax expense. A valuation allowance is established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, when the assessment indicates it is more-likely-than-not, the full or partial amount of the net deferred tax asset will not be realized. As a result of the evaluation of the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the estimated realizability of net deferred tax assets, and based on a history of operating losses, it is more-likely-than-not the deferred tax assets will not be realized, and therefore a valuation allowance reserve equal to the full amount of the deferred tax assets, net of deferred tax liabilities, has been recognized as a charge to income tax expense as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company recognizes the benefit of an uncertain tax position it has taken or expects to take on its income tax return if such a position is more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities, with the tax benefit recognized being the largest amount having a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of December 31, 2021, the Company does not have any unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions.
The Company’s policy is to record interest and penalties related to income taxes as part of its income tax provision. There were no amounts accrued for penalties or interest as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 or recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company is not aware of any issues under review to potentially result in significant payments, accruals, or material deviations from its position.
Recent Accounting Standards Updates Adopted
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815 - 40), (“ASU 2020-06”). ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity, by eliminating the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting models previously contained in ASC 470-20 that required separate accounting for embedded conversion features. ASU 2020-06 also simplified the assessment of a financial instrument settlement to determine whether a contract is an entity’s own equity qualifies for equity classification by removing certain conditions from ASC 815-4-25. The ASU 2020-06 amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, and interim periods within those fiscal years. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company’s adoption of the ASU 2020-06 guidance as of January 1, 2021 did not have an effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income Taxes: Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes”, (“ASU 2019-12”). The guidance of ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions for recognizing deferred taxes for investments, performing intra-period allocation, and calculating income taxes in interim periods, and adds revised guidance to reduce complexity in certain areas, including recognizing deferred taxes for tax goodwill and allocating taxes to members of a consolidated group. Adoption of the guidance of ASU 2019-12 is required for annual and interim financial statements beginning after December 15, 2020. The Company’s adoption of the ASU 2019-12 guidance as of January 1, 2021 did not have an effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.