Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, impacts on our business and general economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, those identified below, those discussed in “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion of changes in our results of operations from fiscal year 2019 to fiscal year 2020 and a discussion of our liquidity and capital resources for 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report but may be found under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020” and “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Historical Cash Flows" in our final
prospectus dated May 25, 2021 and filed with the SEC on May 26, 2021 pursuant to rule 424(b)(4), which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov and our website at https://ir.paymentus.com/home/default.aspx.
Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud-based bill payment technology and solutions. We deliver our next-generation product suite through a modern technology stack to more than 1,700 biller business and financial institution clients. Our platform was used by approximately 21 million consumers and businesses in North America in December 2021 to pay their bills, make money movements and engage with our clients. We serve billers of all sizes that primarily provide non-discretionary services across a variety of industry verticals, including utilities, financial services, insurance, government, telecommunications and healthcare. We also serve financial institutions by providing them with a modern platform that their customers use for bill payment, account-to-account transfers and person-to-person transfers. By powering this comprehensive network of billers and financial institutions, each with their own set of bill payment requirements, we believe we have created an enviable feedback loop that enables us to continuously drive innovation, grow our business and uniquely improve the electronic bill payment experience for participants in the bill payment ecosystem.
Our platform provides our clients with easy-to-use, flexible and secure electronic bill payment experiences powered by an omni-channel payment infrastructure that allows consumers to pay their bills using their preferred payment type and channel. Because our biller platform is developed on a single code base and leverages a SaaS infrastructure, we can rapidly deploy new features and tools to our entire biller base simultaneously. Through a single point of integration to our billers’ core financial and operating systems, our mission-critical solutions provide our billers with a payments operating system that helps them collect revenue faster and more profitably and empower their consumers with the information and transparency needed to control their finances.
We generate substantially all of our revenue from payment transaction fees and have achieved significant growth through our capital efficient model. We rely on a diversified go-to-market strategy to reach new billers. We acquire new billers through direct sales channels, software and strategic partnerships and our Instant Payment Network, or IPN, which together promote rapid adoption of our platform through partnerships with leading business networks. Through these channels, our platform reaches millions of consumers, driving transaction growth.
Our revenue is highly visible. We derive the majority of our revenue from a fee paid per transaction by the consumer, the biller or a combination of both. Our usage-based monetization strategy aligns our economic success with the success of our billers and partners. Since we benefit from increased transactional volume, we do not charge separate license fees or implementation fees. In addition, our modern platform architecture allows us to provide integration, implementation, maintenance and upgrades at no additional cost to billers.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, including its variants, and efforts to control its spread have significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods and services in the United States, where we generate substantially all of our revenue, and worldwide, where we are targeting future growth. It has also caused extreme societal, economic and financial market volatility, resulting in business shutdowns and a global economic downturn. The magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the magnitude and duration of its effect on business activity cannot be predicted with any certainty.
In light of the uncertainty relating to the spread of COVID-19, we have taken precautionary measures intended to reduce the risk of the virus spreading to our employees, billers and partners, and we may take further precautionary measures. In particular, governmental authorities have at times instituted, and in the future may institute, shelter-in-place policies and other restrictions in many jurisdictions in which we operate, including in Redmond, Washington, where our headquarters are located, and Toronto, Canada, Charlotte, North Carolina and Delhi, India, where we maintain significant operations, which policies and restrictions have at times required our employees to work remotely. Even as shelter-in-place policies or other governmental restrictions are lifted, we are taking, and expect to continue to take, a measured and careful approach to having employees return to offices and travel for business. These precautionary measures and policies could negatively impact employee productivity, training and collaboration or otherwise disrupt our business operations. In addition, such restrictions impact certain of our sales efforts, marketing efforts and implementations, adversely affecting the effectiveness of such efforts in some cases and potentially inhibiting future growth.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted and may continue to disrupt the operations of our billers and partners for an indefinite period of time, which in turn could negatively impact our business and operating results. Widespread remote work arrangements may also negatively impact our billers’ and partners’ operations, and the operations of third-party service providers who perform critical services for us, and, by extension, our operations.
We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s potential impact on our business, operating results and financial condition. See the section titled “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business and Industry-The COVID-19 pandemic, including existing and future variants, could have a material adverse impact on our
employees, billers, partners, consumers and other key stakeholders, which could materially and adversely impact our business, operating results and financial condition.”
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate substantially all of our revenue from payment transaction fees. Transaction fees are fees collected for each transaction processed through our platform, on either a fixed basis or variable basis based on the transaction value, with the actual fees dependent on type of transaction, payment or transaction channel and industry vertical. However, irrespective of these factors, the transaction fees that we receive are generally consistent across transaction types, payment and transaction channels and industry verticals. We receive such transaction fees directly from billers, financial institutions, partners or, in some cases, from consumers as a convenience fee.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists of certain direct costs that are directly attributed to processing transactions on our platform. This includes interchange, assessment and network expenses incurred for processing payments as well as costs of servicing our clients through product support, implementations and customer care. Cost of revenue also includes an allocation of hosting and data center costs for our infrastructure and platform environment, telecommunication expenses used by sales and customer support teams and a portion of amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs and a portion of amortization of intangible assets, including amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of our acquisitions of other businesses. We expect that cost of revenue will increase in absolute dollars, but it may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period, as our transaction mix changes and we continue to invest in growing our business across all geographical segments, including through the acquisition of other businesses.
There are external factors that impact interchange fees, such as the average transaction amount in a particular month or quarter. For example, hot summers and cold winters tend to increase utility bills, and property taxes result in two larger payments per year, each of which increases our interchange cost.
Gross profit is equal to our revenue less cost of revenue. Gross profit as a percentage of our revenue is referred to as gross margin. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a number of factors, including average transaction value, payment type and payments and transactions through our IPN.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expenses, incurred in developing new products or enhancing existing products and are expensed as incurred, unless they qualify as internal-use software development costs, which are capitalized and amortized. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period as we expand our research and development team to develop new products and product enhancements. Over the longer term, we expect research and development expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as we leverage the scale of our business.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expenses for sales and marketing personnel, sales commissions, partner fees, marketing program expenses, travel-related expenses and costs to market and promote our platform through advertisements, marketing events, partnership arrangements and direct biller acquisition as well as amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of our acquisitions of other businesses. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation expenses for finance, risk management, legal and compliance, human resources, information technology and facilities personnel. General and administrative expenses also include costs incurred for external professional services and other corporate expenses. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, and to support the growth in our business. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars, but they may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period. Over the longer term, we expect general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue as we leverage the scale of our business.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Increased Adoption of Electronic Bill Payment Solutions
As the number of financial transactions online continues to increase, electronic bill payment is becoming a greater share of the bill payment market. We have observed that consumers demand a frictionless electronic bill payment experience and increasingly prefer more flexible and innovative digital payment options. We expect this trend to continue, providing us with a greater opportunity to provide next-generation bill and digital payment technology and power more transactions, further fueling our growth.
Acquiring New Billers and Financial Institutions
Our future growth depends on the continued adoption of our platform by new billers and financial institutions. We intend to continue investing in our efficient go-to-market strategies, increase brand awareness and drive adoption of our platform and products. We had more than 1,700 billers and financial institution clients as of December 31, 2021, including billers of all sizes and across numerous vertical markets and financial institutions of all sizes. Our ability to attract new billers and financial institutions and drive adoption of our platform will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of our products, offerings of our competitors and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts.
Expanding Usage of Our Platform with Existing Billers and Financial Institutions
We believe our large base of existing billers and financial institutions represents a significant opportunity for further consumption of our platform. We believe our solutions create a superior experience for consumers and accelerate revenue realization for billers, which drives increased usage of our platform. We intend to continue investing in this value proposition. Leveraging our platform to capture more transactions from our existing biller and financial institution base is expected to organically drive transaction growth at lower cost.
Growing Our Partner Base
We believe there is a significant opportunity to increase the transactions on our platform through expanding our base of software, strategic and IPN partners. While revenue derived from or through our IPN partnerships has not been significant historically, we expect that the revenue contribution from our IPN will grow over time. As our IPN partner base expands, and new partners use our platform to power bill payment experiences within their ecosystems, we expect to organically expand the reach of our platform to millions of new consumers and thereby drive new, revenue-generating transactions to our platform. We intend to invest in the expansion of our partner base, including the addition of new IPN partners, because our ability to secure new partners will have a direct impact on our transaction growth.
Investing in Sales and Marketing
We will continue to expand efforts to market our platform through our diversified sales and marketing strategy. We intend to invest in sales and marketing strategies that we believe will drive further brand awareness and preference among our billers, partners and consumers. Given the nature of our biller and partner base, our investment in sales and marketing in a given period may not impact results until subsequent periods. We approach sales and marketing spend strategically to maintain efficient biller and partner acquisition.
Innovation and Enhancement of Our Platform
We will continue to invest in our platform and IPN to maintain our position as a leading provider of biller communication and payments. To drive adoption and increase penetration of our platform, we will continue to introduce new products and features. We believe that investment in research and development will contribute to our long-term growth, but may also negatively impact our short-term profitability. We will continue to leverage emerging technologies and invest in the development of more features and better functionality for consumers.
Key Performance and Non-GAAP Measures
We review the following metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, prepare financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe that these key performance and non-GAAP measures provide meaningful supplemental information for management and investors in assessing our historical and future operating performance. The calculation of the key performance and non-GAAP measures discussed below may differ from other similarly titled metrics used by other companies, securities analysts or investors.
Transactions Processed
We define transactions processed as the number of revenue generating payment transactions, such as checks, credit card and debit card transactions, automated clearing house, or ACH, items and emerging payment types, which are initiated and generally processed through our platform during a period. The number of transactions also includes account-to-account and person-to-person transfers. The number of transactions processed during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased approximately 43.8% as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the addition of new billers and increased transactions from our existing billers.
Non-GAAP Measures
We use supplemental measures of our performance that are derived from our consolidated financial information but which are not presented in our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. These supplemental non-GAAP measures include contribution profit, adjusted gross profit, adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow.
Contribution Profit
We calculate contribution profit as gross profit plus other cost of revenue. Other cost of revenue equals cost of revenue less interchange and assessment fees paid by us to our payment processors.
Adjusted Gross Profit
We calculate adjusted gross profit as gross profit adjusted for non-cash items, primarily stock-based compensation and amortization.
Adjusted EBITDA
We calculate adjusted EBITDA as net income before other income (expense) (which consists of interest income (expense), net and foreign exchange gain (loss)), depreciation and amortization, income taxes, adjusted to exclude the effects of stock-based compensation expense and certain nonrecurring expenses that management believes are not indicative of ongoing operations, consisting primarily of professional fees and other indirect charges associated with our IPO.
Free Cash Flow
We calculate free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capital expenditures and capitalized internal-use software development costs.
We use non-GAAP measures to supplement financial information presented on a GAAP basis. We believe that excluding certain items from our GAAP results allows management and our board of directors to more fully understand our consolidated financial performance from period to period and helps management project our future consolidated financial performance as forecasts are developed at a level of detail different from that used to prepare GAAP-based financial measures. Moreover, we believe these non-GAAP measures provide our investors with useful information to help them evaluate our operating results by facilitating an enhanced understanding of our operating performance and enabling them to make more meaningful period-to-period comparisons. In particular, we exclude interchange and assessment fees in the presentation of contribution profit because we believe inclusion is less directly reflective of our operating performance as we do not control the payment channel used by consumers, which is the primary determinant of the amount of interchange and assessment fees. We use contribution profit to measure the amount available to fund our operations after interchange and assessment fees, which are directly linked to the number of transactions we process and thus our revenue and gross profit. There are limitations to the use of the non-GAAP measures presented in this report. Our non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies; other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP measures differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation from or as a substitute for financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We also urge you to review the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures included below. To properly and prudently evaluate our business, we encourage you to review the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report and to not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Contribution Profit
In general, contribution profit is driven by the number of transactions we process offset by network fees associated with processing those transactions. The amount of contribution profit per transaction may vary due to a variety of factors including client size, type and industry as well as whether the client is a biller, financial institution or other partner. Contribution profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased approximately 31.5% as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the addition of new billers and increased transactions from our existing billers. For 2021, contribution profit increased at a slower rate than transactions due to continued onboarding of larger clients.
Adjusted Gross Profit
Adjusted gross profit is driven primarily by the same factors that impact gross profit with the exception of excluding the amortization in cost of revenue. The increase in amortization was driven by additional capitalization of software costs as well as amortization of acquired intangibles associated with the acquisition of Payveris and Finovera.
Adjusted EBITDA
(1) Other nonrecurring expenses consists of indirect costs incurred associated with completion of our IPO.
As adjusted EBITDA is a measure of profitability, it would generally be expected to move in line with revenue, contribution profit, gross profit and adjusted gross profit. However, it is essentially flat from 2020 to 2021 due to our investment in sales and marketing and research and development in order to drive future growth of the business as well as the increased costs associated with being a public company and the impact of the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions.
Free Cash Flow
(1) Net cash used in investing activities includes payments for purchases of property and equipment and costs related to capitalized for internal-use software development, which is also included in our calculation of free cash flow.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
(1)Stock-based compensation expense was allocated in cost of revenue and operating expenses as follows:
The following table presents the components of our consolidated statements of operations for the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The increase in revenue was primarily due to an increase in the number of transactions processed, which was driven by the implementation of new billers and increased transactions from our existing billers, offset by a decrease in the revenue we received per transaction on a blended basis. We believe we will continue to add new billers, increase transactions from our existing billers and add new financial institutions, which we expect to further increase our transactions and revenue.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
The increase in cost of revenue was driven by the increase in revenue and transactions processed as cost of revenue consists primarily of interchange fees and processor costs as well as other direct and indirect costs associated with making our platform available to our billers. In addition, the increase includes amortization of intangible assets acquired through the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions. The average payment amount of our transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased slightly as compared to the same period in 2020, resulting in increased interchange fees. However, the range of transaction sizes has grown as we have entered into new channels and industry verticals across different markets.
Gross margin was consistent during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase in employee-related costs, including benefits due to an increase in headcount as we continued to invest in building and adding additional features and functionality to our platform. Additional contributors to the increased expense were increased hosting costs as we transition from datacenter to the cloud, increased stock-based compensation associated with routine grants to existing employees and additional expense associated with the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The increase in sales and marketing expenses was primarily due to an increase in employee-related costs, including benefits, as we continued to expand our sales and marketing efforts with additional headcount in order to continue to drive our growth. Additional contributors to the increased expense were amortization expense related to the identifiable intangible assets from the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions, increased stock-based compensation associated with routine grants to existing employees and additional expense associated with the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions.
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to indirect costs incurred associated with completion of our IPO, the increased costs of operating as a public company, including significant increases in our directors and officers insurance premiums, one-time legal and other fees associated with the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions, and increases in employee-related costs, including benefits and stock-based compensation, due to an increase in general and administrative headcount.
The increase in general and administrative expenses as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to certain one-time and increased ongoing costs associated with operating as a public company and one-time legal and other fees associated with the Payveris and Finovera acquisitions.
Other Income (Loss)
The decrease in interest income, net was primarily due to interest expense recorded for finance leases offset by interest on the higher cash balance as a result of the IPO.
Income Taxes
The change in provision for income taxes as well as the decrease in the Company's effective tax rate, which decreased to 10.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 25.3% for the same period in the prior year, was primarily due to discrete tax adjustments related to the deductibility of stock option exercises offset by nondeductible executive compensation and nondeductible IPO costs in connection with the IPO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Funds
As of December 31, 2021, we had $168.4 million of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents. We believe that existing unrestricted cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to support our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. Since inception, we have financed operations primarily through the sale of equity securities and revenue from payment transaction fees and subscriptions. Our principal uses of cash are funding operations, which primarily consist of employee-related costs. Currently, we do not have any material planned capital expenditures in the next 12 months.
In September 2021, we completed the acquisitions of Payveris and Finovera for an aggregate purchase price of $158.4 million, comprised of (i) $90.1 million in cash, of which $0.8 million is being held back by us for a period of twenty-four months following the closing of the Finovera transaction, and (ii) 2,657,776 shares of our Class A common stock with a fair value of approximately $68.3 million, of which 2,494 shares of Class A common stock with an approximate value of $0.06 million remains issuable.
In May 2021, we completed our IPO which resulted in aggregate net proceeds of $224.6 million, after underwriting discounts and commissions of $16.9 million. We also received aggregate proceeds of $50.0 million from a private placement completed concurrently with the IPO, and did not pay any underwriting discounts or commissions with respect to the shares that were sold in the concurrent private placement.
From time to time, we may explore additional financing sources and means to lower our cost of capital, which could include equity, equity-linked and debt financing. We cannot assure you that any additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. The inability to raise capital would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we raise additional financing by the incurrence of indebtedness, we may be subject to increased fixed payment obligations and could be subject to additional restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any future indebtedness we incur may result in terms that could be unfavorable to equity investors.
Historical Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Our primary source of operating cash is revenue from payment transaction fees. Our primary uses of operating cash are employee-related costs, payments to third parties to fulfill our payment transactions and payments to sales and marketing partners.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $19.5 million, primarily consisting of our net income of $9.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $13.3 million in depreciation and amortization, $2.5 million in non-cash lease expense related to our operating right-of-use assets, $3.1 million in stock-based compensation, $0.7 million in amortization of contract assets recorded as contra revenue related to the recognition of the warrant issued to JPMC Strategic Investments I Corporation, and net cash outflows of $8.7 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities includes a $14.7 million increase in accounts and other receivables due to higher sales and relative timing of our cash collections, and increase of $0.8 million in income taxes receivable, net and a $2.4 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, due to current period payments on operating leases. These amounts were partially offset by a $7.4 million increase in accounts payable due to the timing of payments, a decrease of $1.3 million in prepaid expenses and an increase of $0.5 million in contract liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.6 million, primarily consisting of our net income of $13.7 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $8.1 million in depreciation and amortization, $2.8 million in noncash lease expense related to our operating right-of-use assets, $2.0 million in stock-based compensation, $1.6 million in deferred income taxes, $0.1 million for provision for credit losses and net cash inflows of $7.3 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities includes a $14.6 million increase in accounts payable due in part to a change in processer payment timing from real-time payments such that the transactions are processed on a monthly cadence where we are invoiced in arrears for fees owed, a $2.8 million increase in accrued liabilities due to increased headcount and growth in our business, a decrease of $0.8 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets due the amortization of additional insurance premiums, an increase of $0.2 million in contract liabilities and a decrease in income tax receivables, net of $0.2 million. These amounts were partially offset by an $8.7 million increase in accounts and other receivables due to higher sales and relative timing of our cash collections, and a $2.6 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in our investing activities consists primarily of cash paid for acquisitions, capitalized internal-use software development costs, purchases of property and equipment and intangible assets.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $57.4 million of cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash and restricted cash acquired and contingent consideration, $19.3 million of capitalized internal-use software development costs and $1.1 million of purchases of property and equipment and intangible assets.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $14.4 million of capitalized internal-use software development costs, $0.5 million of purchases of property and equipment and $0.3 million related to the payment of deferred consideration for an acquisition.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Financing Activities
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities consists primarily of proceeds from the IPO and private placement and option exercises offset by the redemption of the Series A preferred stock, payment of deferred offering costs related to the IPO, changes in financial institution funds in-transit, and payments on capital lease and other financing arrangements and principal payments on debt.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of proceeds from the IPO of $224.6 million, proceeds from the concurrent private placement of $50.0, an increase in financial institution funds in-transit of $2.0 million, proceeds of $0.8 million from the repayment of a related party loan and proceeds of $0.3 million from the exercise of stock options, offset by $23.0 million for the redemption of the Series A preferred stock, $34.4 million for the payment of dividends on the Series A preferred stock, $4.9 million of payments on finance leases and other financing obligations and $2.0 million of payments of deferred offering costs directly related to our IPO.
Net cash used in financing activities during 2020 consisted of $1.4 million of payments on finance leases and other financing obligations.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments in cash as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Consists of operating lease liabilities for our offices and data centers.
(2)Consists of finance lease liabilities for equipment.
(3)Consists of purchase obligations which were not recognized on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, related primarily to infrastructure services and IT software and maintenance service costs.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and do not have any holdings in variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the accounting principles in GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting. Specifically, the determination of whether we are a principal to a transaction or an agent can require considerable judgment. We have concluded that we are typically the principal in our payment processing arrangements as we control the service on our platform. We also typically contract directly with our billers and have complete pricing latitude on the processing fees charged to our billers. As such, we bear the credit risk for network fees and transactions charged back to the biller. In circumstances where we have minimum revenue or transaction commitments, determining the appropriate accounting treatment of fixed and variable consideration may require considerable judgement.
We will evaluate our accounts receivable portfolio to determine if an allowance for doubtful accounts is necessary. The development of the allowance for doubtful accounts is based on an expected loss model that considers reasonable and supportable forecasts of future conditions and a review of past due amounts, historical write-off and recovery experience, as well as aging trends affecting specific accounts and general operational factors affecting all accounts. Account balances are charged off against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote.
We consider current economic trends when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for doubtful accounts. If circumstances relating to specific billers change or unanticipated changes occur in the general business environment, our estimate of the recoverability of receivables could be further adjusted.
Business Combinations
Upon acquisition of a company, we determine if the transaction is a business combination, which is accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. Under the acquisition method, once control is obtained of a business, the assets acquired, and liabilities assumed are recorded at fair value. We use our best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. One of the most significant estimates relates to the determination of the fair value of these assets and liabilities. The determination of the fair values is based on estimates and judgments made by management. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. Measurement period adjustments are reflected at the time identified, up through the conclusion of the measurement period, which is the time at which all information for determination of the values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is received, and is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date. We may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill.
Additionally, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially recorded in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions periodically and record any adjustments to preliminary estimates to goodwill, provided we are within the measurement period. If outside of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statement of operations.
Internal-use Software Development Costs
Internal-use software development costs consist of personnel costs, including related benefits, incurred to develop functionality for our platform, as well as certain upgrades and enhancements that are expected to result in enhanced functionality. We capitalize certain software development costs for new offerings as well as upgrades to our existing software platforms. We amortize these development costs over the estimated useful life of three to five years on a straight-line basis. We believe there are two key estimates within the internal-use capitalized software development balance, which are the determination of the useful life of the software and the determination of the amounts to be capitalized.
We determined that a three to five year life is appropriate for our internal-use software based on our best estimate of the useful life of the internally developed software after considering factors such as continuous developments in the technology, obsolescence and anticipated life of the service offering before significant upgrades. Based on our prior experience, internally generated software will generally remain in use for a minimum of three to five years before being significantly replaced or modified to keep up with evolving biller and company needs. While we do not anticipate any significant changes to this three to five year estimate, a change in this estimate could produce a material impact on our financial statements. For example, if we received information that indicated the useful life of all internally developed software was one year rather than three to five, our capitalized software balance would materially decrease and our expense would materially increase.
We determine the amount of internal-use software development costs to be capitalized based on the amount of time spent by our developers on projects. Costs associated with building or significantly enhancing our platforms are capitalized, while costs associated with planning new developments and maintaining our platform are expensed as incurred. There is judgment involved in estimating the stage of development as well as estimating time allocated to a particular project. A significant change in the time spent on each project could have a material impact on the amount capitalized and related amortization expense in subsequent periods.
Valuation of Goodwill and Intangibles
The valuation of assets acquired in a business combination and asset impairment reviews require the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires us to estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in an acquired business to allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are depreciated and amortized and goodwill. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill requires the comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or an asset group to estimated undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds these estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the asset or asset group. Our estimates are based upon assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which do not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
We evaluate goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, or sooner if indicators of impairment exist. Under GAAP, the evaluation of goodwill for impairment allows for a qualitative assessment to be performed. In performing these qualitative assessments, we consider relevant events and conditions, including but not limited to: macroeconomic trends, industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, cost factors, company-specific events, legal and regulatory factors and our market capitalization. If the qualitative assessments indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amounts, we must perform a quantitative impairment test.
Goodwill impairment is recognized when the quantitative assessment results in the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeding its fair value, in which case an impairment charge is recorded to goodwill to the extent the carrying value exceeds the fair value, limited to the amount of goodwill. Measurement of the fair value of a reporting unit is based on one or more of the following fair value measures: amounts at which the unit as a whole could be bought or sold in a current transaction between willing parties, present value techniques of estimated future cash flows, valuation techniques based on multiples of earnings or revenue or a similar performance measure.
Stock-based Compensation
We measure and recognize stock-based compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including grants of restricted stock units, or RSUs, and options to purchase stock granted to employees, outside directors and consultants based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the grant date of the award with the compensation expense recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the award. Forfeitures are accounted for in the period in which they occur.
The fair value of an RSU is measured using the market price of our Class A common stock on the date of grant. We estimate grant date fair value for options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value
of options on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by the estimated fair value of our common stock, as well as assumptions regarding a number of variables that are complex, subjective and generally require significant judgment to determine. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
The valuation assumptions were determined as follows:
Fair Value of Underlying Common Stock-Prior to the IPO, our common stock was not yet publicly traded, therefore we estimated the fair value of common stock. Our board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock at each meeting in which awards are approved. These factors included historical and projected financial information, prospects and risks, company performance, various corporate documents, capitalization and economic and financial market conditions. Management, with its third-party valuation firm, also used other economic, industry and market information obtained from other resources considered reliable. After the IPO, we used the publicly quoted price as reported on the New York Stock Exchange as the fair value of our common stock.
Expected Term-The expected life of options granted to employees was determined by using management’s best estimation of exercise activity.
Risk-free Interest Rate-We use a risk-free interest rate in the option valuation model based on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues, with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the options.
Expected Volatility-As we do not have extensive trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our publicly traded industry peers utilizing a period of time consistent with our estimate of expected term.
Expected Dividend Yield-We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option valuation model.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the assumptions related to our stock-based compensation on a prospective basis. As we continue to accumulate additional data related to our common stock, we may have refinements to our estimates, which could materially impact our future stock-based compensation expense.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and deferred tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
We record a provision for income taxes for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations using the asset and liability method. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts for financial reporting purposes and the tax bases of assets and liabilities, as well as for loss and tax credit carryforwards. The deferred assets and liabilities are measured using the statutorily enacted tax rates anticipated to be in effect when those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date.
A valuation allowance is established if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including historical levels of income, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income, in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
Our tax positions are subject to income tax audits by multiple tax jurisdictions throughout the world. We recognize the tax benefit of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the position will be sustainable upon examination by the taxing authority, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. This evaluation is based on all available evidence and assumes that the tax authorities have full knowledge of all relevant information concerning the tax position. The tax benefit recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit which is more likely than not (greater than 50% likely) to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. We recognize interest accrued and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. We make adjustments to these reserves in accordance with the income tax guidance when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Section 107 of the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, as amended, or the JOBS Act, provides that an “emerging growth company” may take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” may delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that any decision to opt out of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards is irrevocable. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations through December 31, 2021. However, we may experience higher than expected increases in wages and other compensation costs during 2022 and beyond. If our costs become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. Our inability or failure to do so could materially adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.