Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations reviews the operating results of Paychex, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries (“Paychex,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) for our fiscal year ended May 31, 2022 (“fiscal 2022” or the “fiscal year”), as compared to our fiscal year ended May 31, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”), and our financial condition as of May 31, 2022. A detailed review of our fiscal 2021 performance compared to our fiscal year ended May 31, 2020 performance and our financial condition as of May 31, 2021 is set forth in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K (“Form 10-K”) for fiscal 2021. This review should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and the related Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K and the “Risk Factors” discussed in Item 1A of this Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements in this review are qualified by the cautionary statement under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” contained at the beginning of Part I of this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a leading HCM software and services company, offering integrated solutions for HR, payroll, benefits, and insurance services for small- to medium-sized businesses. We offer a comprehensive portfolio of technology solutions and services, supported by HR and compliance expertise, that help our clients address the evolving challenges of HR. Our purpose is to allow our customers the freedom to succeed. The workplace is evolving, and we lead the way by making complex HR, payroll, and benefits simple for our clients.
We support our small-business clients, reducing the complexity and risk of running their own payroll, while ensuring greater accuracy with up-to-date tax rates and regulatory information. Clients may choose to have our service team handle everything for them, or process payroll themselves utilizing our proprietary, robust SaaS Paychex Flex® platform and our SurePayroll® SaaS-based products. Our medium-sized clients generally have more complex payroll and employee benefit needs, though with the environment of increasing regulations, we believe the need for HR outsourcing services has been moving down-market. Any of our clients on Paychex Flex can opt for the integrated suite of HCM solutions, which allows clients to choose the services and software that will meet the needs of their business.
Our portfolio of HCM and employee benefit-related services is disaggregated into two categories, (1) Management Solutions and (2) PEO and Insurance Solutions, as discussed in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-K.
Our mission is to be the leading provider of HR, payroll, benefits, and insurance solutions by being an essential partner to small- and medium-sized businesses across the U.S. and parts of Europe. We believe that success in this mission will lead to strong, long-term financial performance. Our strategy focuses on providing industry-leading, integrated technology; increasing client satisfaction; expanding our leadership in HR; growing our client base; and engaging in strategic acquisitions.
We continue to focus on driving growth in the number of clients, revenue per client, total revenue, and profits, while providing industry-leading service and technology solutions to our clients and their employees. We maintain industry-leading margins by managing our personnel costs and expenses while continuing to invest in our business, particularly in sales and marketing and leading-edge technology. We believe these investments are critical to our success. Looking to the future, we believe that investing in our products, people, and service capabilities will position us to capitalize on opportunities for long-term growth.
A key component of our service delivery strategy is to be a proactive partner with our clients and to develop and release integrated solutions within Paychex Flex to meet their current and future needs. Our ongoing investments in our platforms have prepared us well for the demands of the current business and regulatory environments, allowing us to adapt while maintaining strong service delivery, resulting in high levels of client satisfaction and retention.
Fiscal 2022 Business Highlights
Highlights compared to fiscal 2021 are as follows:
(1)Adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share are not U.S. generally accepted accounting principle (“GAAP”) measures. Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this Item 7 for a discussion of non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation to the U.S. GAAP measures of net income and diluted earnings per share.
(2)Dividends paid to stockholders represented approximately 72% of net income for fiscal 2022 compared to approximately 83% of net income for fiscal 2021.
(3)Percentage changes are calculated based on unrounded numbers.
For further analysis of our results of operations for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, and our financial position as of May 31, 2022, refer to the tables and analysis in the “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” sections of this Item 7.
Business Outlook
Our payroll and PEO client base was greater than 730,000 and 710,000 clients as of May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Client retention beat our expectations and pre-pandemic levels at approximately 84% of the beginning client base for fiscal 2022, compared to over 85% for fiscal 2021, which was a record.
While our HR product offerings provide services to employers and employees beyond payroll, they effectively leverage payroll processing data. These services are included as part of the integrated HCM solution within Paychex Flex or provided through the PEO platform. The following table illustrates the growth in selected HR product offerings:
(1)Percentage changes are calculated based on unrounded numbers.
We continue to make investments in technology a priority as companies look to leverage technology solutions to maintain operations, stay connected to employees, and increase productivity. In fiscal 2022, we enhanced our solutions to support businesses as they engage in digital transformation. We have continued to evolve our products to help business leaders find, hire, and retain employees quickly and effectively with an eye on driving engagement and managing labor costs. Our fiscal 2022 technology and solution developments provide a unique combination of data, technology, and service designed to meet the evolving needs of employers and employees, and include:
•Paychex Pre-Check, a self-service solution that allows employees to review their paystubs and alert their employer of discrepancies before payday. This significantly reduces errors, increasing efficiency and employee satisfaction.
•Retention Insights, which utilizes predictive analytics to help identify employees that may be more likely to consider leaving.
•Paychex Employee Retention Tax Credit (“ERTC”) Service, which helps businesses retroactively identify tax credits, based on wages already paid, and file amended returns to claim the credit.
•Talent Dashboard, which brings retention insights, time off balances, and performance ratings in one place. This allows employers to compare the performance rating and compensation of each job position to ensure they are rewarding employees appropriately and equitably.
•Acquisition of a powerful state-of-the-art benefits administration software to help employers drive efficiencies in managing their employee benefits.
•Vaccination Management, utilizing enhanced Document Management features, where employees can confidentially upload proof of vaccination or COVID-19 test results.
•Additional tools that aid in talent management, including Total Compensation Summary, Pay Benchmarking, Time Off Management, Financial Wellness, etc.
We continue to strengthen our position in the industry by serving as a source of education and information to clients, businesses of all sizes, and other interested parties. We provide free webinars, white papers, and other information on our website (www.paychex.com) to aid existing and prospective clients with the impact of regulatory changes. The Paychex Insurance Agency, Inc. website, www.paychex.com/group-health-insurance, helps small-business owners navigate the area of insurance coverage. Both this website and www.paychex.com/worx have sections dedicated to the topic of health care reform.
COVID-19 Update
The COVID-19 pandemic continues, and our priority continues to be the health and safety of our employees. The overall recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic has been uneven and has presented many challenges and risks from general economic uncertainty, changes in consumer demand, disruption of supply chains and challenges with hiring, labor and supply cost inflation. We have maintained health and safety standards for employees meeting all regulatory requirements while providing greater levels of flexibility to employees.
We remain committed to proactively supporting our clients through any lingering uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic and navigating the challenges of the future business environment. Our unique blend of technology solutions and expertise provides valuable tools and resources to assist our clients and their employees. As the global economy continues to evolve, whether due to macroeconomic changes, legislative changes, the pandemic, or other factors, we are committed to supporting our clients to help them navigate these challenges.
As part of the COVID-19 CARES Act, the ERTC helps businesses claim tax credits on qualified wages paid to employees and health plan expenses in 2020 and 2021. The Company introduced the Paychex ERTC Service, which helped businesses retroactively identify tax credits and file amended returns to claim the credits based on wages already paid. As of May 31, 2022, over 40,000 Paychex customers have secured more than $8.0 billion in combined employee retention tax credits and paid leave credits.
We continually evaluate the nature and extent of changes to the market and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic and assess the potential impact on our business and financial position. Despite the emergence of vaccines and vaccine boosters, less virulent strains of COVID-19 such as the Omicron variant, and reduced positivity rates, the end of the COVID-19 pandemic is still uncertain. As such, we expect that the pandemic may continue to have an effect on our results, although the magnitude, duration, and full effects of the pandemic on our future results of operations or cash flows remain difficult to predict at this time.
For further information on the risks posed to our business from the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Summary of Results of Operations for Fiscal Years:
(1)Percentage changes are calculated based on unrounded numbers.
n/m - not meaningful
The changes in revenue as compared to the prior year period were primarily driven by the following factors:
•Management Solutions revenue: $3.4 billion for fiscal 2022, reflecting an increase of 14%:
oGrowth in payroll client base and product penetration across our HCM offerings resulting from strong sales performance and high levels of retention, with continued strong demand for HR Solutions;
oIncrease in revenue per client driven by higher employment levels within our client base and price realization; and
oExpansion of HCM ancillary services.
•PEO and Insurance Solutions revenue: $1.1 billion for fiscal 2022, reflecting an increase of 14%:
oGrowth in the number of average worksite employees and increases in average wages per worksite employee;
oHigher revenue from PEO health insurance; and
oHigher state unemployment insurance revenues.
•Interest on funds held for clients: $57.7 million for fiscal 2022, reflecting a decrease of 3%:
oLower average interest rates, partially offset by
oHigher average investment balances.
We invest in highly liquid, investment-grade fixed income securities and do not utilize derivative instruments to manage interest rate risk. As of May 31, 2022, we had no exposure to high-risk or non-liquid investments. Details regarding our combined funds held for clients and corporate cash equivalents and investment portfolios are as follows:
(1)The net unrealized loss on our investment portfolios was approximately $153.7 million as of July 13, 2022.
(2)The Federal Funds rate was in the range of 0.75% to 1.00% as of May 31, 2022 and in the range of 0.00% to 0.25% as of May 31, 2021. Effective June 16, 2022, the Federal Reserve raised the Federal Funds rate 0.75% to a range of 1.50% to 1.75%.
(3)These items exclude the impact of variable rate demand notes (“VRDNs”), as they are tied to short-term interest rates.
Refer to the “Market Risk Factors” section contained in