ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
INTRODUCTION
Throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) the term, the “Company”, refers to the consolidated entity of Pathfinder Bancorp, Inc. Pathfinder Bank (the “Bank”) and Pathfinder Statutory Trust II are wholly owned subsidiaries of Pathfinder Bancorp, Inc.; however, Pathfinder Statutory Trust II is not consolidated for reporting purposes (see Note 13 of the consolidated financial statements). Pathfinder Risk Management Company, Inc., and Whispering Oaks Development Corp. are wholly owned subsidiaries of Pathfinder Bank.
On October 16, 2014, Pathfinder Bancorp, MHC converted from the mutual to stock form of organization (the “Conversion”). In connection with the Conversion, the Company sold 2,636,053 shares of common stock to depositors at $10.00 per share. Shareholders of Pathfinder Bancorp, Inc., a federal corporation (“Pathfinder-Federal”), the Company’s predecessor, received 1.6472 shares of the Company’s common stock for each share of Pathfinder-Federal common stock they owned immediately prior to completion of the transaction. Following the completion of the Conversion, Pathfinder-Federal was succeeded by the Company and Pathfinder Bancorp, MHC ceased to exist. The Company had 5,983,467 and 4,531,383 shares outstanding at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
On June 1, 2016, Pathfinder Bank, a savings bank chartered by the NYSDFS, merged into Pathfinder Commercial Bank, a limited purpose commercial bank also chartered by the NYSDFS. Prior to the merger, Pathfinder Bank owned 100% of Pathfinder Commercial Bank. On that same date, NYSDFS expanded the powers that it had previously granted to Pathfinder Commercial Bank and chartered Pathfinder Commercial Bank as a fully-empowered commercial bank. Simultaneously, the entity that had operated as “Pathfinder Commercial Bank” changed its name to “Pathfinder Bank.” As a result of this charter conversion and accompanying name change, the entity now known as “Pathfinder Bank” is a commercial bank with the full range of powers granted under a commercial banking charter in New York State. The merger, which had no effect on the Company’s results of operations, converted the consolidated Bank from a savings bank to a commercial bank and was completed in order to better align the Bank’s organization certificate with its long-term strategic focus.
Since the Conversion, we have substantially transformed our business activities from those of a traditional savings bank to those of a commercial bank. This transformation of activities has significantly affected the overall composition of our balance sheet. While not reducing our role as a leading originator of one-to-four family residential real estate loans within our marketplace, which had been our primary focus as a savings bank, we have substantially grown our commercial business and commercial real estate loan portfolios since the Conversion. As a commercial bank, we have been able to offer customized products and services to meet individual commercial customer needs and thereby more definitively differentiate our services from those offered by our competitors. As a result, we have been able to create a substantially more diversified loan portfolio than the one that was in place before the completion of the Conversion. When compared to the Bank’s loan portfolio composition prior to the Conversion, it is our view that our current asset portfolio (1) significantly improves upon the distribution of credit risk across a broader range of borrowers, industries and collateral types, and (2) is more likely to generate consistent net interest margins in a broader range of interest rate environments due to the portfolio’s increased percentage of shorter-term and/or adjustable-rate assets. In a concurrent effort, the Bank has been able to fund the majority of the high level of growth in our loan portfolios primarily with deposits gathered from our local community. We believe that we have gathered these deposits at a reasonable overall cost in terms of deposit interest rates, as well as at a reasonable overall level of related infrastructure and customer support service expenses.
On May 8, 2019, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with Castle Creek Capital Partners VII, L.P. (“Castle Creek”), pursuant to which the Company sold: (i) 37,700 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, at a purchase price of $14.25 per share (the “Common Stock”); (ii) 1,155,283 shares of a new series of preferred stock, Series B convertible perpetual preferred stock, par value $0.01 per share, at a purchase price of $14.25 per share (the “Series B Preferred Stock”); and (iii) a warrant, with an approximate fair value of $373,000, to purchase 125,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price initially equal to $14.25 per share (the “Warrant”), in a private placement transaction (the “Private Placement”) for gross proceeds of approximately $17.0 million. The Securities Purchase Agreement contains significant representations, warranties, and covenants of the Company and Castle Creek.
On May 8, 2019, the Company filed Articles Supplementary with the Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation to issue 1,155,283 shares of Series B Preferred Stock to Castle Creek. Each share of the Series B Preferred Stock was convertible on a one-for-one basis into either (i) Common Stock under certain circumstances or (ii) non-voting common stock, par value $0.01 per share (which will also be convertible into Common Stock), subject to approval of the creation of such class of non-voting common stock by the Company’s stockholders.
The Company also entered into subscription agreements dated as of May 8, 2019 (the “Subscription Agreements”) with certain directors and executive officers of the Company as well as other accredited investors. Pursuant to the Subscription Agreements, the investors purchased an aggregate of 269,277 shares of Common Stock at $14.25 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $3.8
- 31 -
million, before payment of placement fees and related costs and expenses. The Subscription Agreements contain representations, warranties, and covenants of the purchasers and the Company that are customary in private placement transactions. The subscription agreements were also part of the Private Placement, and the term “Private Placement” includes both transactions.
In total, therefore, the Company issued 306,977 shares of Common Stock, 1,155,283 shares of Series B Preferred Stock and the Warrant at the conclusion of the Private Placement. The transaction raised $20.8 million in gross proceeds and the final net cash received from the Private Placement, after all issuance expenses, including placement fees and all other issuance/due diligence costs of $927,000 and $342,000, respectively, was $19.6 million. The fair value of the Warrant at the time of issuance was $373,000.
Pursuant to Nasdaq rules, Castle Creek could not convert the Series B Preferred Stock or, in the future, the non-voting common stock into Common Stock, or exercise the Warrant if doing so would cause Castle Creek, when combined with the purchases of certain directors and executive officers of the Company as well as other accredited investors in the Private Placement, to own more than 19.99% of the Common Stock outstanding immediately prior to the execution of the Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Exchange Cap”). The Company was required to request stockholder approval to eliminate the Exchange Cap no later than at the 2021 annual meeting of Company shareholders. In addition, at the same meeting, the Company was required to seek shareholder approval to create a class of non-voting convertible common stock. Castle Creek will need the approval or non-objection of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the New York State Department of Financial Services if it seeks to increase its ownership of shares of Common Stock in excess of 9.9% of the outstanding shares of Common Stock.
Holders of the Series B Preferred Stock were entitled to receive dividends if declared by the Company’s board of directors, in the same per share amount as paid on the Common Stock. No dividends would be payable on the Common Stock unless a dividend identical to that paid on the Common Stock was payable at the same time on the Series B Preferred Stock. The Series B Preferred Stock would rank, as to payments of dividends and distribution of assets upon dissolution, liquidation or winding up of the Company, pari passu with the Common Stock pro rata. Holders of Series B Preferred Stock had no voting rights except as was required by law. The Series B Preferred Stock was not redeemable by either the Company or by the holder.
As discussed above, pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, on May 8, 2019, the Company issued a Warrant to Castle Creek to purchase 125,000 shares of non-voting common stock at an exercise price equal to $14.25 per share. At the same time, the Company entered into a Warrant Agreement with Castle Creek, to, among other things, authorize and establish the terms of the Warrant. The Warrant is exercisable at any time after May 8, 2019, and from time to time, in whole or in part, until May 8, 2026. However, the exercise of such Warrant remains subject to certain contractual provisions, and regulatory approval if Castle Creek’s ownership of Common Stock would exceed 9.9%. At December 31, 2021, Castle Creek owned approximately 8.9% of the Company’s common voting stock. The Warrant will receive dividends equal to the amount paid on the Company’s common stock. The dividend payment shall be calculated on (1) the unexercised portion of the 125,000 notional shares encompassed within the terms of the Warrant, less (2) any exercised portion of the 125,000 shares, times (3) the amount of the quarterly dividend paid to common shareholders. Dividend payments, if declared on the Company’s common stock, will be made on the Warrant until its expiration date.
Following the Private Placement, the Company used the net cash received from the transaction to strengthen the Company’s general capital and liquidity positions, fund growth within our marketplace, purchase certain loan assets, and increase the regulatory capital position of the Bank. The Company will continue to use the additional capital raised through the Private Placement primarily to support the realization of continued growth opportunities within our marketplace and, to a lesser extent, for general corporate purposes.
Pursuant to the terms of the Securities Purchase Agreement, Castle Creek is entitled to have one representative appointed to the Company’s board of directors for so long as Castle Creek, together with its respective affiliates, owns, in the aggregate, 4.9% or more of all of the outstanding shares of the Company’s Common Voting Stock. If Castle Creek, together with its respective affiliates, owns, in the aggregate, 4.9% or more of all of the outstanding shares of the Company’s Common Voting Stock and does not have a board representative appointed to the Company’s board of directors, the Company will invite a person designated by Castle Creek to attend meetings of the Company’s Board of Directors as an observer. At December 31, 2021, Castle Creek elected to have an observer present at substantially all meetings of the Company’s board of directors.
On November 13, 2020, the Company entered into an agreement (the “Exchange Agreement”) with Castle Creek providing for the exchange of 225,000 shares of the Company’s Common stock owned by Castle Creek for 225,000 shares of the Company’s Series B Preferred Stock. The exchange was consummated simultaneously with the execution and delivery of the Exchange Agreement. The Company and Castle Creek entered into the Exchange Agreement to enable the equity ownership of Castle Creek to comply with applicable banking laws and regulations.
As a result of the Exchange Agreement, on November 13, 2020, the Company issued to Castle Creek 225,000 shares of its Series B Preferred Stock in exchange for an equivalent number of shares of Company Common Stock held by Castle Creek in a transaction exempt from registration under Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Castle Creek is the only stockholder of the
- 32 -
Series B Preferred Stock. The Company received no cash proceeds as a result of the exchange. In addition, the Company did not pay any commission or remuneration for the solicitation of the exchange
On November 13, 2020, the Company filed an amendment to the Articles Supplementary to the Articles of Incorporation of the Company designating the Series B Preferred Stock with the Maryland Department of Assessments and Taxation to increase the classified number of shares of the Series B Preferred Stock from 1,155,283 to 1,506,000 to allow for the additional issuance of Series B Preferred Stock to Castle Creek. There were no other changes made to the preferences, limitations, powers and relative rights of the Series B Preferred Stock.
On June 4, 2021, shareholders of the Company approved an amendment to the Company’s Articles of Incorporation to authorize Non-Voting Common Stock, and to eliminate the Exchange Cap. On June 9, 2021, the Company filed Articles Supplementary to the Articles of Incorporation of the Company (the “Articles Supplementary”) with the Maryland State Department of Assessments and Taxation creating a Class A Non-Voting Common Stock, par value $0.01 per share (“Non-Voting Common Stock”). The Articles Supplementary authorized 1,505,283 shares of the Non-Voting Common Stock which Castle Creek received in exchange for the Company’s outstanding Series B Preferred Stock on a one for one basis and allowed for the issuance of 125,000 shares of Non-Voting Common Stock that may be issued upon the exercise of the Warrant.
The preferences, limitations, powers and relative rights of the Non-Voting Common Stock are set forth in the Articles Supplementary, a summary of which follows:
Ranking: The Non-Voting Common Stock will rank, as to the payment of dividends and distribution of assets upon dissolution, liquidation or winding up of the Company, (i) pari passu with the Company’s Common Stock, and (ii) subordinate and junior to all other securities of the Company which, by their respective terms, are senior to the Non-Voting Common Stock or the Company’s Common Stock.
Dividend Rights: Holders of the Non-Voting Common Stock will be entitled to receive dividends when, as and if declared by the Company’s Board of Directors, in the same per share amount as paid on Company’s Common Stock. No dividends will be payable on the Company’s Common Stock unless a dividend identical to that paid on the Company’s Common Stock is payable at the same time on the Non-Voting Common Stock in an amount per share equal to the product of (i) the per share dividend declared and paid in respect of each share of the Company’s Common Stock and (ii) the number of shares of the Company’s Common Stock into which such share of Non-Voting Common Stock is then convertible (without regard to limitations on conversion of such Non-Voting Common Stock); provided that if any stock dividend is declared on the Company’s Common Stock, the holders of Non-Voting Common Stock will be entitled to receive such dividend payable in shares of Non-Voting Common Stock.
Voting: The holders of shares of Non-Voting Common Stock have no voting rights, except as may be required by Maryland law and as set forth in the Articles Supplementary. So long as any shares of Non-Voting Common Stock are issued and outstanding, the Company will not (including by means of merger, consolidation or otherwise) without obtaining the approval of the holders of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Non-Voting Common Stock:
•
alter or change the rights, preferences, privileges or restrictions provided for the benefit of the holders of the Non-Voting Common Stock so as to affect them adversely;
•
increase or decrease the authorized number of shares of Non-Voting Common Stock; or
•
enter into any agreement, merger or business combination, or engage in any other transaction, or take any action that would have the effect of adversely changing any preference or any relative or other right provided for the benefit of the holders of the Non-Voting Common Stock.
Redemption and Repurchase: The Non-Voting Common Stock is not redeemable by the Company or the holder. However, in the event that the Company offers to repurchase shares of the Company’s Common Stock, the Company must offer to repurchase shares of the Non-Voting Common Stock pro rata based upon the number of shares of the Company’s Common Stock such holders would be entitled to receive if such shares were converted into shares of the Company’s Common Stock immediately prior to such repurchase.
Conversion: Each share of Non-Voting Common Stock will be convertible into one share of the Company’s Common Stock (i) at any time and from time to time at the request of the holder thereof or at the written request of the Company; provided that upon such conversion, the holder, together with all affiliates of the holder, will not own or control in the aggregate more than 9.9% of the Company’s Common Stock (or of any class of the Company’s voting securities), excluding for the purpose of this calculation any reduction in the ownership resulting from transfers by such holder of voting securities (which, for the avoidance of doubt, does not included the Non-Voting Common Stock); or (ii) automatically, without any further action of the part of the holder, on the date that the holder transfers such share of Non-Voting Common Stock to a non-affiliate of the holder in a permissible transfer.
- 33 -
We have consistently maintained our historically strong presence in consumer deposit gathering and residential mortgage lending activities. Notwithstanding the retention of these business lines, we have strategically emphasized developing our business and commercial banking franchise by offering products that are attractive to small-to medium-sized businesses in our market area. We differentiate our commercial loan solutions and related services through the maintenance of high standards of customer service, solution flexibility and convenience. Highlights of our business strategy are as follows:
•
Continuing our emphasis on commercial business and commercial real estate lending. In recent years, we have successfully increased our commercial business and commercial real estate lending activities and portfolio size, consistent with safe and sound underwriting practices. In this regard, we have added, and will continue to add, personnel who are experienced in originating, underwriting and servicing commercial real estate and commercial business loans. We view the growth of our commercial business and commercial real estate loans as a means of further diversifying and increasing our interest income. In increasing our business banking activities, we seek to continuously deepen relationships with local businesses, which offer recurring and potentially increasing sources of both fee income and lower-cost transactional deposits. In that regard, our emphasis on commercial business and commercial real estate lending has complimented, and will continue to compliment, our traditional one-to-four family residential real estate lending and consumer deposit gathering franchises.
•
Providing quality customer service. Our strategy emphasizes providing quality customer service and meeting the financial needs of our customer base by offering a full complement of loan, deposit, financial services and online banking solutions. Our competitive advantage is our ability to make decisions, such as approving loans, more quickly - and with greater flexibility in many cases - than our market competitors. Customers enjoy, and will continue to enjoy, access to senior executives and local decision makers at the Bank and the flexibility that such access brings to their businesses.
•
Optimizing our deposit mix. We seek to enhance the overall characteristics of our deposit base by emphasizing both consumer and business nonmaturity deposit gathering. We also seek to reduce our overall reliance on borrowed funds and brokered deposits as a source of funding for future asset growth. During the second half of 2019, we began a significant refocusing of the Company’s resources, most notably through personnel training, modifications to incentive programs, and the high prioritization of operationalizing and/or enhancing customer-facing technologies that are focused on transactional deposits. The goal of these efforts was, and remains, to better position the Company to compete in our marketplace for these types of deposits in future periods. During 2021, the Bank recorded an increase in combined business and consumer nonmaturity deposits of $81.3 million, or 18.6%. This increase was due to several factors, including the Bank’s continued focus on the gathering of these deposits, the net effects of PPP activity, some of which is considered to be transitory, and changing depositor behavior related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect to make nonmaturity deposit gathering a point of significant organizational focus for the foreseeable future.
•
Continuing to grow our customer relationships and deposit base by expanding our branch network. As conditions permit, we will expand our branch network through a combination of de novo branching and, potentially, acquisitions of branches and/or other financial services companies. We believe that as we expand our branch network, our customer relationships and deposit base will continue to grow. Our branch expansion focus will be primarily within Onondaga County, NY, which encompasses the greater Syracuse, NY area. We currently have three branches in Onondaga County, including the branch in Clay, NY that we opened in the fourth quarter of 2018. We continue to actively seek opportunities for an increased presence within that marketplace. This is consistent with our belief that we have already achieved meaningful brand recognition among potential customers there. In addition to the full-service branches located in Oswego and Onondaga Counties, we opened, in 2017, a loan production office in Utica, located in Oneida County, NY, to increase our availability to potential commercial and business loan customers within that market area. We will continue to seek similar branch network expansion opportunities in the future.
Consistent with this strategy, in November 2018, the Bank acquired a property on West Onondaga Street in Syracuse, which was intended to be renovated and converted into another full-service banking location. This property was sold to an experienced real estate developer in the fourth quarter of 2020. The intent of the sale was to access the purchaser’s greater ability to utilize certain available tax credits that are more beneficial to the purchaser than they would be to the Company, if the Company accessed those credits directly. Management believes that the benefits of the more-fully-utilized tax credits have been passed through to the Company under the terms of a negotiated lease agreement with the property’s purchaser acting as the lessor. We have substantially completed the planned renovation work on the acquired facility and expect to open our new Southwest Syracuse branch office by the second quarter of 2022. We consider the Syracuse Southwest Corridor neighborhood, where this property is located, to be an under-banked area within our target marketplace and believe that this branch will qualify for various economic incentives under New York State’s Banking Development District (“BDD”) program. The BDD program is designed to encourage the establishment of bank branches in areas where there is a demonstrated need for additional banking services. The program was developed in recognition of the fact that banks play a critically important role in promoting individual wealth, community development, and revitalization. This property investment demonstrates Pathfinder Bank’s firm commitment to servicing diverse economic areas within its geographic market.
- 34 -
•
Diversifying our products and services with a goal of increasing non-interest income over time. We have sought to reduce our dependence on net interest income by increasing fee-based income across a broad spectrum of loan and deposit products. It is expected that we will also benefit from increased ancillary income for service activities related to those products. The Company completed a comprehensive study in late 2019 to better understand and monitor the competitive environment for these types of noninterest income opportunities and to improve its product design and customer relationship optimization strategies. A significant number of product design changes were implemented in 2021 and have yielded the expected financial benefits and are expected to continue to do so in future periods. In recent years, we have also sought to increase the breadth of services that we provide to our customers. We offer property and casualty and life insurance through our subsidiary, Pathfinder Risk Management Company, Inc., and its insurance agency subsidiary, the FitzGibbons Agency, LLC. Additionally, Pathfinder Bank’s investment services operations provide brokerage services to our customers for purchasing stocks, bonds, mutual funds, annuities, and long-term care insurance products. We intend to gradually increase our emphasis on the growth of these businesses. We believe that there will be resultant opportunities to cross-sell these products to our deposit and loan customers which will thereby increase our non-interest income over time.
•
Investing in our banking platform and technologies. We have committed significant resources to establish a banking platform to accommodate future growth by upgrading our information systems and customer service technologies, maintaining a robust risk management and compliance staff, improving credit administration functionality, and upgrading our physical infrastructure. We believe that these investments will enable us to achieve operational efficiencies with minimal additional investments, while providing increased convenience for our customers.
•
Controlling the rate of growth in operating expenses. The Company has sought to reduce the rate of growth in its operating expenses relative to its rate of revenue growth and to thereby increase the Company’s overall profitability. Substantial new budgetary and expense control mechanisms were implemented during 2019 that management believes have contributed to a reduction in overall operating expenses in 2021 and 2020, and that will continue to reduce the rate of growth in operating expenses in 2022 and beyond. In 2021, the Company’s efficiency ratio was 63.1%, a 5.6% decline from the 68.7% efficiency ratio in 2020, which is consistent with the implementation of these budgetary and expense control mechanisms.
•
Managing capital. The Company received $24.9 million in net proceeds from the sale of approximately 2.6 million shares of common stock as a result of the Conversion in October 2014. In October 2015, the Company executed the issuance of the $10.0 million non-amortizing Subordinated Loan and subsequently used those proceeds in February 2016 to substantially fund the full retirement of $13.0 million in SBLF Preferred stock. The Company received $19.6 million in net proceeds from the sale of 306,977 shares of common stock and 1,155,283 shares of preferred stock as a result of the Private Placement in May 2019. In October 2020, the Company executed the issuance of $25.0 million in non-amortizing subordinated debt. In April 2021, the Company retired the subordinated debt that it had issued in October 2015, thereby reducing its outstanding balance of Subordinated Loans from $39.4 million at December 31, 2020 to $29.6 million at December 31, 2021. Since 2014, we have therefore successfully leveraged the $44.5 million in net new equity capital and the $35.0 million in the two Subordinated Loans by growing our consolidated assets by $724.2 million, or 129.1%, to $1.23 billion at December 31, 2021. It is our intent to balance our future growth with capital adequacy considerations in a manner that will continue to allow us to effectively serve all of our key stakeholders and maintain our “well capitalized” capital position.
COVID-19 Response
In early January 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) issued an alert that a novel coronavirus outbreak was emanating from Wuhan, Hubei Province in China. Over the course of the next several weeks, the outbreak continued to spread to various regions of the world, prompting the World Health Organization to declare COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. In the United States, by the end of March 2020, the rapid spread of the COVID-19 virus invoked various Federal and New York State authorities to make emergency declarations and issue executive orders to limit the spread of the disease. Measures included restrictions on international and domestic travel, limitations on public gatherings, implementation of social distancing and sanitization protocols, school closings, orders to shelter in place and mandates to close all non-essential businesses to the public. To widely varying degrees, largely dependent upon the level of regional and national outbreaks and the resultant levels of capacity constraints on available medical resources, these very substantial mandated curtailments of social and economic activity were relaxed globally in the third and fourth quarters of 2020. However, within various time periods during 2021 that extended into early 2022, the number of reported positive cases in the United States spiked to very high levels due to the emergence of new variants of the virus. At the date of this filing, the majority of the United States, including the areas in which the Company has its operations, has returned to substantively normal business and social activities.
As a result of the initial and continuing outbreak, and governmental responses thereto, the spread of the coronavirus has caused us to modify our business practices, including employee travel, employee work locations, and cancellation of physical participation in meetings, events and conferences. The Company has many employees working remotely and has significantly reduced physical
- 35 -
customer contact with employees and other customers. Initially, branch activities were limited to drive-thru transactions whenever possible, teleconferencing and in-branch “appointments only” services. The Bank’s branches were made fully accessible to the public in the early fall of 2020, but remained in strict compliance with all applicable social distancing and sanitization guidelines. Since the start of the pandemic, transactional volume has also increased through the Bank’s telephone, mobile and internet banking channels. We will take further actions, focused on safety, as may be required by government authorities or that we determine to be in the best interests of our employees, customers and business partners.
Concerns about the spread of the disease and its anticipated negative impact on economic activity, severely disrupted both domestic and international financial markets prompting the world’s central banks to inject significant amounts of monetary stimulus into their respective economies. In the United States, the Federal Reserve System’s Federal Open Market Committee, swiftly cut the target Federal Funds rate to a range of 0% to 0.25%, where it remained as of December 31, 2021. In addition, the Federal Reserve initiated various market support programs to ease the stress on financial markets. This significant reduction in short-term interest rates has reduced, and will continue to reduce, the Bank’s cost of funds and interest earning-asset yields. The long-term effects of the current interest rate environment, resulting from government and central bank responses to the pandemic, on the Bank’s net interest margin cannot be predicted with certainty at this time.
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), signed into law on March 27, 2020, provided financial assistance in various forms to both businesses and consumers, including the establishment and funding of the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”). In addition, the CARES Act also created many directives affecting the operations of financial services providers, such as the Company, including a forbearance program for federally-backed mortgage loans and protections for borrowers from negative credit reporting due to loan accommodations related to the national emergency. The banking regulatory agencies also issued guidance encouraging financial institutions to work prudently with borrowers who were, or were potentially, unable to meet their contractual payment obligations because of the effects of COVID-19. The Company worked throughout the pandemic to assist its business and consumer customers affected by COVID-19.
The Bank participated in all phases of the PPP funded by the U.S. Treasury Department and administered by the U.S. SBA pursuant to the CARES Act and subsequent legislation. PPP loans have an interest rate of 1.0% and a two-year or five-year loan term to maturity. The SBA guarantees 100% of the PPP loans made to eligible borrowers. The entire principal amount of the borrower’s PPP loan, including any accrued interest, is eligible to be reduced by the loan forgiveness amount under the PPP so long as employee and compensation levels of the business are maintained and the loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses. Through the end of the program in the early spring of 2021, the Bank received approval from the SBA for 1,120 loans totaling approximately $109.8 million through this program. The Bank is now also assisting borrowers with the loan forgiveness phase of the process. As of this filing, the Company has submitted 864 loans totaling approximately $90.5 million to the SBA for forgiveness. The Bank received $4.0 million in fees from the SBA associated with PPP lending activities during 2020 and 2021 and recognized $2.2 million and $900,000 of those fees in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Accordingly, $3.1 million in deferred fee income on a cumulative basis was subtracted from the carrying value of the PPP loans held in portfolio and the remaining $912,000 in deferred collected fees will be recognized in future periods.
Through December 31, 2020, the Bank granted payment deferral requests for an initial period of 90 days on 618 loans representing approximately $137.4 million of existing loan balances. Upon the receipt of borrower requests, additional 90 day deferral periods were generally granted. Consistent with industry regulatory guidance, borrowers that were granted COVID-19 related deferrals, but were otherwise current on loan payments will continue to have their loans reported as current loans during the agreed upon deferral period(s), accrue interest and not be accounted for as troubled debt restructurings. Of these granted deferrals, 303 loans, totaling $24.0 million, were residential mortgage or consumer loans. At December 31, 2020, 265 residential and consumer loans, totaling $21.3 million, have been returned to non-deferral status. Of these granted deferrals, 315 loans, totaling $113.3 million, were commercial real estate or other commercial and industrial loans. At December 31, 2020, 291 commercial real estate or other commercial and industrial loans, totaling $98.9 million, have been returned to non-deferral status. Therefore, at December 31, 2020, 38 residential mortgage and consumer loans, totaling $2.7 million and 24 commercial real estate and other commercial and industrial loans, totaling $14.4 million remained in deferral status. These loans still in deferral status therefore totaled $17.1 million and represented 2.1% of all loans outstanding at December 31, 2020. After consultations with certain of these commercial loan borrowers, 11 loans, representing $8.3 million, have been granted an additional 90 day deferral period beyond 180 days as of December 31, 2020. These loans are included in the $17.1 million in loans still in deferred status at December 31, 2020. On an extremely limited basis, additional deferral periods were granted subject to further analysis and discussion with specific borrowers. To the extent that such modifications met the criteria previously described these loans were not classified as troubled debt restructurings nor classified as nonperforming at December 31, 2020. Loans not granted additional deferral periods were categorized as nonaccrual loans if the borrowers failed to make the first scheduled payment following the end of the deferral period, or became seriously delinquent thereafter. During the course of 2021, all deferred loans were either returned to accrual status or appropriately characterized as nonaccrual as dictated by their repayment activities. Therefore, the Company had no loans in deferral status at December 31, 2021.
- 36 -
Selected Financial Data
The following selected consolidated financial data sets forth certain financial highlights of the Company and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes
- 37 -
(a)
See table below for reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures.
(b)
The efficiency ratio is calculated as noninterest expense divided by the sum of net interest income and noninterest income, excluding net gains on sales, redemptions and impairment of investment securities and net gains (losses) on sales of loans and foreclosed real estate.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL INFORMATION
Regulation G, a rule adopted by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), applies to certain SEC filings, including earnings releases, made by registered companies that contain “non-GAAP financial measures.” GAAP is generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. Under Regulation G, companies making public disclosures containing non-GAAP financial measures must also disclose, along with each non-GAAP financial measure, certain additional information, including a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measure to the closest comparable GAAP financial measure (if a comparable GAAP measure exists) and a statement of the Company’s reasons for utilizing the non-GAAP financial measure as part of its financial disclosures. The SEC has exempted from the definition of “non-GAAP financial measures” certain commonly used financial measures that are not based on GAAP. When these exempted measures are included in public disclosures, supplemental information is not required. Financial institutions, like the Company and its subsidiary bank, are subject to an array of bank regulatory capital measures that are financial in nature but are not based on GAAP and are not easily reconcilable to the closest comparable GAAP financial measures, even in those cases where a comparable measure exists. The Company follows industry practice in disclosing its financial condition under these various regulatory capital measures, including period-end regulatory capital ratios for its subsidiary bank, in its periodic reports filed with the SEC, and does so without compliance with Regulation G, on the widely-shared assumption that the SEC regards such non-GAAP measures to be exempt from Regulation G. The Company uses in this regulatory filing additional non-GAAP financial measures that are commonly utilized by financial institutions and have not been specifically exempted by the SEC from Regulation G. The Company provides, as supplemental information, such non-GAAP measures included in this document as described immediately below.
- 38 -
- 39 -
Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”)
The Bank participated in all rounds of the PPP funded by the U.S. Treasury Department and administered by the SBA pursuant to the CARES Act and subsequent legislation. PPP loans have an interest rate of 1.0% and a two-year or five-year loan term to maturity. The SBA guarantees 100% of the PPP loans made to eligible borrowers. The entire principal amount of the borrower’s PPP loan, including any accrued interest, is eligible to be reduced by the loan forgiveness amount under the PPP so long as employee and compensation levels of the business are maintained and the loan proceeds are used for qualifying expenses. The PPP ended in May 2021. Information related to the Company’s PPP loans are included in the following tables:
- 40 -
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The Company's consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and follow practices within the banking industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on information available as of the date of the financial statements; accordingly, as this information changes, the financial statements could reflect different estimates, assumptions and judgments. Certain policies inherently have a greater reliance on the use of estimates, assumptions and judgments and as such have a greater possibility of producing results that could be materially different than originally reported. Estimates, assumptions and judgments are necessary when assets and liabilities are required to be recorded at fair value or when an asset or liability needs to be recorded contingent upon a future event. Carrying assets and liabilities at fair value inherently results in more financial statement volatility. The fair values, and information used to record valuation adjustments for certain assets and liabilities, are based on quoted market prices or are provided by other third-party sources, when available. When third party information is not available, valuation adjustments are estimated in good faith by management.
The most significant accounting policies followed by the Company are presented in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. These policies, along with the disclosures presented in the other financial statement notes and in this discussion, provide information on how significant assets and liabilities are valued in the consolidated financial statements and how those values are determined. Based on the valuation techniques used and the sensitivity of financial statement amounts to the methods, assumptions, and estimates underlying those amounts, management has identified the allowance for loan losses, deferred income tax assets and liabilities, pension obligations, the evaluation of investment securities for other than temporary impairment, the annual evaluation of the Company’s goodwill for possible impairment, and the estimation of fair values for accounting and disclosure purposes to be the accounting areas that require the most subjective and complex judgments. These areas could be the most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses represents management's estimate of probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio. Determining the amount of the allowance for loan losses is considered a critical accounting estimate because it requires significant judgment on the use of estimates related to the amount and timing of expected future cash flows on impaired loans, estimated losses on pools of homogeneous loans based on historical loss experience, and environmental factors, all of which may be susceptible to significant change. The Company establishes a specific allowance for all commercial loans in excess of the total related credit threshold of $100,000 and single borrower residential mortgage loans in excess of the total related credit threshold of $300,000 identified as being impaired which are on nonaccrual and have been risk rated under the Company’s risk rating system as substandard, doubtful, or loss. The Company also establishes a specific allowance, regardless of the size of the loan, for all loans subject to a troubled debt restructuring agreement. In addition, an accruing substandard loan could be identified as being impaired. The measurement of impaired loans is generally based upon the present value of future cash flows discounted at the historical effective interest rate, except that all collateral-dependent loans are measured for impairment based on the fair value of the collateral, less costs to sell. At December 31, 2021, the Bank’s position in impaired loans consisted of 56 loans totaling $11.3 million. Of these loans, 18 loans, totaling $2.3 million, were valued using the present value of future cash flows method; and 38 loans, totaling $9.0 million, were valued based on a collateral analysis. For all other loans, the Company uses the general allocation methodology that establishes an allowance to estimate the probable incurred loss for each risk-rating category. Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements describes the methodology used to determine the allowance for loan losses and a discussion of the factors driving changes in the amount of the allowance for loan losses is included in this report.
Deferred Income Tax Assets and Liabilities. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined using the liability method. Under this method, the net deferred tax asset or liability is recognized for the future tax consequences. This is attributable to the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases as well as net operating and capital loss carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates applied to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities from a change in tax rates is recognized in income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date. If current available evidence about the future raises doubt about the likelihood of a deferred tax asset being realized, a valuation allowance is established. The judgment about the level of future taxable income, including that which is considered capital, is inherently subjective and is reviewed on a continual basis as regulatory and business factors change.
Pension Obligations. Pension and postretirement benefit plan liabilities and expenses are based upon actuarial assumptions of future events, including fair value of plan assets, interest rates, and the length of time the Company will have to provide those benefits. The assumptions used by management are discussed in Note 14 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein.
- 41 -
Evaluation of Investment Securities for Other-Than-Temporary-Impairment (“OTTI”). The Company carries all of its available-for-sale investments at fair value with any unrealized gains or losses reported net of tax as an adjustment to shareholders' equity and included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss), except for the credit-related portion of debt security impairment losses and OTTI of equity securities which are charged to earnings. The Company's ability to fully realize the value of its investments in various securities, including corporate debt securities, is dependent on the underlying creditworthiness of the issuing organization. In evaluating the debt security (both available-for-sale and held-to-maturity) portfolio for other-than-temporary impairment losses, management considers (1) if we intend to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost; (2) if it is “more likely than not” we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis; or (3) if the present value of expected cash flows is not sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis. When the fair value of a held-to-maturity or available-for-sale security is less than its amortized cost basis, an assessment is made as to whether OTTI is present. The Company considers numerous factors when determining whether a potential OTTI exists and the period over which the debt security is expected to recover. The principal factors considered are (1) the length of time and the extent to which the fair value has been less than the amortized cost basis, (2) the financial condition of the issuer and (guarantor, if any) and adverse conditions specifically related to the security, industry or geographic area, (3) failure of the issuer of the security to make scheduled interest or principal payments, (4) any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, and (5) the presence of credit enhancements, if any, including the guarantee of the federal government or any of its agencies.
Evaluation of Goodwill. Management performs an annual evaluation of the Company’s goodwill for possible impairment. Based on the results of the 2021 evaluation, management has determined that the carrying value of goodwill is not impaired as of December 31, 2021. The evaluation approach is described in Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements contained herein.
Estimation of Fair Value. The estimation of fair value is significant to several of our assets; including investment securities available-for-sale, interest rate derivative (discussed in detail in Note 22 of the consolidated financial statements), intangible assets, foreclosed real estate, and the value of loan collateral when valuing loans. These are all recorded at either fair value, or the lower of cost or fair value. Fair values are determined based on third party sources, when available. Furthermore, accounting principles generally accepted in the United States require disclosure of the fair value of financial instruments as a part of the notes to the consolidated financial statements. Fair values on our available-for-sale securities may be influenced by a number of factors; including market interest rates, prepayment speeds, discount rates, and the shape of yield curves.
Fair values for securities available-for-sale are obtained from an independent third party pricing service. Where available, fair values are based on quoted prices on a nationally recognized securities exchange. If quoted prices are not available, fair values are measured using quoted market prices for similar benchmark securities. Management made no adjustments to the fair value quotes that were provided by the pricing source. The fair values of foreclosed real estate and the underlying collateral value of impaired loans are typically determined based on evaluations by third parties, less estimated costs to sell. When necessary, appraisals are updated to reflect changes in market conditions.
RECENT EVENTS
On December 20, 2021, the Company announced that its Board of Directors had declared a cash dividend of $0.07 per share on the Company’s voting common and non-voting common stock, and a cash dividend of $0.07 per notional share for the issued Warrant relating to the fiscal quarter ending December 31, 2021. The dividend was payable on February 4, 2022 to shareholders of record on January 14, 2022.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Company reported net income of $12.4 million for 2021, an increase of $5.5 million, or 78.5%, as compared to net income of $7.0 million for 2020. Net income increased during 2021, as compared to the previous year, due to an increase in net interest income before the provision for loan losses of $6.7 million, combined with a $3.4 million decrease in provision for loan losses. These increases were offset by a decrease in noninterest income of $254,000, an increase in noninterest expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $2.4 million and an increase in income tax expense of $2.2 million. Basic and diluted earnings per share in 2021 were both $2.07 per share, as compared to $1.17 per share in 2020. Return on average assets increased 38 basis points to 0.98% in 2021 from 0.60% in 2020. Return on average equity increased 448 basis points to 11.91% in 2021 as compared to 7.43% in 2020. The increase in return on average assets in 2021, as compared to the previous year, was primarily due to the increase in net income outpacing average asset growth. Average assets increased in 2021 by $94.2 million, or 8.1%, as the Company grew its total average assets from $1.23 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.29 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in return on average equity in 2021, as compared to the previous year, was primarily due to the increase in net income outpacing the growth in equity.
- 42 -
Net interest income, before provision for loan losses, increased $6.7 million, or 21.0%, to $38.3 million in 2021 on average interest earning assets of $1.19 billion as compared to net interest income before provision for loan losses of $31.6 million in 2020 on average interest earning assets of $1.10 billion. Interest and dividend income increased $3.3 million in 2021 to $45.8 million, as compared to interest and dividend income of $42.5 million in 2020. The aggregate increase in the average balance of interest-earning assets of $92.6 million was partially offset by a decrease of two basis points in the overall average yield earned on those assets. The $3.3 million increase in interest and dividend income was further enhanced by a decrease in interest expense of $3.3 million due to a decrease in the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities of 40 basis points in 2021 as compared to 2020, partially offset by an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing liabilities of $44.1 million.
The Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $1.0 million in 2021 as compared to $4.7 million in the prior year. The $3.7 million year-over-year decrease in provision for loan losses was primarily due to continuing improvements in nonaccrual loans and general economic conditions. Additionally, the provision for loan losses in 2021 reflected a decrease in nonperforming loans of $13.0 million at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020. These factors were partially offset within the provision calculation during 2021 by an increase in outstanding loan balances, excluding PPP loans, of $6.8 million, or 1.0%, in 2021 as compared to 2020. The Company recorded $1.0 million in net charge-offs in 2021 as compared to $599,000 in net charge-offs in 2020. The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans therefore increased to 0.12% in 2021 from 0.08% in 2020.
Noninterest income was $6.2 million in 2021, a decrease of $254,000, or 3.9%, from $6.5 million in 2020. This decrease was primarily the result of an $867,000 decrease in net gains on the sales of loans and foreclosed real estate, and a $1.0 million decrease in net gains on sales and redemptions of investment securities. The decreased gain on the sales of loans and foreclosed real estate was primarily the result of the sale of $35.9 million in seasoned, conforming residential mortgage loans that was completed in January 2020 and resulted in the recognition of a gain of $659,000, which did not recur in 2021. The decrease in the net gains on sales of loans in 2021 was also the result of decreased originations of 1-4 family residential mortgages sold into the secondary market. The increase in the number of residential originations in 2020 was primarily due to significant declines in mortgage loan interest rates in 2020 as compared to the current year. The investment securities sales were part of the Company’s portfolio optimization and liquidity management strategies and were sold in order to improve the expected future total returns within the investment portfolio, particularly in light of potentially increased prepayment activity, related to the sharp decline in general interest rates, and/or potential credit downgrade concerns following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, an increase of $1.0 million was realized on marketable equitable securities when compared to 2020. Also contributing to the decrease in noninterest income was a decrease in loan servicing fees of $115,000. All other categories of noninterest income increased in aggregate when compared to 2020. The net increase in these categories of noninterest income was in part due to the Company’s increased strategic focus on improving recurring noninterest income. Overall increases in noninterest income occurred in 2021, as compared to the previous year, as a result of a return to more normalized customer activity levels in 2021, especially in comparison to the second and third quarters of 2020. In addition, the Bank decreased the levels of customer fee waivers and forbearances during 2021 that were more routinely granted in 2020 as part of the Bank’s response to the local economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Since 2016, the Company held a passive equity investment, acquired for $534,000, in an otherwise unaffiliated financial institution. The issuer of that originally-purchased common stock was acquired in June 2020 by another financial institution (the acquiring bank). Upon the closing of the transaction, the acquisition resulted in the Company receiving total cash and stock compensation of $911,000 for its equity investment, based on the closing stock price of the acquiring institution on June 30, 2020. As a result, during the second quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a net gain on sales and redemptions of investment securities of $115,000 and a gain on equity securities of $438,000. The Company retained its shares of the acquiring bank, valued at $677,000 and $682,000 at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, and has the ability to hold the investment indefinitely.
In addition, the Company held a fixed-income, non-exchange traded investment, previously categorized as available-for-sale, which was managed since its acquisition in 2017 by an external party. The investment was previously reported at its stated net asset value, which was $2.1 million at March 31, 2020. The investment was substantially restructured and subsequently listed on June 17, 2020 as a publicly-traded common stock on the New York Stock Exchange. Due to what management believed were technical factors related to the listing itself, and the almost universal pricing pressure on publicly-traded assets of this type in the then-current uncertain economic environment, the closing stock price at June 30, 2020 was significantly below the historical amortized cost of the investment on that date. Therefore, the restructuring and listing events caused the Company to recognize an unrealized loss in the second quarter of 2020 in the amount of $1.2 million, which was measured by the difference between the newly-issued stock’s closing price at June 30, 2020 and its net asset value at March 31, 2020. The investment’s fair market value subsequently appreciated significantly in the second half of 2020 and during the period of time the Bank held the investment in 2021. In August 2021, the investment, including all interest and dividends received from its issuer since its initial purchase date had substantially reached a breakeven position on a cash flow basis and was sold in its entirety. In 2021, dividend income related to this investment and the net improvement in the fair market value of this investment, recognized through earnings, were $78,000 and $387,000, respectively. After June 30, 2020, through December 31, 2020, dividend income related to this investment and the net change in the fair market value of this investment, recognized through earnings, were $78,000 and $250,000, respectively.
- 43 -
Noninterest expense increased $2.4 million, or 9.6%, to $27.5 million in 2021 from $25.1 million in 2020. The year-over-year increase in noninterest expense was driven by increases in most categories except foreclosed real estate. The Company experienced material declines in substantially all forms of noninterest expenses following the inception of the COVID-19 pandemic which began in March 2020. Accordingly, the Company progressively returned to less restricted operations and noninterest expenses have returned to the levels considered by its management to be prudent for the effective long-term management of the Company. The increase in noninterest expense was primarily driven by an increase of $916,000 in salaries and employee benefits expenses, a $417,000 increase in professional and other services, a $257,000 increase in advertising, a $218,000 increase in audits and exams expense, a $159,000 increase in data processing expense, a $143,000 increase in FDIC assessments, a $108,000 increase in building and occupancy expense, and a $82,000 and $66,000 increase in insurance agency expense and other expenses, respectively. The increase in net salaries expense was partially the result of increased PPP loan originations in 2020 and the deferral of employee-related expenses in 2020 related to those originations. The increases in professional and other services fees, and audits and exams expense were primarily related to the Bank’s increased internal controls testing under FDICIA requirements for institutions with assets greater than $1 billion and additional expenses for the Company as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Building and occupancy costs increased as a result of an increase in maintenance costs and depreciation expense of $79,000 and $48,000, respectively. These increases are consistent with the Company’s recent refurbishments of certain branch and administrative locations and the relative timing of certain maintenance activities. Data processing costs increased due to increases in internet banking costs and processing costs. These increases are consistent with the Company’s customer and operational growth. The FDIC assessment increased as a result of an increase in the average balance of deposits, including an increase in the average balance of brokered time deposits. Insurance agency expense increased as a result of a general increases in personnel costs and other administrative costs related to the Agency.
Total assets were $1.29 billion at December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.23 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets of $57.7 million, or 4.7%, was the result of the increase in investment securities of $50.7 million, a $7.0 million increase in loans and a $5.6 million increase in bank owned life insurance. All other assets, excluding cash and cash equivalents, increased by a net $1.0 million. Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $6.3 million. The increase in total assets in 2021 was funded largely by a $59.4 million increase in deposits, specifically a $71.6 million increase in customer deposits, offset by a $12.2 million decrease in brokered deposits.
Net loan charge-offs to average loans were 0.12% for 2021, as compared to 0.08% for 2020. Nonperforming loans to total loans were 1.00% at December 31, 2021, down 158 basis points compared to 2.58% at December 31, 2020. The allowance for loan losses to non-performing loans at December 31, 2021 was 155.99%, compared with 59.89% at December 31, 2020. Total nonperforming loans decreased $13.0 million, or 61%, between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, driven by decreases of $11.6 million and $1.7 million in nonperforming commercial and commercial real estate loans and residential real estate loans respectively, partially offset by an increase of $357,000 in consumer loans. The decrease in nonperforming commercial and commercial real estate loans in 2021 was primarily due to the return of two commercial loan relationships, comprised of two individual loans, with aggregate outstanding loan balances of $12.0 million, to accrual status during the year. These loans were initially placed in nonaccrual status in 2020. These relationships, which included loans secured by third-party pledges and/or business assets, as well as loans collateralized by commercial real estate were making all required payments, as agreed, at December 31, 2021.
Pursuant to the CARES Act and subsequent legislation, financial institutions had the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles related to troubled debt restructurings for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. This provision allowed a financial institution the option to not apply the guidance on accounting for troubled debt restructurings to loan modifications, such as extensions or deferrals, related to COVID-19 made between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022 or (ii) 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The relief could only be applied to modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Bank elected to adopt these provisions of the CARES Act in 2020. Management monitored these entities closely and has incorporated our current estimate of the ultimate collectability of these loans into the reported allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021. Overall the ratio of the allowance for loan losses to year end loans remained stable at 1.57% and 1.55% for December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Total past due loans measured as a percent of total loans, increased from 1.85% at December 31, 2020 to 2.14% at December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase of $2.8 million in past due commercial loans and a $317,000 increase in past due consumer loans, partially offset by a $650,000 decrease in past due residential loans. The level of nonperforming loans decreased in aggregate by $13.0 million led by a decrease of $11.6 million in nonperforming commercial loans, a $1.7 million decrease in nonperforming residential loans, and partially offset by a $357,000 increase in nonperforming consumer loans. Commensurate with the decrease in nonperforming loans to year end loans, the ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets decreased to 0.99% at December 31, 2021 from 2.58% at December 31, 2020.
The Company’s shareholders’ equity increased $12.8 million, or 13.2%, to $110.3 million at December 31, 2021 from $97.5 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $10.7 million increase in retained earnings, a $968,000 increase in comprehensive income, a $1.0 million increase in additional paid in capital and a $180,000 increase in ESOP shares earned.
- 44 -
Comprehensive income increased primarily as the result of a reduction in the losses on derivatives and hedging activities and unrealized gains on retirement plans, partially offset by the unrealized losses on available for sale securities during 2021. The increase in retained earnings resulted from $12.5 million in net income recorded in 2021. Partially offsetting this increase in retained earnings were $1.3 million for cash dividends declared on our voting common stock, $290,000 for cash dividends on our non-voting common stock, $97,000 for cash dividends declared on our former preferred stock, and $35,000 for cash dividends declared on our issued warrant.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the Company's primary source of operating income. It is the amount by which interest earned on interest-earning deposits, loans and investment securities exceeds the interest paid on deposits and borrowed money. Changes in net interest income and the net interest margin ratio resulted from the interaction between the volume and composition of interest earning assets, interest-bearing liabilities, and their respective yields and funding costs.
The following comments refer to the table of Average Balances and Rates and the Rate/Volume Analysis, both of which follow below.
Net interest income, before provision for loan losses, increased $6.7 million, or 21.0%, to $38.3 million in 2021 as compared to $31.6 million in the previous year. Our net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 3.21% from 2.88% for the comparable prior year. The increase in net interest income was primarily due to a $3.3 million, or 7.8%, increase in interest and dividend income in 2021 to $45.8 million primarily as a result of the $92.6 million, or 8.4%, increase in the average balance of interest earning assets (due primarily to loan growth), partially offset by a two basis point decrease in the average yield earned on those assets. This increase in net interest income was additionally enhanced by a decrease in interest expense of $3.3 million, or 30.7%, during 2021, as compared to the previous year. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to a decrease in the average rate paid on interest-bearing liabilities of 40 basis points in 2021 as compared to 2020, partially offset by an increase in the balance of average interest-bearing liabilities of $44.1 million.
- 45 -
Average Balances and Rates
The following table sets forth information concerning average interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and the yields and rates thereon. Interest income and resultant yield information in the table has not been adjusted for tax equivalency. Averages are computed on the daily average balance for each month in the period divided by the number of days in the period. Yields and amounts earned include loan fees. Nonaccrual loans have been included in interest-earning assets for purposes of these calculations.
- 46 -
Rate/Volume Analysis
Net interest income can also be analyzed in terms of the impact of changing interest rates on interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and changes in the volume or amount of these assets and liabilities. The following table represents the extent to which changes in interest rates and changes in the volume of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities have affected the Company’s interest income and interest expense during the years indicated. Information is provided in each category with respect to: (i) changes attributable to changes in volume (change in volume multiplied by prior rate); (ii) changes attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume); and (iii) total increase or decrease. Changes attributable to both rate and volume have been allocated ratably. Tax-exempt securities have not been adjusted for tax equivalency.
Interest Income
Changes in interest income result from changes in the average balances of loans, securities, and interest-earning deposits and the related average yields on those balances.
Interest and dividend income increased $3.3 million, or 7.8%, to $45.8 million in 2021 as compared to $42.5 million in 2020 due principally to the $92.6 million, or 8.4%, increase in average interest-earning assets. The average balance of loans increased $36.2 million, or 4.5%, in 2021, as compared to the previous year. This increase reflected the Company’s continued success in its expansion within the greater Syracuse market and the Company’s continued participation in the PPP loan program during 2021. The average yield earned on loans in 2021 remained consistent with 2020 levels at 4.44%. The $36.2 million increase in the average balance of loans in 2021 therefore resulted in a $1.6 million increase in loan income recorded in 2021 as compared to 2020. The average balance of PPP loans outstanding in 2021 was $75.5 million with an average yield of 3.33%. Excluding PPP loans, the average balance of loans was $748.5 million with an average yield of 4.52%. The average balance of taxable investment securities increased $56.8 million, or 22.1%, when compared to the prior year. This increase in investment securities was partially the result of increases in government and agency securities which are pledged as collateral for municipal deposits. The increase in the average balance of taxable investment securities resulted in $1.6 million of income recorded in 2021, as compared to 2020. The average yields earned on taxable investment securities increased seven basis points to 2.74% in 2021 as compared to 2.67% in 2020, accounting for an increase in interest income of $178,000 in 2021.
- 47 -
Interest Expense
Changes in interest expense result from changes in the average balances of deposits and borrowings and the related average interest costs on those balances.
Interest expense decreased $3.3 million, or 30.7%, to $7.5 million in 2021, as compared to $10.9 million in the previous year. The decrease in interest expense was primarily the result of a decrease in interest paid on time deposits of $3.2 million. Decreases between 2021 and 2020 were recorded in average rates paid on time deposits of 69 basis points. The decrease in the average rates paid on those deposits reflected the general decline in market interest rates during 2021. Partially offsetting the reduction in interest expense on deposits was an increase of $33.9 million, or 4.2%, in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits in 2021 as compared to the previous year. Further contributing to the decrease in interest expense was a $623,000 decrease in borrowings expense, which also was attributable to a general decline in market interest rates during 2021. These decreases in borrowed funds expense were partially offset by a $689,000 increase in subordinated debt expense, which was the result of the Company’s completion of a private placement of the fixed-to-floating rate 2020 subordinated loan during the fourth quarter of 2020. The Company redeemed approximately $10.0 million of previously issued loans that were outstanding on December 31, 2020, during the second quarter of 2021.
Provision for Loan Losses
We establish a provision for loan losses, which is charged to operations, at a level management believes is appropriate to absorb probable incurred credit losses in the loan portfolio. In evaluating the level of the allowance for loan losses, management considers historical loss experience, the types and amount of loans in the loan portfolio, adverse situations that may affect a borrower’s ability to repay, estimated value of any underlying collateral, and prevailing economic conditions. This evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires estimates that are susceptible to significant revision as more information becomes available or as future events change. The provision for loan losses represents management’s estimate of the amount necessary to maintain the allowance for loan losses at an adequate level.
The Company recorded a provision for loan losses of $1.0 million in 2021 as compared to $4.7 million in the prior year. The $3.7 million year-over-year decrease in provision for loan losses was primarily due to continuing reductions during 2021 in the level of nonaccrual loans held by the Bank, as well as observed improvements in both local and national economic conditions corresponding with the general diminution of the effects of the pandemic in 2021. The provision for loan losses in 2021 reflected a decrease in nonperforming loans of $13.0 million at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. The Company recorded $1.0 million in net charge-offs in 2021 as compared to $599,000 in net charge-offs in 2020. The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans therefore increased to 0.12% in 2021 from 0.08% in 2020.
Nonperforming loans to total loans were 1.00% at December 31, 2021, down 158 basis points compared to 2.58% at December 31, 2020. The allowance for loan losses to non-performing loans at December 31, 2021 was 155.99%, compared with 59.89% at December 31, 2020. Total nonperforming loans decreased $13.0 million, or 61%, between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, driven by decreases of $11.6 million and $1.7 million in nonperforming commercial and commercial real estate loans and residential real estate loans respectively, partially offset by an increase of $357,000 in consumer loans. The decrease in nonperforming commercial and commercial real estate loans in 2021 was primarily due to the return of two commercial loan relationships, comprised of two individual loans, with aggregate outstanding loan balances of $12.0 million, to accrual status during the year. These loans were initially placed in nonaccrual status in 2020. These relationships, which included loans secured by third-party pledges and/or business assets, as well as loans collateralized by commercial real estate were making all required payments, as agreed, at December 31, 2021.
- 48 -
Noninterest Income
The Company's noninterest income is primarily comprised of fees on deposit account balances and transactions, loan servicing, commissions and net gains or losses on sales of securities, loans, and foreclosed real estate.
The following table sets forth certain information on noninterest income for the years indicated.
Noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $254,000, or 3.9%, to $6.2 million from $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Noninterest income before gains (losses) on the sales and redemptions of investment securities, gains (losses) on marketable equity securities, gains on the sale of loans and foreclosed real estate and gains on sale of premises and equipment, increased $439,000, or 9.0%, to $5.3 million in 2021 as compared to $4.9 million in 2020. This $439,000 increase in 2021 as compared with the previous year, was primarily due to increases in debit card interchange fees, other charges, commissions and fees and earnings and gain on bank owned life insurance of $152,000, $141,000, and $99,000, respectively, partially offset by a decrease in loan servicing fees of $115,000. The increase in debit card interchange was due to an increase in the number of consumer checking accounts and generally increased consumer spending activity following the lessening or outright elimination of the most severe restrictions related to the pandemic in 2021. The $141,000 increase in other charges, commissions and fees in 2021, as compared to the previous year, was primarily due to an increase of investment services revenue of $97,000. The $99,000 increase in the gain on bank owned life insurance was primarily due to an increase in the average balance of bank owned life insurance held from $17.8 million held in 2020 to $22.0 million held in 2021. The $115,000 year over year decease in loan servicing fees was primarily due to reduced loan prepayment fee collections in 2021, as compared to the previous year. Fee collections of this type are generally related to commercial mortgage and commercial real estate loan activity and will vary from year to year based on a number of factors including the level of fee waivers and other concessions offered to customers as a part of refinancing negotiations.
In comparing the year ended December 31, 2021 to the previous year, net gains on the sales of loans and foreclosed real estate decreased $866,000 and net gains on the sales and redemptions of investment securities decreased $1.0 million. The decrease in gains on the sales of loans and foreclosed real estate was primarily the result of the January 2020 sale of $35.9 million in seasoned, conforming residential mortgage loans that resulted in the recognition of a gain of $659,000. There were no similar sales of seasoned portfolio loans in 2021. Additionally, the decrease in the net gains on sale of loans in 2021 was also the result of fewer sales of newly-originated 1-4 family residential mortgages into the secondary market than in the previous year due to a modest decrease in loan application volume and certain changes made to the Bank’s product mix. The changes in product mix were primarily related to a higher percentage of construction-to permanent financing loans that were retained in portfolio during 2021 than in the previous year.
Since 2016, the Company held a passive equity investment, acquired for $534,000, in an otherwise unaffiliated financial institution. The issuer of that originally-purchased common stock was acquired in June 2020 by another financial institution (the acquiring bank). Upon the closing of the transaction, the acquisition resulted in the Company receiving total cash and stock compensation of $911,000 for its equity investment, based on the closing stock price of the acquiring institution on June 30, 2020. As a result, during the second quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a net gain on sales and redemptions of investment securities of $115,000 and a gain on equity securities of $438,000.
- 49 -
In addition, the Company held a fixed-income, non-exchange traded investment, previously categorized as available-for-sale, which was managed since its acquisition in 2017 by an external party. The investment was previously reported at its stated net asset value, which was $2.1 million at March 31, 2020. The investment, was substantially restructured and subsequently listed on June 17, 2020 as a publicly-traded common stock on the New York Stock Exchange. Due to what management believed were technical factors related to the listing itself, and the almost universal pricing pressure on publicly-traded assets of his type in the then-current uncertain economic environment, the closing stock price at June 30, 2020 was significantly below the historical amortized cost of the investment on that date. Therefore, the restructuring and listing events caused the Company to recognize an unrealized loss in the second quarter of 2020 of $1.2 million, which was measured by the difference between the newly-issued stock’s closing price at June 30, 2020 and its net asset value at March 31, 2020. The investment’s fair market value subsequently appreciated significantly in the second half of 2020 and during the period of time the Bank held the investment in 2021. In August 2021, the investment, including all interest and dividends received from its issuer since its initial purchase date had substantially reached a breakeven position on a cash flow basis and was sold in its entirety. In 2021, dividend income related to this investment and the net change in the fair market value of this investment, recognized through earnings, were $78,000 and $387,000, respectively. After June 30, 2020, through December 31, 2020, dividend income related to this investment and the net change in the fair market value of this investment, recognized through earnings, were $78,000 and $250,000, respectively. The decrease in net gains on sales and redemptions of investment securities was primarily due to investment securities sales in 2020 which were part of the Company’s portfolio optimization and liquidity management strategies and were sold in order to improve the expected future total returns within the investment portfolio, particularly in light of potentially increased prepayment activity, related to the sharp decline in general interest rates, and/or potential credit downgrade concerns following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth certain information on noninterest expense for the years indicated.
Noninterest expense increased $2.4 million, or 9.6%, to $27.5 million in 2021 from $25.1 million in 2020. The year-over-year increase in noninterest expense was principally driven by increases in most categories of noninterest expense. The Company experienced material declines in substantially all forms of noninterest expenses following the inception of the COVID-19 pandemic which began in March 2020. Accordingly, the Company progressively returned to less restricted operations and noninterest expenses have returned to the levels considered by its management to be prudent for the effective long-term management of the Company.
The increase in noninterest expense was primarily driven by an increase of $916,000 in personnel expenses, a $417,000 increase in professional and other services, a $257,000 increase in advertising, a $218,000 increase in audits and exams expense, a $159,000 increase in data processing expense, a $143,000 increase in FDIC assessments, a $108,000 increase in building and occupancy expense, and a $82,000 and $66,000 increase in insurance agency expense and other expenses, respectively. The increase in net salaries expense was partially the result of increased PPP loan originations in 2020 and the deferral of employee-related expenses in 2020 related to those originations. The increases in professional and other services fees, and audits and exams expense were primarily related to the Bank’s increased internal controls testing under FDICIA requirements for institutions with assets greater than $1 billion and additional expenses for the Company as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Building and occupancy costs increased as a result of an increase in maintenance costs and depreciation expense of $79,000 and $48,000, respectively. These increases are consistent with the Company’s recent refurbishments of certain branch and administrative locations and the relative timing of certain maintenance activities. Data processing costs increased due to increases in internet banking costs and processing costs. These increases are consistent with the Company’s customer and operational growth. The FDIC assessment increased as a result of an increase in the average balance of deposits, including an increase in the average balance of brokered time deposits. Insurance agency expense increased as a result of a general increases in personnel costs and other administrative costs related to the Agency.
- 50 -
Income Tax Expense
The Company reported income tax expense of $3.5 million in 2021 and $1.3 million in 2020, an increase of $2.2 million when compared to the previous year. This increase was the result of the increase in pretax net income of $7.7 million, combined with an increase in the effective tax rate in 2021, as described below.
The Company’s effective tax rate was 22.4% in 2021, as compared to 15.9% in 2020. The Company’s effective tax rate in 2021 was increased from the federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% primarily due to the effects of New York State taxation, net of federal tax benefit, partially offset by the effects of tax exempt income received in the form of interest on tax exempt loans and investment securities, and the increase in the value of its bank owned life insurance.
The Company’s effective tax rate was 15.9% in 2020. The Company’s effective tax rate was reduced from the federal statutory income tax rate of 21.0% by 3.8% in 2020 as a result of anticipated New York State tax refunds described below and 2.0% by the combined effects of tax exempt income received in the form of interest on tax exempt loans and investment securities, and the increase in the value of its bank owned life insurance.
During 2021, the Company disposed of an equity security investment that resulted in a capital loss. Under current IRS law, capital losses are allowed to be carried back for a period of three years and carried forward five years. The allowable portion that can be carried back will result in an approximate tax benefit of $56,000. The Company believes that forecasted future capital gains make it likely that such capital losses will not be utilized in future periods, therefore, a valuation allowance has been provided on these capital losses.
In the first quarter of 2021, the Company filed amended New York State tax returns for 2015 through 2017 (the “carryback years”). The returns were amended from their original filings in order to file carryback claims utilizing New York State net operating losses generated under New York State tax law in 2018. As a result, the Company received $316,000 in tax refunds from New York State for taxes previously paid in the carryback years. This refund has been applied to the effective tax rate of the Company in 2020 in accordance with GAAP. The recognition of this tax refund in 2020 reduced the Company’s effective tax rate by 3.8% in 2020.
As a Maryland business corporation, the Company is required to file an annual report with, and pay franchise taxes to, the State of Maryland.
See Note 17 to the consolidated financial statements for the reconciliation of the statutory tax rate to the effective tax rate.
Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 were both $2.07, as compared to basic and diluted earnings per share of $1.17 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in earnings per share between these two periods was due to the increase in net income available to common shareholders between these two time periods. Further information on earnings per share can be found in Note 3 of this Form 10-K.
CHANGES IN FINANCIAL CONDITION
Total assets were $1.29 billion at December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.23 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase in total assets of $57.7 million, or 4.7%, was the result of the increase in investment securities of $50.7 million, a $6.8 million increase in loans, principally commercial loans, and a $5.6 million increase in bank owned life insurance. All other assets, excluding cash and cash equivalents, increased by a net $1.0 million. Cash and cash equivalents decreased by $6.3 million. The increase in total assets in 2021 was funded largely by a $59.4 million increase in deposits to $1.1 billion at December 31, 2021 and a $71.6 million increase in customer deposits, offset by a $12.2 million decrease in brokered deposits.
- 51 -
Investment Securities
The investment portfolio represented 27.2% of the Company’s average interest earning assets in 2021 and is designed to generate a favorable rate of return in consideration of all risk factors associated with debt securities while assisting the Company in meeting its liquidity needs and interest rate risk strategies. All of the Company’s investments, with the exception of marketable equity securities, are classified as either available-for-sale or held-to-maturity. The Company does not hold any trading securities. The Company invests primarily in securities issued by United States Government agencies and sponsored enterprises (“GSE”), mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, state and municipal obligations, mutual funds, equity securities, investment grade corporate debt instruments, and common stock issued by the FHLBNY. By investing in these types of assets, the Company reduces the credit risk of its asset base through geographical and collateral-type diversification but must accept lower yields than would typically be available on loan products. Our mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations portfolios include privately-issued but substantially over-collateralized pass-through securities as well as pass-through securities guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or Ginnie Mae.
At December 31, 2021, available-for-sale investment securities increased 48.6% to $190.6 million and held-to-maturity investment securities decreased 6.0% to $160.9 million as compared to December 31, 2020. There were no securities that exceeded 10% of consolidated shareholders’ equity.
Our available-for-sale investment securities are carried at fair value and our held-to-maturity investment securities are carried at amortized cost.
The following table sets forth the carrying value of the Company's investment portfolio at December 31:
- 52 -
The following table sets forth the scheduled maturities, amortized cost, fair values and average yields for the Company's investment securities at December 31, 2021. Average yield is calculated on the amortized cost to maturity. Adjustable rate mortgage-backed securities are included in the period in which interest rates are next scheduled to be reset.
AVAILABLE FOR SALE
- 53 -
HELD-TO-MATURITY
The yield information disclosed above does not give effect to changes in fair value that are reflected in accumulated other comprehensive loss in consolidated shareholders’ equity.
Loans Receivable
Average loans receivable represented 69.9% of the Company’s average interest earning assets in 2021 and account for the greatest portion of total interest income. At December 31, 2021, the Company has the largest portion of its loan portfolio in commercial loan products that represented 53.3% of total loans. These products include credits extended to businesses and political subdivisions within its marketplace that are typically secured by commercial real estate, equipment, inventories, and accounts receivable. The residential mortgage loans product segment represents 29.7% of total loans at December 31, 2021. The consumer loan products represents 17.0% of total loans at December 31, 2021. The Company has seen the proportion of commercial loan products to total loans increase in recent years and it will continue to emphasize these types of loans. Notwithstanding this emphasis, the Company also anticipates a continued commitment to financing the purchase or improvement of residential real estate in its market area.
- 54 -
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio, including net deferred costs, in dollar amount and as a percentage of loans.
The following table shows the amount of loans outstanding, including net deferred costs, as of December 31, 2021 which, based on remaining scheduled repayments of principal, are due in the periods indicated. Demand loans having no stated schedule of repayments, no stated maturity, and overdrafts are reported as one year or less. Adjustable and floating rate loans are included in the period on which interest rates are next scheduled to adjust, rather than the period in which they contractually mature. Fixed rate loans are included in the period in which the final contractual repayment is due.
The following table sets forth fixed- and adjustable-rate loans at December 31, 2021 that are contractually due after December 31, 2022:
Total loans receivable, including net deferred costs, increased $7.0 million, or 0.8%, to $832.5 million at December 31, 2021 when compared to $825.5 million at December 31, 2020, due to increases in consumer loans and residential mortgage loans of $32.3 million and $11.9 million, respectively. These increases were offset by a decrease in commercial loans of $37.2 million. The increase in consumer loans was primarily due to the purchase of two secured consumer installment loan pools of $22.3 million and $24.9 million during 2021. The increase in residential mortgage loans was primarily the result of increased home sales in 2021. The Company does not originate sub-prime, Alt-A, negative amortizing or other higher risk structured residential mortgages. The Company maintained its previously established credit standards, but continued to benefit from the expanding relationship-derived business activity within the markets that the Bank serves. Commercial loans decreased primarily due to decreases of $41.3 million in PPP loans and $9.5 million in other commercial and industrial, offset by increases in commercial lines of credit of $12.8 million. The decrease in commercial loans was primarily due to the forgiveness of $41.3 million of PPP loans during the year.
- 55 -
Nonperforming Loans and Assets
The following table represents information concerning the aggregate amount of nonperforming assets:
Nonperforming assets include nonaccrual loans, nonaccrual troubled debt restructurings (“TDR”), and foreclosed real estate (“FRE”). Loans are considered a TDR when, due to a borrower’s financial difficulties, the Company makes a concession(s) to the borrower that it would not otherwise consider. These modifications may include an extension of the term of the loan, and granting a period when interest-only payments can be made, with the principal payments made over the remaining term of the loan or at maturity. TDRs are included in the above table within the categories of nonaccrual loans or accruing TDRs.
Pursuant to the CARES Act and subsequent legislation, financial institutions had the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles related to troubled debt restructurings for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. This provision allowed a financial institution the option to not apply the guidance on accounting for troubled debt restructurings to loan modifications, such as extensions or deferrals, related to COVID-19 made between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022 or (ii) 60 days after the end of the COVID-19 national emergency. The relief could only be applied to modifications for borrowers that were not more than 30 days past due as of December 31, 2019. The Bank elected to adopt these provisions of the CARES Act in 2020. Management monitored these entities closely and has incorporated our current estimate of the ultimate collectability of these loans into the reported allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021. The ratio of the allowance for loan losses to year end loans was 1.57% and 1.55% for December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Total nonperforming loans decreased $13.0 million, or 61%, between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, driven by decreases of $11.6 million and $1.7 million in nonperforming commercial and commercial real estate loans and residential real estate loans respectively, partially offset by an increase of $357,000 in consumer loans. The decrease in nonperforming commercial and commercial real estate loans in 2021 was primarily due to the return of two commercial loan relationships, comprised of two individual loans, with aggregate outstanding loan balances of $12.0 million, to accrual status during the year. These loans were initially placed in nonaccrual status in 2020. These relationships, which included loans secured by third-party pledges and/or business assets, as well as loans collateralized by commercial real estate were making all required payments, as agreed, at December 31, 2021.
Management is monitoring these entities closely and has incorporated our current estimate of the ultimate collectability of these loans into the reported allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021. Management believes that the value of the collateral properties underlying the loans is sufficient to preclude any significant losses related to these loans. Management continues to monitor and react to national and local economic trends as well as general portfolio conditions which may impact the quality of the portfolio, and considers these environmental factors in support of the allowance for loan loss reserve. Management believes that the current level of the allowance for loan losses, at $12.9 million at December 31, 2021, adequately addresses the current level of risk within the loan portfolio, particularly considering the types and levels of collateralization supporting the substantial majority of the portfolio. The Company maintains strict loan underwriting standards and carefully monitors the performance of the loan portfolio.
There were no Foreclosed Real Estate (“FRE”) balances at December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020.
- 56 -
The Company generally places a loan on nonaccrual status and ceases accruing interest when loan payment performance is deemed unsatisfactory and the loan is past due 90 days or more. There are no loans that are past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest. The Company considers a loan impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal and interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan. Had the loans in nonaccrual status performed in accordance with their original terms, additional interest income of $592,000 and $685,000 would have been recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
The measurement of impaired loans is based upon the fair value of the collateral or the present value of future cash flows discounted at the historical effective interest rate for impaired loans when the receipt of contractual principal and interest is probable. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $11.4 million and $22.8 million in loans, which were deemed to be impaired, having specific reserves of $1.9 million and $2.8 million, respectively. The $11.5 million year-over-year decrease in impaired loans was principally due to decreases of $5.6 million, $4.8 million, $772,000, $642,000 and $81,000 in impaired commercial real estate loans, other commercial and industrial loans, commercial lines of credit, residential loans and other consumer loans, respectively. Home equity and junior liens increased $415,000 when compared to 2020.
The threshold for individually measuring impairment on commercial real estate or commercial loans remains at $100,000 and for residential mortgage loans remains at $300,000 at December 31, 2021. The thresholds described above do not apply to loans that have been classified as troubled debt restructurings, which are individually measured for impairment at the time that the restructuring is affected.
Appraisals are obtained at the time a real estate secured loan is originated. For commercial real estate held as collateral, the property is inspected every two years.
Management has identified certain loans with potential credit profiles that may result in the borrowers not being able to comply with the current loan repayment terms and which may result in possible future impaired loan reporting. Potential problem loans decreased $2.3 million to $43.6 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $45.9 million at December 31, 2020. These loans have been internally classified as special mention, substandard, or doubtful, yet are not currently considered impaired. The decrease in potential problem loans was primarily due to a $3.2 million decrease in potential problem residential loans and a $1.6 million decrease in potential problem commercial and industrial loans. These decreases were partially offset by increase in potential problem commercial real estate loans of $2.5. The decrease in potential problem commercial and industrial loans and residential loans was a result of the loans that were previously potential problem loans, which were deemed to be impaired during 2020.
Total potential problem loans, including impaired loans, were $43.7 million at December 31, 2021, comprised of special mention, substandard and doubtful loans of $18.3 million, $23.8 million and $1.6 million, respectively. Total potential problem loans, including impaired loans, were $45.9 million at December 31, 2020, comprised of special mention, substandard and doubtful loans of $20.7 million, $23.7 million and $1.5 million, respectively. Special mention loans decreased $2.5 million, partially offset by increases in doubtful loans of $123,000 and substandard loans of $59,000 at December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. The decrease in loans classified as substandard was primarily due to a $15.5 million increase in commercial loans in 2020, due to the addition of two relationships outstanding comprised of eight loans with an outstanding balance of $8.9 million. These relationships, include secured loans (secured by third-party pledges, other governmental grants and/or business assets), unsecured loans, and loans collateralized by commercial real estate.
The Company measures delinquency based on the amount of past due loans as a percentage of total loans. The ratio of delinquent loans to total loans increased to 2.14% at December 31, 2021 as compared to 1.85% at December 31, 2020. This increase was due to an increase of $2.8 million in past due commercial loans and a $317,000 increase in past due consumer loans, partially offset by a $650,000 decrease in past due residential loans. At December 31, 2021, there were $17.9 million in loans past due including $5.2 million, $4.6 million and $8.0 million in loans 30-59 days, 60-89 days, and 90 days and over past due, respectively. At December 31, 2020, there were $15.3 million in loans past due including $3.8 million, $5.4 million and $6.1 million in loans 30-59 days, 60-89 days, and 90 days and over past due, respectively.
The increase of $2.5 million in total loans past due at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020, was primarily due to an increase of $1.9 million in loans 90 days and over past due and a $1.5 million increase in 30-59 days past due, partially offset by a $783,000 decrease in loans 60-89 days past due. The increase in loans 30-59 days past due was primarily due to an increase of $1.9 million in commercial loans. At December 31, 2021, there were 13 loans with an outstanding aggregate balance of $5.2 million that were 30-59 days past due, while at December 31, 2020, there were 13 loans with an outstanding aggregate balance of $1.8 million. The decrease in loans 60-89 days past due was primarily due to a decrease of $605,000 in commercial loans. The increase in loans 90 days and over past due was primarily due to an increase of $1.6 million in delinquent commercial loans.
- 57 -
The ratio of the allowance to loan losses to year end loans was 1.57% and 1.55% for December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Loans purchased outside of the Bank’s general market area are subject to substantial pre-purchase due diligence. Homogenous pools of purchased loans are subject to pre-purchase analyses led by a team of the Bank’s senior executives and credit analysts. In each case, the Bank’s analytical processes consider the types of loans being evaluated, the underwriting criteria employed by the originating entity, the historical performance of such loans, especially in the most recent deeply recessionary period, the offered collateral enhancements and other credit loss mitigation factors offered by the seller and the capabilities and financial stability of the servicing entities involved. From a credit risk perspective, these loan pools also benefit from broad diversification, including wide geographic dispersion, the readily-verifiable historical performance of similar loans issued by the originators, as well as the overall experience and skill of the underwriters and servicing entities involved as counterparties to the Bank in these transactions. The performance of all purchased loan pools are monitored regularly from detailed reports and remittance reconciliations provided at least monthly by the servicing entities.
The projected credit losses related to purchased loan pools are evaluated prior to purchase and the performance of those loans against expectations are analyzed at least monthly. Over the life of the purchased loan pools, the allowance for loan losses is adjusted, through the provision for loan losses, for expected loss experience, over the projected life of the loans. The expected credit loss experience is determined at the time of purchase and is modified, to the extent necessary, during the life of the purchased loan pools. The Bank does not initially increase the allowance for loan losses on the purchase date of the loan pools.
In the normal course of business, the Bank has, from time to time, sold residential mortgage loans and participation interests in commercial loans. As is typical in the industry, the Bank makes certain representations and warranties to the buyer. Pathfinder Bank maintains a quality control program for closed loans and considers the risks and uncertainties associated with potential repurchase requirements to be minimal.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses is established through provision for loan losses and reduced by loan charge-offs net of recoveries. The allowance for loan losses represents the amount available for probable credit losses in the Company’s loan portfolio as estimated by management. In its assessment of the qualitative factors used in arriving at the required allowance for loan losses, management considers changes in national and local economic trends, including the COVID-19 pandemic, the rate of the portfolios’ growth, trends in delinquencies and nonaccrual balances, changes in loan policy, and changes in management experience and staffing. These factors, coupled with the recent historical loss experience within the loan portfolio by product segment support the estimable and probable losses within the loan portfolio.
The Company establishes a specific allocation for all commercial loans identified as being impaired with a balance in excess of $100,000 that are also on nonaccrual or have been risk rated under the Company’s risk rating system as substandard, doubtful, or loss. The measurement of impaired loans is based upon either the present value of future cash flows discounted at the historical effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral, less costs to sell for collateral dependent loans. At December 31, 2021, the Bank’s position in impaired loans consisted of 56 loans totaling $11.4 million. Of these loans, 18 loans, totaling $2.3 million, were valued using the present value of future cash flows method; and 38 loans, totaling $9.0 million, were valued based on a collateral analysis. For all other loans, the Company uses the general allocation methodology that establishes an allowance to estimate the probable incurred loss for each risk-rating category. The Company uses the fair value of collateral, less costs to sell to measure impairment on commercial and commercial real estate loans. Residential real estate loans in excess of $300,000 will also be included in this individual loan review. Residential real estate loans less than this amount will be included in impaired loans if it is part of the total related credit to a previously identified impaired commercial loan. The Company also establishes a specific allowance, regardless of the size of the loan, for all loans subject to a troubled debt restructuring agreement.
The allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $12.9 million and $12.8 million respectively, or 1.57% of total year end loans. The Company recorded $1.0 million in net charge-offs in 2021 as compared to $599,000 in net charge-offs in 2020. The ratio of net charge-offs to average loans increased to 0.12% in 2021 from 0.08% in 2020.
For further discussion of our allowance for loan losses procedures, please see “Business-Allowance for Loan Losses” and Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
- 58 -
The following table sets forth the allocation of allowance for loan losses by loan category for the years indicated. The allocation of the allowance by category is not necessarily indicative of future losses and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in any category.
(1)
Includes loans held-for-sale at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. There were no loans classified as held for sale at December 31, 2018 and 2017.
The following table sets forth the allowance for loan losses for the years indicated:
The following table sets forth the loan net charge-off ratios for the years indicated:
- 59 -
Bank Owned Life Insurance
The Company held $23.4 million and $17.9 million in bank owned life insurance at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Bank owned life insurance increased $5.5 million, or 31.1%, to $23.4 million at December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the $5.0 million purchase in additional life insurance and an increase in the cash value of the policies recorded as income in 2021.
Deposits
The Company’s deposit base is drawn from ten full-service offices in its market area. The deposit base consists of demand deposits, money management and money market deposit accounts, savings, and time deposits. Average deposits increased $74.6 million, or 7.8%, in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, 64.5% of the Company's average deposit base of $1.0 billion consisted of core deposits. Core deposits, which exclude time deposits, are considered to be more stable and provide the Company with a lower cost of funds than time deposits. The Company will continue to emphasize retail and business core deposits by providing depositors with a full range of deposit product offerings and will maintain its recent focus on deposit gathering within the Syracuse market.
At December 31, 2021, business deposits, consumer deposits, and municipal deposits increased $33.9 million, $23.9 million and $13.8 million, respectively, when compared to December 31, 2020. The increase in business deposits was primarily from activities related to PPP loans. Noninterest-bearing deposits, which are primarily demand deposits, were $191.9 million at year end, compared with $162.1 million on December 31, 2020. A significant, but indeterminate amount of this increase in noninterest-bearing accounts is comprised of the unused balances in PPP loans that were deposited directly into customer accounts during the first quarter of 2021. The increase in consumer deposits during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected the Bank’s increased market penetration among non-business customers, particularly in Onondaga County, and the effects of federal and state stimulus payments to consumers during the pandemic, partially offset by decreased brokered deposit acceptances and the resultant decrease in the average balance of brokered deposits accepted by the Bank in 2021, as compared to 2020. The increase in municipal deposits in 2021, as compared to the previous year, resulted from transitory factors among a small number of the Bank’s largest municipal depositors.
Total deposits of $1.06 billion at December 31, 2021 consisted in part of $158.0 million in brokered money market and certificates of deposit accounts. Brokered deposits represented 15.0% of all deposits at December 31, 2021. Total deposits of $995.9 million at December 31, 2020 consisted in part of $170.0 million in brokered money market and certificates of deposit accounts. Brokered deposits represented 17.1% of all deposits at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth our deposit composition in dollar amount and as a percentage of total deposits.
At December 31, 2021, time deposit accounts in excess of $250,000 totaled $67.5 million, or 21.01% of time deposits and 6.4% of total deposits. At December 31, 2020, these deposits totaled $92 million, or 23.2% of time deposits and 9.2% of total deposits.
The following table indicates the amount of the Company’s time deposit accounts in excess of $250,000 by time remaining until maturity as of December 31, 2021:
- 60 -
Borrowings
Borrowings are comprised primarily of advances and overnight borrowings at the FHLBNY.
The following table represents information regarding short-term borrowings for the years ended December 31:
The following table represents information regarding long-term borrowings for the years ended December 31:
Subordinated Loans
The Company has a non-consolidated subsidiary trust, Pathfinder Statutory Trust II, of which the Company owns 100% of the common equity. The Trust issued $5,000,000 of 30-year floating rate Company-obligated pooled capital securities of Pathfinder Statutory Trust II (“Floating-Rate Debentures”). The Company borrowed the proceeds of the capital securities from its subsidiary by issuing floating rate junior subordinated deferrable interest debentures having substantially similar terms. The capital securities mature in 2037 and are treated as Tier 1 capital by the FDIC and Federal Reserve. The capital securities of the trust are a pooled trust preferred fund of Preferred Term Securities VI, Ltd., whose interest rate resets quarterly, and are indexed to the 3-month U.S. dollar-denominated (“USD”) LIBOR rate plus 1.65%. These securities have a five-year call provision. The Company paid $94,000 and $124,000 in interest expense related to this issuance in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company guarantees all of these securities.
In December 2020 the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the organization responsible for regulating LIBOR, stated that it would (i) cease publishing indices at December 31, 2020 for one-week and two-month USD LIBOR after December 31, 2021, and (ii) cease publishing of all other tenors of USD LIBOR (specifically, one, three, six and 12-month tenors) after June 30, 2023. The Alternative Reference Rates Committee (the “ARRC”), formed by the FRB and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, was charged with developing an alternative rate that will replace USD LIBOR. The ARRC subsequently identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) as the rate that represents best practice for use in USD LIBOR derivatives and other financial contracts. U.S. banking regulators also encouraged banks to cease entering into new contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference rate as soon as practicable and, in any event, by December 31, 2021. Management has analyzed the Company’s aggregate exposure to instruments that are indexed to USD LIBOR (including the Company’s acquired loan participations, fixed-income investments, hedging instruments and the Floating-Rate Debentures) and concluded that the adoption of SOFR will not materially impact the Company or the results of its operations.
The Company's equity interest in the trust subsidiary is included in other assets on the Consolidated Statements of Condition at December 31, 2021 and 2020. For regulatory reporting purposes, the Federal Reserve has indicated that the preferred securities will continue to qualify as Tier 1 Capital subject to previously specified limitations, until further notice. If regulators make a determination that Trust Preferred Securities can no longer be considered in regulatory capital, the securities become callable and the Company may redeem them at its discretion.
On October 15, 2015, the Company executed a $10.0 million non-amortizing Subordinated Loan (the 2015 Subordinated Loan) with an unrelated third party that was scheduled to mature on October 1, 2025. The Company had the right to prepay the 2015 Subordinated Loan on the first day of any calendar quarter after October 15, 2020 without penalty. The effective annual interest rate charged to the Company was be 6.25% through the maturity date of the 2015 Subordinated Loan. The Company paid $172,000 in origination and legal fees as part of this transaction. These fees were amortized over the life of the 2015 Subordinated Loan through its first call date using the effective interest method. The effective cost of funds related to this transaction was 6.44% calculated under this method through October 15, 2020 and was subsequently 6.25% until the stated maturity or redemption date. In the first quarter of 2021, the Company exercised its existing contractual option and issued a Notice of Redemption (“NOR”) to the holders of the 2015 Subordinated Loan, which was scheduled to mature on October 1, 2025. With the issuance of this NOR, the Company redeemed the
- 61 -
$10.0 million 2015 Subordinated Loan, plus accrued interest on April 1, 2021. Interest expense, related to this borrowing, of $156,000 and $650,000 was recorded in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
On October 14, 2020, the Company executed a private placement of $25.0 million of its 5.50% Fixed to Floating Rate non-amortizing Subordinated Loan (the “2020 Subordinated Loan”) to certain qualified institutional buyers and accredited institutional investors. The 2020 Subordinated Loan has a maturity date of October 15, 2030 and initially bear interest, payable semi-annually, at a fixed annual rate of 5.50% per annum until October 15, 2025. Commencing on that date, the interest rate applicable to the outstanding principal amount due will be reset quarterly to an interest rate per annum equal to the then current three month Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) plus 532 basis points, payable quarterly until maturity. The Company may redeem the 2020 Subordinated Loan at par, in whole or in part, at its option, any time after October 15, 2025 (the first redemption date). The 2020 Subordinated Loan is senior in the Company’s credit repayment hierarchy only to the Company’s common equity and, any future senior indebtedness and is intended to qualify as Tier 2 capital for regulatory capital purposes for the Company, when applicable. The Company paid $783,000 in origination and legal fees as part of this transaction. These fees will be amortized over the life of the 2020 Subordinated Loan through its first redemption date using the effective interest method, giving rise to an effective cost of funds of 6.22% from the issuance date calculated under this method. Accordingly, interest expense of $1.5 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021 related to this transaction.
Capital
The Company’s shareholders’ equity increased $12.8 million, or 13.2%, to $110.3 million at December 31, 2021 from $97.5 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $10.7 million increase in retained earnings, a $968,000 increase in comprehensive income, a $1.0 million increase in additional paid in capital and a $180,000 increase in ESOP shares earned. Comprehensive income increased primarily as the result of reduced losses on derivatives and hedging activities, partially offset by the unrealized losses on available for sale securities during 2021. The increase in retained earnings resulted from $12.4 million in net income recorded in 2021. Partially offsetting this increase in retained earnings were $1.3 million for cash dividends declared on our voting common stock, $290,000 for cash dividends declared on our non-voting common stock, $97,000 for cash dividends declared on our preferred stock, and $35,000 for cash dividends declared on our issued warrant.
Risk-based capital provides the basis for which all banks are evaluated in terms of capital adequacy. Capital adequacy is evaluated primarily by the use of ratios which measure capital against total assets, as well as against total assets that are weighted based on defined risk characteristics. The Company’s goal is to support growth and expansion activities, while maintaining a strong capital position and exceeding regulatory standards. At December 31, 2021, the Bank exceeded all regulatory required minimum capital ratios and met the regulatory definition of a “well-capitalized” institution. See “Supervision and Regulation - Federal Regulations - Capital Requirements”
As a result of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Company’s ability to raise new capital through the use of trust preferred securities may be limited because these securities will no longer be included in Tier 1 capital. In addition, our ability to generate or originate additional revenue producing assets may be constrained in the future in order to comply with capital standards required by federal regulation. See Note 20 to the consolidated financial statements contained herein and the regulation and supervision section within Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion on regulatory capital requirements.
The Bank is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of its assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require the Bank to maintain amounts and ratios of total and Tier 1 capital (as defined in the regulations) to risk-weighted assets (as defined), and of Tier 1 capital (as defined) to average assets (as defined).
As of December 31, 2021, the Bank’s most recent notification from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation categorized the Bank as “well-capitalized”, under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. To be categorized as “well-capitalized”, the Bank must maintain specified total risk-based, Tier 1 risk-based and Tier 1 leverage ratios. There are no conditions or events since that notification that management believes have changed the Bank’s category.
The regulations also impose a “capital conservation buffer” consisting of 2.5% of common equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets above the amount necessary to meet its minimum risk-based capital requirements. The buffer is separate from the capital ratios required under the Prompt Corrective Action (“PCA”) standards and imposes restrictions on dividend distributions and discretionary bonuses. In order to avoid these restrictions, the capital conservation buffer effectively increases the minimum the following capital to risk-weighted assets ratios: (1) Core Capital, (2) Total Capital and (3) Common Equity. At December 31, 2021, the Bank exceeded all current regulatory required minimum capital ratios, including the capital buffer requirements.
- 62 -
LIQUIDITY
Liquidity management involves the Company’s ability to generate cash or otherwise obtain funds at reasonable rates to support asset growth, meet deposit withdrawals, maintain reserve requirements, and otherwise operate the Company on an ongoing basis. The Company's primary sources of funds are deposits, borrowed funds, amortization and prepayment of loans and maturities of investment securities and other short-term investments, and earnings and funds provided from operations. While scheduled principal repayments on loans are a relatively predictable source of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition. The Company manages the pricing of deposits to maintain a desired deposit balance. In addition, the Company invests excess funds in short-term interest-earning and other assets, which provide liquidity to meet lending requirements.
The Company's liquidity has been enhanced by its ability to borrow from the FHLBNY, whose competitive advance programs and lines of credit provide the Company with a safe, reliable, and convenient source of funds. A significant decrease in deposits in the future could result in the Company having to seek other sources of funds for liquidity purposes. Such sources could include, but are not limited to, additional borrowings, brokered deposits, negotiated time deposits, the sale of "available-for-sale" investment securities, or the sale of loans. Such actions could result in higher interest expense costs and/or losses on the sale of securities or loans.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents decreased by $6.3 million. The Company reported net cash flows from financing activities of $43.5 million generated principally by increased customer deposit balances of $71.6 million and an $8.5 million increase in short term borrowings, offset by a decrease in net proceeds from long-term borrowings of $13.4 million, a $10.0 million subordinated loan redemption and an aggregate decrease in net cash of all other financing sources, including dividends paid to common and preferred shareholders, and the holder of the Warrant of $1.6 million. Additionally, $20.1 million was provided through operating activities generated principally by net income. These cash flows were primarily invested in: $200.4 million in purchases of investment securities in 2021, and $9.6 million net increases in loans outstanding.
Certificates of deposit due within one year of December 31, 2021 totaled $185.9 million, representing 57.9% of certificates of deposit at December 31, 2021, a decrease from 84.3% at December 31, 2020. We believe the large percentage of certificates of deposit that mature within one year reflect customers’ hesitancy to invest their funds for long periods in the current low interest rate environment. If these maturing deposits do not remain with us, we will be required to seek other sources of funds, including other certificates of deposit and borrowings. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay on the certificates of deposit due on or before December 31, 2021.
The Company is a separate legal entity from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity. In addition to its operating expenses, the Company is responsible for paying any dividends declared to its shareholders and making payments on its subordinated loans. The Company may repurchase shares of its common stock. The Company’s primary sources of funds are the proceeds it retained from the Private Placement, the issuance of the 2020 Subordinated Loan, interest and dividends on securities and, potentially, dividends received from the Bank. The amount of dividends that the Bank may declare and pay to the Company in any calendar year, without prior regulatory approval, cannot exceed net income for that year to date plus retained net income (as defined) for the preceding two calendar years. The Company believes that this restriction will not have an impact on the Company's ability to meet its ongoing cash obligations. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $37.1 million and $43.5 million, respectively.
The Bank has a number of existing credit facilities available to it. At December 31, 2021, total credit available under the existing lines of credit was approximately $147.6 million at FHLBNY, the FRB, and two other correspondent banks. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $77.1 million of the available lines of credit utilized, including encumbrances supporting the outstanding letters of credit, described above, on its existing lines of credit with the remainder of $70.5 million available.
The Asset Liability Management Committee of the Company is responsible for implementing the policies and guidelines for the maintenance of prudent levels of liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, management reported to the board of directors that the Bank was in compliance with its liquidity policy guidelines.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Bank is also a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. At December
- 63 -
31, 2021, the Bank had $245.2 million in outstanding commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit. See Note 18 within the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained herein.