ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
This is a combined report of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and includes separate Consolidated Financial Statements for each of these two entities. This combined MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8.
Summary of Changes in Net Income and Earnings per Share
PG&E Corporation’s net loss attributable to common shareholders was $102 million in 2021, compared to $1.3 billion in 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation recorded a $1.3 billion charge, net of tax as a result of the grantor trust election, with no similar amount in 2020. This amount is partially offset by increases in base revenues authorized in the 2020 GRC and previously deferred costs associated with various regulatory proceedings in the year ended December 31, 2021. In the year ended December 31, 2020, PG&E Corporation recognized $1.1 billion of expense related to the Backstop Commitment Premium Shares and $452 million of expense related to the Additional Backstop Premium Shares, with no similar amounts in 2021.
Key Factors Affecting Financial Results
PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that their financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows may be materially affected by the following factors:
•The Uncertainties in Connection with Any Future Wildfires, Wildfire Insurance, and AB 1054. While PG&E Corporation and the Utility cannot predict the occurrence, timing or extent of damages in connection with future wildfires, factors such as environmental conditions (including weather and vegetation conditions) and the efficacy of wildfire risk mitigation initiatives are expected to influence the frequency and severity of future wildfires. To the extent that future wildfires occur in the Utility’s service territory, the Utility may incur costs associated with the investigations of the causes and origins of such fires, even if it is subsequently determined that such fires were not caused by the Utility’s facilities. The financial impact of future wildfires could be mitigated through insurance, the Wildfire Fund or other forms of cost recovery. However, the Utility may not be able to obtain sufficient wildfire insurance coverage at a reasonable cost, or at all, and any such coverage may include limitations that could result in substantial uninsured losses depending on the amount and type of damages resulting from covered events, including coverage limitations applicable to different insurance layers. The Utility will not be able to obtain any recovery from the Wildfire Fund for wildfire-related losses in any Wildfire Fund coverage year (“Coverage Year”) that do not exceed the greater of $1.0 billion in the aggregate and the amount of insurance coverage required under AB 1054. In addition, the policy reforms contemplated by AB 1054 are likely to affect the financial impact of future wildfires on PG&E Corporation and the Utility should any such wildfires occur. The Wildfire Fund is available to the Utility to pay eligible claims for liabilities arising from wildfires and serves as an alternative to traditional insurance products, provided that the Utility satisfies the conditions to the Utility’s ongoing participation in the Wildfire Fund set forth in AB 1054 and that the Wildfire Fund has sufficient remaining funds. See “Loss Recoveries” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
However, the impact of AB 1054 on PG&E Corporation and the Utility is subject to numerous uncertainties, including the Utility’s ability to demonstrate to the CPUC that wildfire-related costs paid from the Wildfire Fund were just and reasonable and therefore not subject to reimbursement, and whether the benefits of participating in the Wildfire Fund ultimately outweigh its substantial costs. Finally, even if the Utility satisfies the ongoing eligibility and other requirements set forth in AB 1054, for eligible claims against the Utility arising from wildfires that occurred between July 12, 2019 and the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11 on July 1, 2020, the availability of the Wildfire Fund to pay such claims would be capped at 40% of the allowed amount of such claims. See “Wildfire Fund under AB 1054” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
•The Costs, Effectiveness, and Execution of the Utility’s Wildfire Mitigation Initiatives. In response to the wildfire threat facing California, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have taken aggressive steps to mitigate the threat of catastrophic wildfires, the spread of wildfires should they occur and the impact of PSPS events.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility incurred substantial expenditures in 2020 and 2021 in connection with the 2020-2022 WMP. For more information, see Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The Utility expects that its wildfire mitigation initiatives will continue to involve substantial and ongoing expenditures. The extent to which the Utility will be able to recover these expenditures and potential other costs through rates is uncertain.
The Utility has implemented operational changes and investments that reduce wildfire risk, including the EPSS, PSPS, vegetation management, asset inspection, and system hardening programs. These programs, particularly the PSPS and EPSS programs, have been the subject of significant scrutiny and criticism by various stakeholders, including the California governor, the CPUC and the court that oversaw the Utility’s probation. The PSPS and EPSS programs have had an adverse impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s reputation with customers, regulators and policymakers, and future PSPS events may increase these negative perceptions. See “OII to Examine the Late 2019 Public Safety Power Shutoff Events” in “Regulatory Matters” below.
The Utility is subject to a number of legal and regulatory requirements related to its wildfire mitigation efforts, which require periodic inspections of electric assets and ongoing reporting related to this work. Although the Utility believes that it has complied substantially with these requirements, it is undertaking a review and has identified instances of noncompliance. The Utility intends to update the CPUC and OEIS as its review progresses. The Utility could face fines, penalties, enforcement action, or other adverse legal or regulatory consequences for the late inspections or other noncompliance related to wildfire mitigation efforts. See “Self-Reports to the CPUC” in “Regulatory Matters” below.
While PG&E Corporation and the Utility are committed to taking aggressive wildfire mitigation actions, if additional requirements are imposed that go beyond current expectations, such requirements could have a substantial impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. The success of the Utility’s wildfire mitigation efforts depends on many factors, including on whether the Utility is able to retain or contract for the workforce necessary to execute its wildfire mitigation actions. See “Order Instituting Investigation into the 2017 Northern California Wildfires and the 2018 Camp Fire” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
•The Timing and Outcome of Ratemaking Proceedings. The Utility’s financial results may be impacted by the timing and outcome of its FERC TO18 rate case and the resulting impact on the TO19 and TO20 rate cases, 2023 GRC, WMCE applications, and its ability to timely recover costs not currently in rates, including costs already incurred and future costs tracked in its CEMA, WEMA, WMPMA, FRMMA, CPPMA, VMBA, WMBA, and RTBA. The outcome of regulatory proceedings can be affected by many factors, including intervening parties’ testimonies, potential rate impacts, the regulatory and political environments, and other factors. See Notes 4 and 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 and “Regulatory Matters” below.
•The Impact of Wildfires. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s liabilities for the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, or the 2021 Dixie fire, are significant and may be excluded from any potential amounts recoverable under applicable insurance policies, the WEMA, FERC TO rates, or the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054. Recorded liabilities in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire and the 2021 Dixie fire have already exceeded potential amounts recoverable under applicable insurance policies. Liabilities in excess of recoverable amounts for these wildfires could have a material impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had recorded an aggregate liability of $800 million, $375 million, and $1.15 billion for claims in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, and the 2021 Dixie fire, respectively, and in each case before available insurance and other probable cost recoveries in the case of the 2021 Dixie fire. These liability amounts correspond to the lower end of the range of reasonably estimable probable losses, but do not include all categories of potential damages and losses. Claims related to the 2019 Kincade fire that were not satisfied in full as of the Emergence Date were not discharged in connection with emerging from Chapter 11.
On April 6, 2021, the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office charged the Utility with five felonies and 28 misdemeanors in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, and on January 28, 2022, the Sonoma County District Attorney’s Office filed the Kincade Amended Complaint, which replaced two felonies with five different felonies and dropped six misdemeanor counts. On September 24, 2021, the Shasta County District Attorney’s Office charged the Utility with 11 felonies and 20 misdemeanors in connection with the 2020 Zogg fire and three other fires. If the Utility were to be convicted of certain charges in the Kincade Amended Complaint or the Zogg Complaint, the Utility could be subject to material fines, penalties, and restitution, as well as non-monetary remedies such as oversight requirements, and accordingly the Utility currently believes that, depending on which charges it were to be convicted of, its total losses associated with the 2019 Kincade fire or the 2020 Zogg fire would materially exceed the $800 million or $375 million, respectively, of aggregate liability that PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded.
If the eligible claims for liabilities arising from wildfires were to exceed $1.0 billion in any Coverage Year, the Utility may be eligible to make a claim to the Wildfire Fund under AB 1054 for such excess amount, except that recoveries for the 2019 Kincade fire would be subject to the 40% limitation on the allowed amount of claims arising before emergence from bankruptcy, and recoveries for each of these fires would also be subject to the other limitations and requirements under AB 1054. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility had recorded insurance receivables of $430 million for the 2019 Kincade fire, $337 million for the 2020 Zogg fire, and $563 million for the 2021 Dixie fire. The Utility had recorded regulatory recovery and Wildfire Fund receivables of $448 million and $150 million, respectively, for the 2021 Dixie fire. However, there can be no assurance that such amounts will ultimately be recovered, and the Utility does not expect that any of its liability insurance would cover restitution payments ordered by the courts presiding over the criminal proceedings. See “2019 Kincade Fire,” “2020 Zogg Fire,” and “2021 Dixie Fire” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for more information.
•The Outcome of Other Enforcement, Litigation, and Regulatory Matters, and Other Government Proposals. The Utility’s financial results may continue to be impacted by the outcome of other current and future enforcement, litigation, and regulatory matters, including those described above as well as the outcome of the Safety Culture OII, and potential penalties in connection with the Utility’s WMP and safety and other self-reports. See Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. In addition, the Utility’s business profile and financial results could be impacted by the outcome of recent calls for municipalization of part or all of the Utility’s businesses, offers by municipalities and other public entities to acquire the electric assets of the Utility within their respective jurisdictions and calls for state intervention, including the possibility of a state takeover of the Utility. PG&E Corporation and the Utility cannot predict the nature, occurrence, timing or extent of any such scenario, and there can be no assurance that any such scenario would not involve significant ownership or management changes to PG&E Corporation or the Utility, including by the state of California. Further, certain parties filed notices of appeal with respect to the Confirmation Order, including provisions related to the injunction contained in the Plan that channels certain pre-petition fire-related claims to trusts to be satisfied from the trusts’ assets. There can be no assurance that any such appeal will not be successful and, if successful, that any such appeal would not have a material adverse effect on PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
•The Uncertainties in Connection with the Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process. On April 15, 2021, the CPUC placed the Utility in step 1 of the EOEP. As a result, the Utility is subject to additional reporting requirements, monitoring, and oversight by the CPUC. See “Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process” in “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” below.
•The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. The principal areas of near-term impact include liquidity, financial results and business operations, stemming primarily from the ongoing economic hardship of the Utility’s customers, the moratorium on service disconnections, and an observed reduction in non-residential electrical load. The Utility continues to monitor the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; however, the Utility expects a significant impact on monthly cash collections as long as current circumstances persist. PG&E Corporation and the Utility expect additional financial impacts in the future as a result of COVID-19 pandemic. Other impacts of COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E Corporation and the Utility have included operational disruptions, workforce disruptions, both in personnel availability (including a reduction in contract labor resources) and deployment, delays in production and shipping of materials used in the Utility’s operations, higher credit spreads and borrowing costs and could potentially also include a reduction in revenue due to the cost of capital adjustment mechanism and incremental financing needs. For more information on the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E Corporation and the Utility, see “PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.” in Item 1A Risk Factors and “COVID-19” in Liquidity and Financial Resources below.
For more information about the risks that could materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows, or that could cause future results to differ from historical results, see Item 1A. Risk Factors. In addition, this annual report contains forward-looking statements that are necessarily subject to various risks and uncertainties. These statements reflect management’s judgment and opinions that are based on current estimates, expectations, and projections about future events and assumptions regarding these events and management’s knowledge of facts as of the date of this report. See “Forward-Looking Statements” above for a list of some of the factors that may cause actual results to differ materially. PG&E Corporation and the Utility are unable to predict all the factors that may affect future results and do not undertake an obligation to update forward-looking statements, whether in response to new information, future events, or otherwise.
Tax Matters
PG&E Corporation had a U.S. federal net operating loss carryforward of approximately $21.1 billion and California net operating loss carryforward of $18.9 billion at the end of 2021.
Under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code, if a corporation (or a consolidated group) undergoes an “ownership change,” net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes may be subject to certain limitations. In general, an ownership change occurs if the aggregate stock ownership of certain shareholders (generally five percent shareholders, applying certain look-through and aggregation rules) increases by more than 50% over such shareholders’ lowest percentage ownership during the testing period (generally three years). PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Amended Articles limit Transfers (as defined in the Amended Articles) that increase a person’s or entity’s (including certain groups of persons) ownership of PG&E Corporation’s equity securities to 4.75% or more prior to the Restriction Release Date (as defined in the Amended Articles) without approval by the Board of Directors of PG&E Corporation (the “Ownership Restrictions”). As discussed below under “Update on Ownership Restrictions in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles,” due to the election to treat the Fire Victim Trust as a grantor trust for income tax purposes, the calculation of Percentage Stock Ownership (as defined in the Amended Articles) will effectively be based on a reduced number of shares outstanding, namely the total number of outstanding equity securities less the number of equity securities held by the Fire Victim Trust, the Utility and ShareCo. As of the date of this report, it is more likely than not that PG&E Corporation has not undergone an ownership change, and consequently, its net operating loss carryforwards and other tax attributes are not limited by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code.
On July 8, 2021, PG&E Corporation, the Utility, ShareCo and the Fire Victim Trust entered into the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement, pursuant to which PG&E Corporation and the Utility made a grantor trust election for the Fire Victim Trust effective retroactively to the inception of the Fire Victim Trust.
As a result of the benefits of a grantor trust election, the Utility’s tax deductions occur when the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims, rather than when the Utility transferred cash and other property (including PG&E Corporation common stock) to the Fire Victim Trust. Therefore, $5.4 billion of cash and $4.54 billion of PG&E Corporation common stock, in the aggregate $10.0 billion, that were transferred to the Fire Victim Trust in 2020, will not be deductible for tax purposes by the Utility until the Fire Victim Trust pays the fire victims.
Furthermore, the activities of the Fire Victim Trust are treated as activities of the Utility for tax purposes. PG&E Corporation’s net operating loss has decreased by approximately $10.0 billion which will be offset by payments made by the Fire Victim Trust to the fire victims (which totaled approximately $1.67 billion in 2021) and the net activities of the Fire Victim Trust. Additionally, there was a $1.3 billion charge, net of tax, decreasing net DTAs for the payment made to the Fire Victim Trust in PG&E Corporation common stock on its Consolidated Financial Statements for activity through December 31, 2020. PG&E Corporation will recognize income tax benefits and the corresponding DTA as the Fire Victim Trust sells shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, and the amounts of such benefits and assets will be impacted by the price at which the Fire Victim Trust sells the shares, rather than the price at the time such shares were transferred to the Fire Victim Trust. As of December 31, 2021, to the knowledge of PG&E Corporation, the Fire Victim Trust had not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, resulting in no tax impact on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. On January 31, 2022, the Fire Victim Trust initiated an exchange of 40,000,000 Plan Shares for an equal number of New Shares in the manner contemplated by the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement and announced that it had entered into a transaction for the sale of these shares.
Update on Ownership Restrictions in PG&E Corporation’s Amended Articles
As a result of the grantor trust election, shares of PG&E Corporation common stock owned by the Fire Victim Trust are treated as held by the Utility and, in turn, attributed to PG&E Corporation for income tax purposes. Consequently, any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock owned by the Fire Victim Trust, along with any shares owned by the Utility directly, are effectively excluded from the total number of outstanding equity securities when calculating a person’s Percentage Stock Ownership (as defined in the Amended Articles) for purposes of the 4.75% ownership limitation in the Amended Articles. Shares owned by ShareCo are also effectively excluded because ShareCo is a disregarded entity for income tax purposes. For example, although PG&E Corporation had 2,463,891,104 shares outstanding as of February 4, 2022, only 1,548,403,924 shares (the number of outstanding shares of common stock less the number of shares held by the Fire Victim Trust, the Utility and ShareCo) count as outstanding for purposes of the ownership restrictions in the Amended Articles. As such, based on the total number of outstanding equity securities and assuming the Fire Victim Trust has not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock, a person’s effective Percentage Stock Ownership limitation for purposes of the Amended Articles as of February 4, 2022 was 2.98% of outstanding shares. As of December 31, 2021, to the knowledge of PG&E Corporation, the Fire Victim Trust had not sold any shares of PG&E Corporation common stock. On January 31, 2022, the Fire Victim Trust initiated an exchange of 40,000,000 Plan Shares for an equal number of New Shares in the manner contemplated by the Share Exchange and Tax Matters Agreement and announced that it had entered into a transaction for the sale of these shares.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion presents PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s operating results for 2021, 2020, and 2019. See “Key Factors Affecting Financial Results” above for further discussion about factors that could affect future results of operations.
PG&E Corporation
The consolidated results of operations consist primarily of results related to the Utility, which are discussed in the “Utility” section below. The following table provides a summary of net income (loss) available for common shareholders:
PG&E Corporation’s net loss decreased in 2021, as compared to 2020 and primarily consists of income taxes, interest expense on long-term debt, and reorganization items, net. PG&E Corporation’s net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 included $1.5 billion in expense related to the Backstop Commitment Premium Shares and Additional Backstop Premium Shares, which is not deductible for tax purposes.
Utility
The table below shows certain items from the Utility’s Consolidated Statements of Income for 2021, 2020, and 2019. The table separately identifies the revenues and costs that impacted earnings from those that did not impact earnings. In general, expenses the Utility is authorized to pass through directly to customers (such as costs to purchase electricity and natural gas, as well as costs to fund public purpose programs) and the corresponding amount of revenues collected to recover those pass-through costs, do not impact earnings.
Revenues that impact earnings are primarily those that have been authorized by the CPUC and the FERC to recover the Utility’s costs to own and operate its assets and to provide the Utility an opportunity to earn its authorized rate of return on rate base. Expenses that impact earnings are primarily those that the Utility incurs to own and operate its assets.
(1) These items impacted earnings.
Utility Revenues and Costs that Impacted Earnings
The following discussion presents the Utility’s operating results for 2021, 2020, and 2019, focusing on revenues and expenses that impacted earnings for these periods.
Operating Revenues
The Utility’s electric and natural gas operating revenues that impacted earnings increased by $856 million, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increased base revenues authorized in the 2020 GRC and FERC formula rates.
The Utility’s electric and natural gas operating revenues that impacted earnings increased by $546 million, or 5%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to increased base revenues authorized in the 2020 GRC and 2019 GT&S rate cases, additional revenues recorded pursuant to the TO20 rate case, and CEMA interim rate relief.
Operating and Maintenance
The Utility’s operating and maintenance expenses that impacted earnings increased by $421 million, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increases in labor and insurance costs as well as a $135 million charge related to wildfire response and mitigation regulatory matters, including the 2020 WMCE settlement. These increases were partially offset by $298 million in previously deferred CEMA costs recorded in conjunction with interim rate relief in 2020, with no comparable costs in 2021.
The Utility’s operating and maintenance expenses that impacted earnings decreased by $768 million, or 11%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a reduction in accelerated transmission inspection and repair costs of approximately $460 million. Additionally, in 2019 the Utility recorded $398 million related to the Wildfires OII settlement and $237 million in disallowed costs for previously incurred capital expenditures in excess of adopted amounts in the 2019 GT&S rate case in 2019, with no similar charges in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase of $223 million in previously deferred CEMA costs recorded in conjunction with interim rate relief (see “2018 CEMA Application” below) (the Utility amortized $298 million in deferred CEMA costs in 2020, compared to $75 million amortized in 2019). The Utility also experienced increased insurance premium costs in the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019.
Wildfire-Related Claims, Net of Recoveries
Costs related to wildfires that impacted earnings increased by $7 million, or 3%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $1.15 billion related to the 2021 Dixie fire, offset by $563 million of probable insurance recoveries, $347 million of probable recoveries through the WEMA, and $150 million of probable recoveries from the Wildfire Fund in 2021, with no comparable charges and recoveries in 2020. The Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $175 million related to the 2019 Kincade fire in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $625 million, partially offset by $430 million of probable insurance recoveries in the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, the Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $100 million related to the 2020 Zogg fire, fully offset by $100 million of probable insurance recoveries, in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to pre-tax charges of $275 million, partially offset by $219 million of probable insurance recoveries in the year ended December 31, 2020.
In addition to the probable wildfire-related recoveries noted above, in 2021, the Utility recorded $101 million of probable recoveries through FERC TO formula rates, which are recorded as a reduction to regulatory liabilities and are not captured in wildfire-related claims, which along with the items noted above, fully offset the $1.15 billion charge related to the 2021 Dixie fire.
Costs related to wildfires that impacted earnings decreased by $11.2 billion, or 98%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The Utility recognized pre-tax charges of $625 million related to the 2019 Kincade fire, partially offset by $430 million of probable insurance recoveries, and pre-tax charges of $275 million related to the 2020 Zogg fire, partially offset by $219 million of probable insurance recoveries in 2020. The Utility recognized charges of $11.4 billion in 2019, for wildfire-related claims primarily associated with the 2018 Camp fire and 2017 Northern California wildfires.
See Item 1A. Risk Factors and Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Wildfire Fund Expense
Wildfire fund expense that impacted earnings increased by $104 million, or 25%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Due to the Chapter 11 Cases, the Utility’s participation in the Wildfire Fund was limited to 40% for the period from July 12, 2019 to June 30, 2020. Additionally, the Utility recorded $43 million of accelerated amortization as a result of the Wildfire Fund receivable accrued in relation to the 2021 Dixie fire.
Wildfire fund expense that impacted earnings increased by $413 million, or 100%, in 2020 compared to 2019. In 2020, the Utility became eligible to participate in the Wildfire Fund and as a result recorded amortization and accretion expense related to the Wildfire Fund coverage received from the effective date of AB 1054 through December 31, 2020.
See Notes 3 and 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Depreciation, Amortization, and Decommissioning
The Utility’s depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning expenses decreased by $66 million, or 2%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a reduction in decommissioning expense that was recorded as a result of the final 2018 Nuclear Decommissioning Cost Triennial Proceeding decision.
The Utility’s depreciation, amortization, and decommissioning expenses increased by $236 million, or 7%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to capital additions and an increase in depreciation rates associated with the TO20 decision.
Interest Income
The Utility’s interest income that impacted earnings decreased by $17 million, or 44%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Interest income decreased by $43 million, or 52%, in 2020 compared to 2019. The Utility’s interest income is primarily affected by changes in regulatory balancing accounts and changes in interest rates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense that impacted earnings increased by $262 million, or 24%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the issuance of additional long-term debt.
The Utility’s interest expense that impacted earnings increased by $199 million, or 22%, in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to the issuance of new debt in 2020 in connection with the emergence from Chapter 11.
Other Income, Net
Changes to Other income, net that impact earnings are primarily driven by fluctuations in the balance of construction work in progress that impact equity AFUDC.
Reorganization Items, Net
Reorganization items, net that impacted earnings decreased by $298 million, or 96%, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the Utility’s emergence from the Chapter 11 Cases on July 1, 2020.
There was no material change to reorganization items, net that impacted earnings in 2020 compared to 2019.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
Income tax expense increased by $492 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a DTA write-off associated with the grantor trust election for the Fire Victim Trust in 2021, as compared to a smaller DTA write-off associated with the decline in value of PG&E Corporation common stock contributed into a Fire Victim Trust in the same period in 2020.
The Utility’s income tax benefit increased by $3.8 billion in 2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to a pre-tax loss in 2019 compared to pre-tax income in 2020. Additionally, there was a $619 million adjustment from the measurement of the DTA associated with the difference between the liability recorded related to the TCC RSA and the ultimate value of PG&E Corporation stock contributed to the Fire Victim Trust in 2020.
The following table reconciles the income tax expense at the federal statutory rate to the income tax provision:
(1) Includes the effect of state flow-through ratemaking treatment and the effect of the grantor trust election.
(2) Includes the effect of federal flow-through ratemaking treatment for certain property-related costs. For these temporary tax differences, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize the deferred tax impact in the current period and record offsetting regulatory assets and liabilities. Therefore, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s effective tax rates are impacted as these differences arise and reverse. PG&E Corporation and the Utility recognize such differences as regulatory assets or liabilities as it is probable that these amounts will be recovered from or returned to customers in future rates. In 2021 and 2020, the amounts also reflect the impact of the amortization of excess deferred tax benefits to be refunded to customers as a result of the Tax Act passed in December 2017.
(3) Includes the effect of the grantor trust election as discussed in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
(4) These amounts primarily represent the impact of tax audit settlements and non-tax deductible penalty costs in 2021 and 2020.
Utility Revenues and Costs that did not Impact Earnings
Fluctuations in revenues that did not impact earnings are primarily driven by procurement costs. See below for more information.
Cost of Electricity
The Utility’s cost of electricity includes the cost of power purchased from third parties (including renewable energy resources), fuel and associated transmission costs used in its own generation facilities, fuel and associated transmission costs supplied to other facilities under power purchase agreements, costs to comply with California’s cap-and-trade program, and realized gains and losses on price risk management activities. Cost of electricity also includes net sales (Utility owned generation and third parties) in the CAISO electricity markets. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The Utility’s total purchased power is driven by customer demand, net CAISO electricity market activities (purchases or sales), the availability of the Utility’s own generation facilities (including Diablo Canyon and its hydroelectric plants), and the cost-effectiveness of each source of electricity.
Cost of Natural Gas
The Utility’s cost of natural gas includes the costs of procurement, storage and transportation of natural gas, costs to comply with California’s cap-and-trade program, and realized gains and losses on price risk management activities. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. The Utility’s cost of natural gas is impacted by the market price of natural gas, changes in the cost of storage and transportation, and changes in customer demand.
Operating and Maintenance Expenses
The Utility’s operating expenses that did not impact earnings include certain costs that the Utility is authorized to recover as incurred. If the Utility were to spend more than authorized amounts, these expenses could have an impact to earnings.
Other Income, Net
The Utility’s other income, net that did not impact earnings includes pension and other post-retirement benefit costs that fluctuate primarily from market and interest rate changes.
LIQUIDITY AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES
Overview
The Utility’s ability to fund operations, finance capital expenditures, make scheduled principal and interest payments, and make distributions to PG&E Corporation depends on the levels of its operating cash flows and access to the capital and credit markets. The CPUC authorizes the Utility’s capital structure, the aggregate amount of long-term and short-term debt that the Utility may issue, and the revenue requirements the Utility is able to collect to recover its cost of capital. The Utility generally utilizes retained earnings, equity contributions from PG&E Corporation and long-term debt issuances to maintain its CPUC-authorized long-term capital structure consisting of 52% equity and 48% debt and preferred stock and relies on short-term debt, including its revolving credit facilities, to fund temporary financing needs. On May 28, 2020, the CPUC approved a final decision in the Chapter 11 Proceedings OII, which, among other things, grants the Utility a temporary, five-year waiver from compliance with its authorized capital structure for the financing in place upon the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11.
PG&E Corporation’s ability to fund operations, make scheduled principal and interest payments, and fund equity contributions to the Utility depends on the level of cash on hand, cash received from the Utility, and PG&E Corporation’s access to the capital and credit markets.
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s credit ratings may be affected by the ultimate outcome of pending enforcement and litigation matters. Credit rating downgrades may impact the cost and availability of short-term borrowings, including credit facilities, and long-term debt costs. In addition, some of the Utility’s commodity contracts contain collateral posting provisions tied to the Utility’s credit rating from each of the major credit rating agencies. The collateral posting provisions for some of the Utility’s power and natural gas commodity, and transportation and service agreements state that if the Utility’s credit ratings were to fall below investment grade, the Utility would be required to post additional cash immediately to fully collateralize some or all of its net liability positions. The Utility’s credit ratings fell below investment grade in January 2019, at which time the Utility was required to post additional collateral under its commodity purchase agreements. A further downgrade would not materially impact the collateral postings for procurement activity. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have various contractual commitments which impact cash requirements. These commitments are discussed in “Recognition of Lease Assets and Liabilities” in Note 3, Note 5, Note 12, and “Purchase Commitments” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
COVID-19
PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, the emergence of variant strains of the virus (including Delta and Omicron), and the resulting economic conditions and government orders have had and will continue to have a significant adverse impact on the Utility’s customers and, as a result, these circumstances have impacted and will continue to impact the Utility for an indeterminate period of time. The principal areas of near-term impact include liquidity, financial results and business operations, stemming primarily from the ongoing economic hardship of the Utility’s customers, the moratorium on service disconnections for residential and small business customers and for eligible medium and large commercial and industrial customers that expired on September 30, 2021, the CPUC’s “Emergency Authorization and Order Directing Utilities to Implement Emergency Customer COVID-19 Protections” and an observed reduction in non-residential electrical load. The Utility’s accounts receivable balances over 30 days outstanding as of December 31, 2021, were approximately $1.1 billion, or $832 million higher as compared to the balance as of December 31, 2019. The Utility is unable to estimate the portion of the increase directly attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Utility expects to continue experiencing an impact on monthly cash collections for as long as current COVID-19 circumstances persist.
On April 16, 2020, the CPUC adopted a resolution ordering utilities to implement a number of emergency customer protections, including a moratorium on service disconnections for residential and small business customers, beginning on March 4, 2020, which it subsequently extended through June 30, 2021. The CPUC authorized utilities to establish memorandum accounts to track incremental costs associated with complying with the resolution. On April 19, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision to implement a temporary moratorium on service disconnection for medium and large commercial and industrial customers. Although the moratorium on service disconnections ended on September 30, 2021, the Utility does not anticipate resuming service disconnections until 2022. If the moratorium on service disconnections were to be reinstated, it could have a material impact on results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows of PG&E Corporation and the Utility.
Although the Utility is seeking further regulatory relief to mitigate the impact of the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic, there can be no assurance as to the amount or timing of such relief. On July 16, 2021, the California governor signed into law AB 135, which provides financing assistance to customer accounts in arrears. See “Assembly Bill 135” below for more information. AB 135 allocates roughly $300 million in relief funding to the Utility’s customers and the amount was paid on January 27, 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had access to approximately $2.2 billion of total liquidity comprised of approximately $165 million of Utility cash, $126 million of PG&E Corporation cash and $1.9 billion of availability under PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s revolving credit facilities. The 2022 cost of capital application was filed off-cycle based on the extraordinary event of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government response. See “Cost of Capital Proceedings” below for more information.
The Utility has established the CPPMA memorandum accounts for tracking costs related to the CPUC’s emergency authorization and order, which, as of December 31, 2021, totaled $49 million and is reflected in Long-term regulatory assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. In addition to the $49 million recorded to the CPPMA that is subject to CPUC approval, the Utility has recorded approximately $127 million of undercollections from residential customers from June 11, 2020 to December 31, 2021 to the RUBA, which has been approved by the CPUC and is reflected in Regulatory balancing accounts receivable on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. During the quarter ended December 31, 2021, there was an adjustment to the RUBA current balancing accounts receivable of $180 million as a result of the expected CAPP funding, which was received on January 27, 2022. For more information on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on PG&E Corporation and the Utility, see “PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows have been and could continue to be significantly affected by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic” in Item 1A. Risk Factors in Part I of this 2021 Form 10-K.
The COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact PG&E Corporation and the Utility financially, and PG&E Corporation and the Utility will continue to monitor the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash and short-term, highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. PG&E Corporation and the Utility maintain separate bank accounts and primarily invest their cash in money market funds.
Financial Resources
Equity Financings
On April 30, 2021, PG&E Corporation entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with the Agents, the Forward Sellers and the Forward Purchasers (each as defined in “At the Market Equity Distribution Program” in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8), establishing an at the market equity distribution program, pursuant to which PG&E Corporation, through the Agents, may offer and sell from time to time shares of PG&E Corporation’s common stock having an aggregate gross sales price of up to $400 million. The Equity Distribution Agreement provides that, in addition to the issuance and sale of shares of common stock by PG&E Corporation to or through the Agents, PG&E Corporation may enter into Forward Sale Agreements (as defined in “At the Market Equity Distribution Program” in Note 6 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8) with the Forward Purchasers.
As of December 31, 2021, there was $400 million available under PG&E Corporation’s at the market equity distribution program for future offerings. During the year ended December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation has not sold any shares pursuant to the Equity Distribution Agreement or any Forward Sale Agreement.
Debt Financings
In March 2021, the Utility issued (i) $1.5 billion aggregate principal amount of 1.367% First Mortgage Bonds due March 10, 2023, (ii) $450 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031, and (iii) $450 million aggregate principal amount of 4.20% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2041. The proceeds were used for (i) the prepayment of all of the $1.5 billion 364-day term loan facility (maturing June 30, 2021) outstanding under the Utility Term Loan Credit Agreement, (ii) the repayment of all of the borrowings outstanding under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement, and (iii) general corporate purposes.
In June 2021, the Utility issued $800 million aggregate principal amount of 3.0% First Mortgage Bonds due June 15, 2028. The proceeds were used for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of borrowings under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement.
On November 15, 2021, the Utility completed the sale of (i) $300 million aggregate principal amount of Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due November 14, 2022, (ii) $900 million aggregate principal amount of 1.70% First Mortgage Bonds due November 15, 2023 and (iii) an additional $550 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% First Mortgage Bonds due June 1, 2031 (the “2031 Bonds”). The 2031 Bonds are part of the same series of debt securities issued by the Utility in March 2021. The proceeds were used for the repayment of the $1.45 billion aggregate principal amount of the Utility’s Floating Rate First Mortgage Bonds due November 15, 2021. The Utility used the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of approximately $300 million of borrowings outstanding under the Utility’s revolving credit facility pursuant to the Utility Revolving Credit Agreement.
For more information, see “Recovery Bonds” below and “Long-Term Debt” in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Credit Facilities
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility had $500 million and $1.4 billion available under their respective $500 million and $6.4 billion credit facilities, including the Utility’s term loan credit facility and Receivables Securitization Program. The amount the Utility may borrow under the Receivables Securitization Program is limited to the lesser of the facility limit and the facility availability. The facility availability may vary based on the amount of accounts receivable that the Utility owns that are eligible for sale to the SPV and the portion of those accounts receivable that are sold to the SPV that are eligible for advances by the lenders under the Receivables Securitization Program from time to time.
For more information, see “Credit Facilities” in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Intercompany Note Payable
On August 11, 2021, PG&E Corporation borrowed $145 million from the Utility under an interest bearing 364-day intercompany note due August 10, 2022. The intercompany note includes usual and customary provisions for notes of this type. The interest rate on the loan is a variable rate equal to the interest rate applicable to loans under the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement. Interest is due on the last business day of each month, commencing on August 31, 2021. The proceeds were borrowed to fund debt service obligations of PG&E Corporation. As of December 31, 2021, the intercompany note is reflected in Accounts receivable - other on the Utility’s Consolidated Balance Sheet and is eliminated upon consolidation of PG&E Corporation’s Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Recovery Bonds
On November 12, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC, a bankruptcy remote, limited liability company wholly owned by the Utility, issued approximately $860 million of senior secured recovery bonds. The recovery bonds were issued in three tranches: (1) approximately $266 million with an interest rate of 1.46% and is due July 15, 2033, (2) approximately $160 million with an interest rate of 2.28% and is due January 15, 2038, and (3) approximately $434 million with an interest rate of 2.82% and is due July 15, 2048. The net proceeds were used to fund fire risk mitigation capital expenditures that have been incurred by the Utility and incurred by PG&E Corporation on behalf of the Utility in 2020 and 2021.
For more information, see “AB 1054” in Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Dividends
On December 20, 2017, the Boards of Directors of PG&E Corporation and the Utility suspended quarterly cash dividends on both PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s common stock, beginning the fourth quarter of 2017, as well as the Utility’s preferred stock, beginning the three-month period ending January 31, 2018.
On March 20, 2020, PG&E Corporation and the Utility filed a motion with the Bankruptcy Court that includes a dividend restriction for PG&E Corporation. According to the dividend restriction, PG&E Corporation “will not pay common dividends until it has recognized $6.2 billion in non-GAAP core earnings following the Effective Date” of the Plan. The Bankruptcy Court entered the order approving the motion on April 9, 2020.
In addition, the Corporation Revolving Credit Agreement requires that PG&E Corporation (1) maintain a ratio of total consolidated debt to consolidated capitalization of no greater than 70% as of the end of each fiscal quarter and (2) if revolving loans are outstanding as of the end of a fiscal quarter, a ratio of adjusted cash to fixed charges, as of the end of such fiscal quarter, of at least 150% prior to the date that PG&E Corporation first declares a cash dividend on its common stock and at least 100% thereafter.
Under the Utility’s Articles of Incorporation, the Utility cannot pay common stock dividends unless all cumulative preferred dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock have been paid. As of January 31, 2022, there were $59.1 million of such cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock. Additionally, the CPUC requires the Utility to maintain a capital structure composed of at least 52% equity on average. On May 28, 2020, the CPUC approved a final decision in the Chapter 11 Proceedings OII, which, among other things, grants the Utility a temporary, five-year waiver from compliance with its authorized capital structure for the financing in place upon the Utility’s emergence from Chapter 11.
Subject to the foregoing restrictions, any decision to declare and pay dividends in the future will be made at the discretion of the Boards of Directors and will depend on, among other things, results of operations, financial condition, cash requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors that the Boards of Directors may deem relevant. On February 8, 2022, the Board of Directors of the Utility authorized the payment of all cumulative and unpaid dividends on the Utility’s preferred stock as of January 31, 2022 totaling $59.1 million, payable on May 13, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022 and declared a dividend on the Utility’s preferred stock totaling $3.5 million that will be accrued during the three-month period ending April 30, 2022, payable on May 15, 2022, to holders of record on April 29, 2022. It is uncertain as to when PG&E Corporation and the Utility will commence the payment of dividends on their common stock.
Utility Cash Flows
The Utility’s cash flows were as follows:
Operating Activities
The Utility’s cash flows from operating activities primarily consist of receipts from customers less payments of operating expenses, other than expenses such as depreciation that do not require the use of cash. During 2021, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $21.5 billion compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily due to the payment of $18.8 billion in satisfaction of pre-petition wildfire-related claims in 2020 as compared to the payment of $758 million to the Fire Victim Trust in 2021. Additionally, the Utility made initial and first annual contributions to the Wildfire Fund of $5.2 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the $193 million contribution made during the year ended December 31, 2021. Lastly, the Utility paid approximately $260 million more in interest in satisfaction of pre-petition claims during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2021. The increase was partially offset by wildfire-related insurance reimbursements of $2.2 billion received in 2020 as compared to $0.1 billion in 2021.
During 2020, net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $23.9 billion compared to 2019. This decrease was primarily due to the payment of $18.8 billion in satisfaction of pre-petition wildfire-related claims (including claims associated with the 2018 Camp fire, the 2017 Northern California wildfires, and the 2015 Butte fire), and the initial, first, and second annual contributions made to the Wildfire Fund of $5.2 billion, with no similar payments made in 2019.
Future cash flow from operating activities will be affected by various factors, including:
•the timing and amount of costs in connection with the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire, and the 2021 Dixie fire, and the timing and amount of any potential related insurance, Wildfire Fund, and regulatory recoveries;
•the timing and amounts of costs, including fines and penalties, that may be incurred in connection with current and future enforcement, litigation, and regulatory matters (see “Wildfire-Related Securities Class Action” in Note 14 and “Enforcement Matters” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 and “Regulatory Matters” below for more information);
•the severity, extent and duration of the global COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the Utility’s service territory, the ability of the Utility to collect on its customer invoices, the ability of the Utility’s customers to pay their utility bills in full and in a timely manner, the ability of the Utility to offset these effects, including with spending reductions, and the ability of the Utility to recover through rates any losses incurred in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the availability or cost of financing;
•the timing and amounts of available funds to pay eligible claims for liabilities arising from future wildfires;
•the timing and amount of substantially increasing costs in connection with 2020-2022 WMPs and the costs previously incurred in connection with the 2019 WMP that are not currently being recovered through rates (see “Regulatory Matters” below for more information);
•the timing and amount of premium payments related to wildfire insurance (see “Insurance Coverage” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 for more information);
•the timing of the gain to be returned to customers from the sale of the SFGO and transmission tower wireless licenses and the amounts incurred related to the move to and the leasing of the Lakeside Building; and
•the timing and outcomes of the Utility’s pending and future ratemaking and regulatory proceedings, including the extent to which PG&E Corporation and the Utility are able to recover their costs through regulated rates as recorded in memorandum accounts or balancing accounts, or as otherwise requested.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have had, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on their financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources, other than those discussed under “Purchase Commitments” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $698 million during 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the sale of the SFGO, which resulted in net proceeds received of $749 million in September 2021, with no similar receipts in 2020. See “Application to Sell General Office Complex” below for more information.
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $1.4 billion during 2020 as compared to 2019 partially due to the payment of pre-petition vendor payables for capital expenditures as a result of emerging from the Chapter 11 Cases. The Utility’s investing activities primarily consist of the construction of new and replacement facilities necessary to provide safe and reliable electricity and natural gas services to its customers. Cash used in investing activities also includes the proceeds from sales of nuclear decommissioning trust investments which are largely offset by the amount of cash used to purchase new nuclear decommissioning trust investments. The funds in the decommissioning trusts, along with accumulated earnings, are used exclusively for decommissioning and dismantling the Utility’s nuclear generation facilities.
Future cash flows used in investing activities are largely dependent on the timing and amount of capital expenditures. The Utility estimates that it will incur between $7.8 billion and $8.9 billion in 2022. Additionally, future cash flows used in investing activities will be impacted by the timing and amount related to the intended purchase of the Lakeside Building.
Financing Activities
During 2021, net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $21.7 billion as compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily due to PG&E Corporation making a cash equity contribution to the Utility of approximately $13.0 billion in 2020, with no similar activity in 2021. Additionally, during 2021, the Utility issued approximately $3.3 billion less of long-term debt, net of repayments, as compared to the same period in 2020. In addition, the Utility had net borrowings of $4.6 billion under its credit facilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to net repayments of $246 million during the same period in 2021. The Utility had net borrowings of short-term debt of $1.4 billion during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to net repayments of short-term debt of $1.2 billion during the same period in 2021. The decrease was partially offset by $1.5 billion of net repayments of debtor-in-possession credit facilities in 2020, with no similar payments in 2021. Lastly, the Utility received $370 million of proceeds in 2021 in connection with the Transaction Agreement between the Utility and SBA, with no similar receipts in 2020. For more information, see “Sale of Transmission Tower Wireless Licenses” in Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
During 2020, net cash provided by financing activities increased by $24.7 billion as compared to 2019. This increase was primarily due to PG&E Corporation making a cash equity contribution to the Utility of approximately $13.0 billion, and the Utility receiving $10.4 billion in proceeds from the issuance of short-term and long-term first mortgage bonds, with no similar activities in 2019. Additionally, the Utility had net borrowings of $4.6 billion under its credit facilities during the year ended December 31, 2020, with no similar activity in 2019 due to the Utility entering into the facilities in 2020. These increases were partially offset by net repayments of $1.5 billion on the debtor-in-possession facilities in 2020, as compared to net borrowings of $1.5 billion on the debtor-in-possession facilities in 2019.
Cash provided by or used in financing activities is driven by the Utility’s financing needs, which depend on the level of cash provided by or used in operating activities, the level of cash provided by or used in investing activities, the conditions in the capital markets, and the maturity date or prepayment date of existing debt instruments. Additionally, future cash flows from financing activities will be affected by the timing and outcome of the Utility’s applications for a post-emergence securitization transaction and for an AB 1054 securitization transaction. See “Application for Post-Emergence Securitization Transaction” and “Application for AB 1054 Securitization Transaction” below for more information.
ENFORCEMENT AND LITIGATION MATTERS
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have significant contingencies arising from their operations, including contingencies related to the enforcement and litigation matters described in Notes 14 and 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. that are incorporated by reference herein. The outcome of these matters, individually or in the aggregate, could have a material effect on PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
U.S. District Court Matters and Probation
On August 9, 2016, the jury in the federal criminal trial against the Utility in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, in San Francisco, found the Utility guilty on one count of obstructing a federal agency proceeding and five counts of violations of pipeline integrity management regulations of the Natural Gas Pipeline Safety Act. On January 26, 2017, the court imposed a sentence on the Utility in connection with the conviction. The court sentenced the Utility to a five-year corporate probation period, oversight by the Monitor for a period of five years, with the ability to apply for early termination after three years, a fine of $3 million to be paid to the federal government, certain advertising requirements, and community service.
In the course of 2021, the court entered numerous other orders, including in connection with the Utility’s vegetation management, the Utility’s PSPS program, the 2018 Camp fire, the 2019 Kincade fire, the 2020 Zogg fire and the 2021 Dixie fire.
On January 25, 2022, the period of probation expired and the Monitor’s oversight of the Utility ended.
Enhanced Oversight and Enforcement Process
In the OII to Consider PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Plan of Reorganization final decision, the CPUC adopted an EOEP designed to provide a roadmap for how the CPUC will monitor the Utility’s operational performance on an ongoing basis. The EOEP contains six steps that are triggered by specific events and includes enhanced reporting requirements and additional monitoring and oversight. These trigger events include failure to obtain an approved WMP, failure to comply with regulatory reporting requirements in the WMP, insufficient progress toward approved safety or risk-driven investments and failure to comply with or demonstrate sufficient progress toward certain metrics (some of which will be determined in an ongoing regulatory proceeding). The EOEP also contains provisions for the Utility to cure and permanently exit the EOEP if it can satisfy specific criteria. If the Utility is placed into the EOEP, actions taken would occur in coordination with the CPUC’s existing formal and informal reporting requirements and procedures. The EOEP does not replace or limit the CPUC’s regulatory authority, including the authority to issue Orders to Show Cause and Orders Instituting Investigations and to impose fines and penalties. The EOEP requires the Utility to report the occurrence of a triggering event to the CPUC’s executive director no later than five business days after the date on which any member of senior management of the Utility becomes aware of the occurrence of a triggering event.
The Utility is unable to predict whether additional fines or penalties may be imposed, or other regulatory actions may be taken.
On August 18, 2021, the President of the CPUC informed the Utility that the CPUC staff intends to conduct a fact-finding review regarding a pattern of self-reported missed inspections and other self-reported safety incidents to determine whether a recommendation to advance the Utility further within the EOEP is warranted.
Vegetation Management
The CPUC placed the Utility into step 1 of the EOEP on April 15, 2021 and imposed additional reporting requirements on the Utility. The CPUC’s resolution states that a step 1 triggering event had occurred because the Utility “has made insufficient progress toward approved safety or risk-driven investments related to its electric business.” The resolution finds that, based on the CPUC’s evaluation of the Utility’s EVM work in 2020, the Utility “is not sufficiently prioritizing its Enhanced Vegetation Management (“EVM”) based on risk” and “is not making risk-driven investments.” The resolution also finds that “less than five percent of the EVM work” the Utility completed in 2020 “was on the 20 highest risk power lines according to [its] own risk rankings.”
As required by the CPUC’s resolution, the Utility submitted a corrective action plan to the CPUC’s Executive Director on May 6, 2021, which is designed to correct or prevent recurrence of the step 1 triggering event, or otherwise mitigate any ongoing safety risk or impact, as soon as practicable, among other things. The corrective action plan addresses the EVM situation that occurred in 2020 and provides a risk-informed EVM workplan for 2021. The Utility is required to update the information contained in the corrective action plan every 90 days. The Utility will remain in step 1 of the EOEP until the CPUC determines that the Utility has met the conditions of the corrective action plan. If the Utility does not adequately meet such conditions within the timeframe approved by the CPUC, the CPUC may place the Utility into a higher step of the EOEP, or the Utility may remain in step 1 of the EOEP if it demonstrates sufficient progress towards meeting such conditions.
The Utility is unable to predict the outcome of this regulatory process.
Order Instituting an Investigation into PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s Safety Culture
On August 27, 2015, the CPUC began a formal investigation into whether the organizational culture and governance of PG&E Corporation and the Utility prioritize safety and adequately direct resources to promote accountability and achieve safety goals and standards (the “Safety Culture OII”). The CPUC directed the SED to evaluate the Utility’s and PG&E Corporation’s organizational culture, governance, policies, practices, and accountability metrics in relation to the Utility’s record of operations, including its record of safety incidents.
On June 18, 2019, the CPUC issued a ruling requesting comments from parties on four proposals that it stated may improve the safety culture of PG&E Corporation and the Utility. The four proposals are: separating the Utility into gas and electric utilities (including, as one possibility, sale of the gas assets to a third party); establishing periodic review of the Utility’s certificate of convenience and necessity; modifying or eliminating PG&E Corporation’s holding company structure; and linking the Utility’s rate of return or ROE to safety performance metrics.
On September 4, 2020, the administrative law judge issued a ruling updating case status, which states that the proceeding will remain open as a vehicle to monitor the progress of the Utility in improving its safety culture, and to address any relevant issues that arise, with the CPUC’s consultant NorthStar Consulting Group, Inc. continuing in a monitoring role. The ruling states that additional issues may be raised in the proceedings by parties or the CPUC.
REGULATORY MATTERS
The Utility is subject to substantial regulation by the CPUC, the FERC, the NRC, and other federal and state regulatory agencies. The resolutions of the proceedings described below and other proceedings may materially affect PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
During 2021, the Utility continued to make progress on regulatory matters.
•In June, the Utility filed its 2023 GRC application. The application requests a revenue requirement of $15.46 billion for the 2023 test year.
•In August, the CPUC approved the Utility’s agreement to sell the SFGO. In September, the sale closed.
•In September, OEIS issued a final decision statement approving the Utility’s 2021 WMP, and in October the CPUC ratified the OEIS’ approval.
•In September, the Utility filed a motion seeking CPUC approval of a settlement agreement for its 2020 WMCE application. Under the settlement agreement, the Utility would recover a revenue requirement of $1.04 billion, or 81% of the requested $1.28 billion.
•In September, the Utility filed its 2021 WMCE application, requesting cost recovery of approximately $1.6 billion of recorded expenditures related to wildfire mitigation, certain catastrophic events, and a number of other activities, resulting in a proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.47 billion.
•In October, the CPUC approved the settlement agreement among the Utility and other parties that authorizes the Utility to recover $445.5 million in incremental insurance costs in its WEMA that were incurred for the period of July 26, 2017 through December 31, 2019.
•In November, the Utility filed a motion seeking CPUC approval of a settlement agreement for its 2018 CEMA application. Under the settlement agreement, the Utility would recover approximately $683 million plus interest, compared to the requested $763 million.
In addition, on January 31, 2022, the OEIS issued the Utility’s 2021 safety certification, which will be valid for 12 months or until a timely request for a new safety certification is acted upon, whichever occurs later.
Cost Recovery Proceedings
Periodically, costs arise that could not have been anticipated by the Utility during CPUC GRC rate requests or that have been deliberately excluded therefrom. These costs may result from catastrophic events, changes in regulation, or extraordinary changes in operating practices. The Utility may seek authority to track incremental costs in a memorandum account and the CPUC may authorize recovery of costs tracked in memorandum accounts if the costs are deemed incremental and prudently incurred. The CPUC also authorized balancing accounts with limitations or caps to cost recovery. These accounts, which include the CEMA, WEMA, FHPMA, FRMMA, WMPMA, VMBA, WMBA, and RTBA among others, allow the Utility to track the costs associated with work related to disaster and wildfire response, other wildfire prevention-related costs, certain third-party wildfire claims, and insurance costs. While the Utility generally expects such costs to be recoverable, there can be no assurance that the CPUC will authorize the Utility to recover the full amount of its costs.
In recent years, the amount of the costs recorded in these accounts has increased. As of December 31, 2021, the Utility had recorded an aggregate amount of approximately $5.4 billion in costs not otherwise being recovered in existing revenue requirements, if any, for the CEMA, WEMA, FHPMA, FRMMA, WMPMA, VMBA, WMBA, MGMA, and RTBA. Because rate recovery may require CPUC authorization for these accounts, there is a delay between when the Utility incurs costs and when it may recover those costs.
If the amount of the costs recorded in these accounts continues to increase, the delay between incurring and recovering costs lengthens, or the Utility does not recover the full amount of its costs, PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected.
Except as otherwise noted, the Utility is unable to predict the timing and outcome of the following applications. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected if the Utility is unable to timely recover costs included in these applications.
For more information, see Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8., “Regulatory Matters - Wildfire Mitigation and Catastrophic Events Costs Recovery Applications,” “Regulatory Matters - Application for Recovery of Costs Recorded in the Wildfire Expense Memorandum Account,” and “Regulatory Matters - Catastrophic Event Memorandum Accounts and Applications” below.
Wildfire Mitigation and Catastrophic Events Cost Recovery Applications
2020 WMCE Application
On September 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting cost recovery of recorded expenditures related to wildfire mitigation and certain catastrophic events (the “2020 WMCE application”). The recorded expenditures, which exclude amounts disallowed as a result of the CPUC’s decision in the OII into the 2017 Northern California wildfires and the 2018 Camp fire, consist of $1.18 billion in expense and $801 million in capital expenditures, resulting in a proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.28 billion.
The costs addressed in the 2020 WMCE application cover activities mainly during the years 2017 to 2019 and are incremental to those previously authorized in the Utility’s 2017 GRC and other proceedings. The Utility’s request includes amounts from the FHPMA of $293 million, the FRMMA and the WMPMA of $740 million, and the CEMA of $251 million.
Given the CPUC’s prior approval of $447 million in interim rate relief (which includes interest), the Utility proposed to recover the remaining $868 million revenue requirement over a one-year period (following the conclusion of interim rate relief recovery). Cost recovery requested in this application is subject to the CPUC’s reasonableness review, which could result in some or all of the interim rate relief being subject to refund.
On September 21, 2021, the Utility and certain parties filed a motion with the CPUC seeking approval of a settlement agreement that would resolve all of the issues raised by the settling parties in the 2020 WMCE application. The settlement agreement proposes that the Utility recover a revenue requirement of $1.04 billion. The settlement agreement would authorize the Utility to continue to recover the interim revenue requirement of $447 million over a 17-month amortization period, followed by an additional revenue requirement of $591 million over a 24-month amortization period. On September 23, 2021, the CPUC extended the statutory deadline for a PD in this matter to April 1, 2022.
2021 WMCE Application
On September 16, 2021, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting cost recovery of approximately $1.6 billion of recorded expenditures, resulting in a proposed revenue requirement of approximately $1.47 billion (the “2021 WMCE application”). The costs addressed in this application reflect costs related to wildfire mitigation and certain catastrophic events, as well as implementation of various customer-focused initiatives. These costs were incurred primarily in 2020.
The recorded expenditures consist of $1.4 billion in expenses and $197 million in capital expenditures. The costs addressed in the 2021 WMCE application are incremental to those previously authorized in the Utility’s 2017 GRC, 2020 GRC, and other proceedings. The majority of the Utility’s proposed revenue requirement would be collected over a two-year period starting in January 2023.
The Utility’s requested revenue requirement includes amounts recorded to the VMBA of $592 million, the CEMA of $535 million, the WMBA of $149 million, and other memo accounts. On November 18, 2021, the Utility filed updates to the application, increasing total costs by $19.4 million. On December 30, 2021, the Utility filed supplemental testimony reducing the cost recovery ask of the COVID-19 CEMA costs by $12.2 million. The $12.2 million reduction is a result of identified avoided costs, such as employee business travel expenses and in-person training costs, due to the pandemic.
The scoping memo shows a schedule with the CPUC issuing a PD in the fourth quarter of 2022.
Wildfire Expense Memorandum Account Application
On February 7, 2020, the Utility filed an application requesting cost recovery of $499 million of insurance premiums paid by the Utility between July 26, 2017 through December 31, 2019, which were recorded in the WEMA. These costs are incremental to the insurance costs authorized in the 2017 GRC. These incremental costs are not associated with any specific wildfire event. The application does not seek recovery of wildfire claims or associated legal costs eligible for recording to the WEMA. On October 21, 2021, the CPUC adopted a final decision approving a settlement agreement among the Utility and the other active parties that authorizes the Utility to recover $445.5 million over a 12-month period beginning January 1, 2022.
Catastrophic Event Memorandum Account Application
The CPUC allows utilities to recover the reasonable, incremental costs of responding to catastrophic events that have been declared a disaster or state of emergency by competent federal or state authorities. The Utility has historically sought such costs through standalone CEMA applications. More recently, the Utility has sought CEMA-eligible costs through its WMCE applications.
In addition to the Utility’s responsibilities in responding to catastrophic events, in 2014, the CPUC directed the Utility to perform additional fire prevention and vegetation management work in response to the severe drought in California. Through 2019, the costs associated with this work were tracked in the CEMA. In the 2020 GRC decision, the CPUC required the Utility to track these costs in the VMBA beginning January 1, 2020.
2018 CEMA Application
On March 30, 2018, the Utility submitted to the CPUC its 2018 CEMA application requesting cost recovery of $183 million in connection with seven catastrophic events that included fire and storm declared emergencies from mid-2016 through early 2017, as well as $405 million related to work performed in 2016 and 2017 to cut back or remove dead or dying trees that were exposed to years of drought conditions and bark beetle infestation. The Utility filed three revisions to this application, resulting in a total cost recovery request of $763 million.
On April 25, 2019, the CPUC approved the Utility’s request for interim rate relief, allowing for recovery of $373 million of costs as requested by the Utility at that time. The interim rate relief was implemented, commencing on October 1, 2019. Costs included in the interim rate relief are subject to audit and refund.
On November 2, 2021, the Utility filed with the CPUC a settlement agreement with the active parties in the matter. The settlement agreement, if approved by the CPUC, would authorize the Utility to collect a total of $683 million plus interest for the 2018 CEMA application. As noted above, $373 million of the total amount has already been collected in interim rates. The interim rates would become final and no longer subject to refund. The remainder of the authorized revenue requirement that has yet to be collected would be amortized over a 12-month period.
Forward-Looking Rate Cases
The Utility routinely participates in forward-looking rate case applications before the CPUC and the FERC. Those applications include GRCs, where the revenue required for general operations (“base revenue”) of the Utility is assessed and reset. In addition, the Utility is periodically involved in proceedings to adjust its regulated return on rate base.
Decisions in GRC proceedings are generally expected prior to the commencement of the period to which the rates would apply. However, delayed decisions in the Utility’s GRCs may cause the Utility to develop its budgets based on possible outcomes, rather than authorized amounts. When decisions are delayed, the CPUC typically provides rate relief to the Utility effective as of the commencement of the rate case period (not effective as of the date of the delayed decision). Nonetheless, the Utility’s spending during the period of the delay may exceed the authorized amount, without an ability for the Utility to seek cost recovery of such excess. If the Utility’s spending during the period of the delay is less than the authorized amount, the Utility could be exposed to operational and financial risk associated with the lower level of work achieved compared to that funded by the CPUC.
Except as otherwise noted, the Utility is unable to predict the timing and outcome of the following applications. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows could be materially affected depending on the outcomes of these applications.
The Utility’s rate cases that are pending, have pending appeals, or were completed in 2021 are summarized in the following table:
2023 General Rate Case
On June 30, 2021, the Utility filed its 2023 GRC application with the CPUC. The 2023 GRC combined what had historically been separated into the GRC and GT&S rate cases. In the 2023 GRC, the CPUC will determine the annual amount of base revenues that the Utility will be authorized to collect from customers from 2023 through 2026 to recover its anticipated costs for gas distribution, gas transmission and storage, electric distribution, and electric generation and to provide the Utility an opportunity to earn its authorized rate of return. The Utility’s revenue requirements for other portions of its operations, such as electric transmission, and electricity and natural gas purchases, are authorized in other regulatory proceedings overseen by the CPUC or the FERC.
In a GRC, the CPUC approves annual revenue requirements for the first year (a “test year”) of the GRC period and typically authorizes the Utility to receive annual increases in revenue requirements for the subsequent years of the GRC period (known as “attrition years”). For its 2023 test year, the Utility has requested revenue requirements of $15.46 billion, an increase of $3.56 billion over the adopted 2020 GRC and 2019 GT&S revenue requirements for 2022 of $11.90 billion. The GRC application further states that the Utility’s requested 2023 revenue requirements represent a 9.6% increase over its total revenue requirements for 2022 (including both amounts that are authorized and that are requested outside of the GRC and remain subject to the regulatory process). The requested weighted-average GRC rate base for 2023 is approximately $48.52 billion, which corresponds to an increase of $9.35 billion over the authorized rate base for 2022 of $39.17 billion. The Utility also requested that the CPUC establish a ratemaking mechanism that would increase the Utility’s authorized GRC revenues in 2024, 2025, and 2026 by $930 million, $590 million, and $381 million, respectively. The Utility estimated its proposed revenue requirements for 2024, 2025, and 2026 would result in revenue requirement increases of 2.4%, 1.9%, and 1.5%, compared to its total estimated revenue requirements for 2023, 2024, and 2025, respectively. Over the 2023-2026 GRC period, the Utility plans to make average annual capital investments of approximately $7.75 billion in gas distribution, transmission and storage, electric distribution, and electric generation infrastructure, and to improve safety, reliability, and customer service.
The following table compares the Utility’s initial requested revenue requirements for 2023 with the comparable revenue requirements currently authorized for 2022, by both line of business and cost category:
(1) May not sum due to rounding.
(2) These amounts include revenues from Decision (“D.”) 20-12-005 (the Utility’s 2020 GRC), D.19-09-025 (the Utility’s 2019 GT&S) adjusted for D.19-12-056 and Advice Letter (“AL”) 4275-G/5887-E (Cost of Capital changes adopted for Long Term Debt and Common Stock) and AL 4367-G/6062-E (Excess Accumulated Deferred Income Taxes Pursuant to the 2017 Tax Act). Also included are the 2022 adopted revenue requirements associated with the following previously separately-funded projects: AL 5322-E (Energy Storage), D.16-12-065 (Electric Vehicle Charging Network Phase I), D.14-03-021 (Mobile Home Park to the Meter), D.20-11-035 (2019 CEMA), AL 4392-G/6100-E (WMBA and VMBA), AL 4444-G/6210-E (RTBA).
In the 2023 GRC application, the Utility proposed a series of safety, resiliency, and clean energy investments to further reduce wildfire risk and deliver safe, reliable, and clean energy service. Among other things, the Utility proposed to invest a total of approximately $31 billion between 2023 and 2026 to reduce wildfire risk; improve gas and electric system safety, reliability, and resiliency; increase the use of new, innovative technologies; and expand its clean energy infrastructure.
In addition to coverage that may be available from the private insurance market, the Utility also proposed to use self-insurance as part of its wildfire insurance program as follows: (1) the Utility’s recommended approach, a new self-insurance structure whereby the Utility would seek customer-funded self-insurance in the amount of $250 million annually and traditional private insurance procurement for amounts between the accumulated self-insurance balance and $1.0 billion; or, alternatively (2) continuing the currently authorized mechanism whereby the Utility seeks procurement of wildfire liability insurance instruments through the private insurance market and is authorized to use any unspent authorized revenue requirements on self-insurance.
In addition, the Utility requested authorization to establish one new balancing account and one new memorandum account as follows:
•Catastrophic Events Straight-Time Labor Balancing Account, a two-way account which would recover straight-time labor costs associated with catastrophic events. These costs are currently recovered through the Catastrophic Events Memorandum Account process.
•Helms Capacity Memorandum Account, which would allow the Utility to track and recover the actual costs associated with upgrading the Helms Pumped Storage Facility through a future application.
The Utility did not seek recovery of compensation of PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s officers within the scope of 17 Code of Federal Regulations 240.3b-7.
On October 1, 2021, the CPUC issued a scoping memo indicating that the CPUC will issue a decision on an initial track of the proceeding in the second quarter of 2023. The scoping memo also established a second track of the 2023 GRC to consider costs incurred from 2019 to 2021 that are recorded in balancing or memorandum accounts for, among other work, wildfire mitigation and gas system safety improvements. The second track will review more than $500 million in capital and $160 million in expense included in the Utility’s initial 2023 GRC application for the period from 2019 to 2020, plus additional costs recorded in memorandum and balancing accounts in 2021. The scoping memo indicated that the CPUC will issue a decision on the second track in the third quarter of 2023. The scoping memo also directed the Utility to file an update for its
undergrounding program in February 2022.
On November 5, 2021, the Utility filed a motion to revise the proceeding schedule.
Between August 2021 and January 2022, the Utility served updates to its 2023 GRC testimony that would, if approved, reduce the requested revenue requirement in 2023 by approximately $181 million in the aggregate.
2020 General Rate Case
On December 3, 2020, the CPUC approved the final decision for the Utility’s 2020 GRC.
Revenue Requirements and Attrition Year Revenues
The final decision approved a 2020 authorized revenue requirement of $9.102 billion, effective January 1, 2020. The CPUC also approved the revenue requirements for 2021 and 2022 as follows: an additional increase of $316 million in 2021 over the authorized 2020 revenue requirement, or a 3.5% increase, and an additional increase of $364 million in 2022, or a 3.9% increase. The Utility is authorized to collect in rates the difference between the revenue requirement in effect and the 2020 GRC decision-authorized revenue requirement for the period of January 1, 2020 to February 28, 2021 over the period of March 1, 2021 through December 31, 2022.
The final decision also allows the Utility to recover the annual cost of excess liability insurance for coverage of up to $1.4 billion. An advice letter is required for recovery of excess liability insurance costs for coverage exceeding $1.4 billion. The final decision also approved wildfire mitigation capital expenditures in the Community Wildfire Safety Program of $603 million in 2020, $931 million in 2021 and $1.15 billion in 2022. In addition, the final decision requires a reasonableness review and recovery of WMBA costs or unit costs for system hardening in excess of 115% of the adopted amounts and VMBA costs in excess of 120% of the adopted amounts through an application.
Rate Base and Capital Additions
The CPUC also adopted a rate base of $31.0 billion in 2021, or a 5.4% increase over 2020; and $33.0 billion in 2022, or a 6.3% increase over 2021. Consistent with AB 1054, the decision provides for a total of $2.83 billion in forecast capital spend without an equity return for the period of August 2019 to December 2022, which includes $931 million for 2021 and $1.15 billion for 2022.
Over the 2020-2022 GRC period, the decision provided average annual capital investments of approximately $4.5 billion in electric distribution, natural gas distribution and electric generation infrastructure.
2019 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case
As previously disclosed, on September 12, 2019, the CPUC approved the final decision in the 2019 GT&S rate case of the Utility. The CPUC adopted revenue requirements of $1.516 billion for 2021 and $1.580 billion for 2022, compared to the Utility’s request of $1.693 billion for 2021 and $1.679 billion for 2022.
On October 23, 2019, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC requesting the rehearing of the final decision. Specifically, issues identified by the Utility include the adopted disallowance associated with vintage pipe replacement, reduction in the Utility’s expense forecast for in-line inspections, and establishment of a memo account for Internal Corrosion Direct Assessment. On November 19, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision denying the Utility’s application for rehearing but allowing the Utility to file an advice letter to remove the 2015 portion of the capital vintage pipe replacement disallowance. The advice letter was approved by the CPUC on January 21, 2022.
Removing the 2015 value of $39.4 million from the disallowance reduced the total disallowed amount from $237.3 million to $197.9 million.
Cost of Capital Proceedings
On December 19, 2019, the CPUC approved a final decision in the 2020 cost of capital application (the “2020 cost of capital application”), maintaining the Utility’s return on common equity at the 2019 level of 10.25% for the three-year period beginning January 1, 2020. The decision maintained the common equity component of the Utility’s capital structure at 52% and reduced its preferred stock component from 1% to 0.5%. The decision also approved the cost of debt requested by the Utility.
The Utility’s annual cost of capital adjustment mechanism, which allows for changes in the Utility’s authorized ROE and cost of debt, also remained unchanged by the final 2020 cost of capital application decision. The mechanism provides that in any year in which the difference between (i) the average Moody’s utility bond rates (as measured in the 12-month period from October through September (the index)) and (ii) 4.5% (the benchmark) exceeds 100 basis points, the Utility’s ROE will be adjusted by one-half of such difference, and the cost of debt will be trued up to the most recent recorded cost of debt. The Utility is to initiate this adjustment mechanism by filing an advice letter on or before October 15 of the year in which the mechanism triggered, to become effective on January 1 of the next year.
On August 23, 2021, the Utility filed an off-cycle 2022 cost of capital application with the CPUC based on the extraordinary event of the COVID-19 pandemic and related government response, which has decreased interest rates but has not reduced the cost of capital for electric utilities in general, and the Utility in particular, to the same extent as the overall financial markets (the “2022 cost of capital application”). The 2022 cost of capital application requested that the CPUC authorize the Utility's cost of capital for its electric generation, electric distribution, natural gas distribution, and natural gas transmission and storage rate base beginning on January 1, 2022 for 2022, 2023, and 2024. The Utility requested that the CPUC approve the Utility’s proposed ratemaking capital structure (i.e., the relative weightings of common equity, preferred equity, and debt for ratemaking), ROE, cost of preferred stock, and cost of debt. The Utility proposed to establish a cost of long-term debt of 4.14%, a return on preferred stock of 5.52%, a ROE of 11%, and to retain the existing capital structure. The Utility also concurrently filed a motion requesting that the revenue requirement for the 2022 cost of capital be recorded in memorandum accounts to be trued-up following a final decision in this proceeding.
In September 2021, the cost of capital adjustment mechanism was triggered because the index was 117 basis points below the benchmark. As the 2022 cost of capital application was pending, the Utility did not file the October 15, 2021 advice letter to adjust rates. Subsequently, on October 28, 2021, the CPUC ruled that the 2022 cost of capital application did not suspend the adjustment mechanism as requested by the application. The ruling also required that the Utility comply with the cost of capital mechanism by filing the information that would have been included in the October 15, 2021 advice letter in the 2022 cost of capital application proceeding on November 8, 2021, which the Utility did.
On December 17, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision authorizing the Utility’s request to establish memorandum accounts to track revenue requirement changes starting on January 1, 2022 and leaving the cost of capital rates at current levels, subject to true-up based on the CPUC’s decision on the 2022 cost of capital application.
On December 24, 2021, the CPUC issued a scoping memo in the 2022 cost of capital application limiting the scope of the Utility’s 2022 cost of capital application to the 2022 cost of capital only. The scoping memo also affirmed that the Utility is to file a 2023 cost of capital application in April 2022 for the 2023 test year.
To set the 2022 cost of capital, the CPUC will consider (i) whether there are extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital mechanism for 2022; and (ii) if so, whether to leave the cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for the year 2022, or open a second phase to consider alternative cost of capital proposals for the year 2022. The Utility’s position is that there are extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital mechanism for 2022 and that the CPUC should leave the cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for 2022.
If the CPUC determines that the 2022 cost of capital application establishes extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital mechanism for 2022 and leaves the Utility’s cost of capital components at pre-2022 levels for 2022, the cost of long-term debt would be 4.17%, the return on preferred stock would be 5.52%, and the ROE would be 10.25%. If the CPUC opens a second phase of the proceeding, the CPUC would set the cost of capital for 2022 based on alternative cost of capital proposals that would address the technical cost of capital material included within the Utility’s 2022 cost of capital application.
If the CPUC determines that there are not extraordinary circumstances that warrant a departure from the cost of capital mechanism for 2022, the cost of capital adjustment mechanism would operate and the cost of long-term debt would be 4.15%, the return on preferred stock would be 5.52%, and the ROE would be 9.67%. The resulting decrease in the CPUC jurisdictional gas and electric revenue requirement would be approximately $163 million ($99 million electric and $64 million gas).
The scoping memo called for briefing to be completed by March 25, 2022 but did not indicate timing for a PD or final decision.
2015 Gas Transmission and Storage Rate Case
On June 23, 2016, the CPUC approved a final phase one decision in the Utility’s 2015 GT&S rate case. The phase one decision excluded from rate base $696 million of 2011 to 2014 capital spending in excess of the amount adopted in the prior GT&S rate case. The decision permanently disallowed $120 million of that amount and ordered that the remaining $576 million be subject to an audit overseen by the CPUC staff, with the possibility that the Utility may seek recovery in a future proceeding. For more information regarding this proceeding, see Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Transmission Owner Rate Cases
Transmission Owner Rate Cases for 2015 and 2016 (the “TO16” and “TO17” rate cases, respectively)
As previously disclosed, on January 8, 2018, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals issued an opinion granting an appeal of the FERC’s decisions in the TO16 and TO17 rate cases that had granted the Utility a 50-basis point ROE incentive adder for its continued participation in the CAISO. If the FERC concluded on remand that the Utility should no longer be authorized to receive the 50 basis point ROE incentive adder, the Utility would incur a refund obligation of $1 million and $8.5 million for TO16 and TO17, respectively. Those rate case decisions were remanded to the FERC for further proceedings consistent with the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals’ opinion.
On July 18, 2019, the FERC issued its order on remand reaffirming its prior grant of the Utility’s request for the 50-basis point ROE adder.
On March 17, 2020, the FERC issued its order denying requests for rehearing that were previously filed by several parties. On May 11, 2020, the CPUC and a number of other parties filed a petition for review of the FERC’s orders in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Oral argument was held on April 16, 2021.
Transmission Owner Rate Case for 2017 (the “TO18” rate case)
As previously disclosed, on July 29, 2016, the Utility filed its TO18 rate case with the FERC requesting a 2017 retail electric transmission revenue requirement of $1.72 billion, a $387 million increase over the 2016 revenue requirement of $1.33 billion. The forecasted network transmission rate base for 2017 was $6.7 billion. The Utility sought a ROE of 10.9%, which included an incentive component of 50 basis points for the Utility’s continuing participation in the CAISO.
On October 15, 2020, the FERC issued an order that, among other things, rejected the Utility’s direct assignment of common plant to FERC and required the allocation of all common plant between CPUC and FERC jurisdiction be based on operating and maintenance labor ratios. The order reopened the record for the limited purpose of allowing the participants to the proceeding an opportunity to present written evidence concerning the FERC’s revised ROE methodology adopted in FERC Opinion No. 569-A, issued on May 21, 2020. Initial briefs and testimony were filed on December 14, 2020 and responses were filed on February 12, 2021.
On December 17, 2020 and June 17, 2021, the FERC issued orders denying requests for rehearing submitted by the Utility and intervenors. In 2021, the Utility filed four appeals. The appeals related to two issues: (1) impact of the Tax Act on TO18 rates in January and February 2018 and (2) aspects of the rehearing order other than the Tax Act. The appeals have been consolidated and are currently being held in abeyance until the FERC addresses the ROE issue.
As a result of an order denying rehearing on the common plant allocation, the Utility increased its Regulatory liabilities for amounts previously collected during the TO18, TO19, and TO20 rate case periods from 2017 through the fourth quarter of 2021 by approximately $324 million. A portion of these common plant costs are expected to be recovered at the CPUC in a separate application and as a result, as of December 31, 2021, the Utility has recorded approximately $197 million to Regulatory assets.
Aside from the ultimate outcome of the common plant allocation, which is subject to further appellate briefing and a further FERC decision on ROE, that order is not expected to result in a material impact on the Utility’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows. Some of the issues that will be decided in a final and unappealable TO18 decision, including the common plant allocation, will also be incorporated into the Utility’s TO19 and TO20 rate cases. See “Transmission Owner Rate Case Revenue Subject to Refund” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Transmission Owner Rate Case for 2018 (the “TO19” rate case)
As previously disclosed, on July 27, 2017, the Utility filed its TO19 rate case with the FERC. On December 20, 2018, the FERC issued an order approving an all-party settlement filed by the Utility. As part of the settlement, the TO19 revenue requirement will be set at 98.85% of the revenue requirement for TO18 that will be determined upon the issuance of a final, non-appealable TO18 decision. Additionally, if the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals were to determine that the Utility was not entitled to the 50 basis point incentive adder for the Utility’s continued CAISO participation, then the Utility would be obligated to make a refund to customers of approximately $25 million. See “Transmission Owner Rate Cases for 2015 and 2016” above for a discussion of the incentive adder. On December 20, 2018, the FERC issued an order approving the all-party settlement.
Transmission Owner Rate Case for 2019 (the “TO20” rate case)
As previously disclosed, on October 1, 2018, the Utility filed its TO20 rate case with the FERC requesting approval of a formula rate for the costs associated with the Utility’s electric transmission facilities. On November 30, 2018, the FERC issued an order accepting the Utility’s October 2018 filing, subject to hearings and refund, and established May 1, 2019 as the effective date for rate changes. The FERC also ordered that the hearings be held in abeyance pending settlement discussions among the parties.
On March 31, 2020, the Utility filed a partial settlement with the FERC, which the FERC approved on August 17, 2020. On October 15, 2020, the Utility filed a settlement with the FERC resolving all of the remaining issues in the formula rate proceedings, including the Utility’s ROE, capital structure, depreciation rates, as well as certain other aspects of the Utility’s formula rate. Specifically, the settlement establishes an all-in ROE of 10.45%; a fixed capital structure of 49.75% common stock, 49.75% debt, and 0.5% preferred stock; and fixed depreciation rates for various categories of transmission facilities (represented by individual FERC accounts). The term of the settlement continues until December 31, 2023 and the Utility will be required to file a replacement rate filing to be effective on January 1, 2024.
On December 30, 2020, the FERC approved the settlement without modifications.
Some of the issues that will be decided in a final and unappealable TO18 decision, including the common plant allocation, will also be incorporated into the Utility’s TO19 and TO20 rate cases.
Other Regulatory Proceedings
Application to Sell General Office Complex
On September 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC to sell the SFGO located at 25 Beale Street, 45 Beale Street, 77 Beale Street, 50 Main Street, 215 Market Street and 245 Market Street in downtown San Francisco, and to recover costs to relocate its staff at the SFGO to a new headquarters at the Lakeside Building, and for appropriate ratemaking treatment of those transactions.
On May 21, 2021, the Utility entered into a purchase agreement with HNG Atlas US LP, to sell the SFGO for $800 million.
On May 26, 2021, the Utility filed an amended settlement agreement with the CPUC. Under the amended settlement, the parties agreed that (1) the Utility’s headquarters strategy, including the move to the Lakeside Building, the sale of the SFGO, and the terms of the agreement to lease and the option to purchase the Lakeside Building, is reasonable, (2) all of the net gain on sale of the SFGO will be distributed to customers over five years, beginning in 2022, and (3) the costs associated with the Utility’s move to the Lakeside Building and development will be considered at later stages of the proceeding through a petition for modification of the final decision in the proceeding.
The CPUC issued a final decision approving the purchase agreement and the ratemaking treatment proposed under the parties’ settlement on August 19, 2021, and the sale closed on September 17, 2021. The final decision defers, until the petition for modification, determinations as to the amount of the Utility’s cost recovery in connection with the anticipated purchase of the Lakeside Building and operating and capital expenses related to the transition to the Lakeside Building.
Application for Post-Emergence Securitization Transaction
On April 30, 2020, the Utility filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization for a post-emergence transaction to recover $7.5 billion of 2017 wildfire claims costs through securitization that is designed to be rate neutral to customers, with the proceeds used to pay or reimburse the Utility for the payment of wildfire claims costs associated with 2017 Northern California wildfires. Among other uses, as a result of the proposed transaction, the Utility would retire $6.0 billion of Utility debt. Specifically, the application requested administration of the stress test methodology approved in the CHT OIR and a determination that $7.5 billion in 2017 catastrophic wildfire costs and expenses are stress test costs and eligible for securitization. In this context, a securitization refers to a financing transaction where a special purpose financing vehicle issues new debt that is secured by the proceeds of a new recovery charge to Utility customers. The application also proposed a customer credit designed to equal the bond charges over the life of the bonds, which would insulate customers from the charge on customer bills associated with the bonds.
On April 23, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision finding that $7.5 billion of the Utility’s 2017 catastrophic wildfire costs and expenses are stress test costs that may be financed through the issuance of recovery bonds pursuant to Public Utilities Code sections 850 et seq. and approving a structure for the transaction. As requested, the decision authorizes the Utility to establish a customer credit trust funded by PG&E Corporation’s shareholders, that will provide a monthly credit to customers that is anticipated to equal the securitized charges such that the securitization is designed to be rate neutral to customers. Subject to retention of the CPUC’s existing jurisdiction, the decision adopts a transaction structure comprised of four elements (1) an initial shareholder contribution of $2.0 billion, with $1.0 billion to be contributed in 2022 and $1.0 billion to be contributed in 2024; (2) up to $7.59 billion of additional contributions funded by certain shareholder tax benefits; (3) a single CPUC review of the balance of the customer credit trust in 2040, with a single contingent supplemental shareholder contribution, if needed, up to $775 million in 2040; and (4) sharing with customers 25% of any surplus of shareholder assets in the customer credit trust at the end of the life of the trust. Three parties filed applications for rehearing of the decision on May 3, 2021, and the Utility filed a response to those applications on May 14, 2021. On August 12, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision denying the applications for rehearing.
Separately, on January 6, 2021, the Utility filed an additional application requesting that the CPUC issue a financing order authorizing the issuance of one or more series of recovery bonds in connection with the post-emergence transaction to finance, using securitization, the $7.5 billion of claims associated with the 2017 Northern California wildfires. On May 11, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision granting the Utility’s January 2021 application for a financing order authorizing the issuance of $7.5 billion of recovery bonds in connection with the rate neutral securitization proceeding. Two parties filed applications for rehearing of the financing order, and the Utility filed a response to those applications for rehearing on June 4, 2021. On August 12, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision denying the applications for rehearing.
On September 10, 2021, TURN filed a petition for writ of review of the decision and financing order in state court. Responses to the petition were filed on October 15, 2021. TURN filed a reply in support of the petition on November 9, 2021.
Application for AB 1054 Securitization Transaction
AB 1054 provides that the first $5.0 billion expended in the aggregate by California’s three large electric IOUs on fire risk mitigation capital expenditures included in their respective approved WMPs will be excluded from their respective equity rate bases. The $5.0 billion of capital expenditures has been allocated among the large electric IOUs in accordance with their Wildfire Fund allocation metrics. The Utility’s allocation is $3.21 billion. (See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.) AB 1054 contemplates that such capital expenditures may be financed using a structure that securitizes a dedicated customer charge.
On February 24, 2021 the Utility filed an application with the CPUC seeking authorization for a transaction to finance, using securitization, up to $1.19 billion of fire risk mitigation capital expenditures that were or will be incurred by the Utility in 2020 and 2021, with the final amount to be financed based on recorded 2020 and 2021 Community Wildfire Safety Program capital expenditures incurred by the Utility prior to the securitization transaction.
The application requested that the CPUC issue a financing order authorizing one or more series of recovery bonds, determine that the issuance of the bonds and collection through fixed recovery charges is just and reasonable, consistent with the public interest and would reduce rates on a present value basis compared to traditional utility financing mechanisms, and authorize the Utility to collect a non-bypassable charge sufficient to pay debt service on the recovery bonds.  The application also requested to exclude the securitized debt from the Utility’s ratemaking capital structure and to adjust its 2020 GRC revenue requirement following the issuance of the recovery bonds. 
On June 24, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision granting the Utility’s application and authorizing the Utility to issue up to approximately $1.2 billion of recovery bonds. On July 6, 2021, the financing order became final and non-appealable. On November 12, 2021, PG&E Recovery Funding LLC issued approximately $860 million of senior secured recovery bonds. The recovery bonds were issued in three tranches: (1) approximately $266 million with an interest rate of 1.46% and is due July 15, 2033, (2) approximately $160 million with an interest rate of 2.28% and is due January 15, 2038, and (3) approximately $434 million with an interest rate of 2.82% and is due July 15, 2048.
2020-2022 Wildfire Mitigation Plan
As previously disclosed, on February 7, 2020, the Utility submitted its 2020 WMP and the related utility survey. The Utility’s 2020 WMP describes the Utility’s wildfire safety programs, which are focused on three key areas: reducing the potential for fires to be started by electrical equipment, reducing the potential for fires to spread, and minimizing the frequency, scope and duration of PSPS events, as well as providing historical data. The Utility’s 2020 WMP covers a three-year period from 2020 to 2022 but is updated annually.
The Utility’s 2021 WMP was submitted on February 5, 2021. The 2021 WMP updated the 2020 WMP and addressed the Utility’s wildfire safety programs focused on reducing the potential for catastrophic wildfires related to electrical equipment, reducing the potential for fires to spread and reducing the impact of PSPS events.
On September 22, 2021, OEIS issued a final action statement approving the Utility’s 2021 WMP and on October 21, 2021, the CPUC ratified OEIS’s approval.
In 2021, the Utility notified the CPUC that it had missed inspections and other targets subject to the 2020 WMP. The Utility is undertaking a review of its electric asset inspections. For more information, see “Electric Asset Inspections” below.
On December 16, 2021, the CPUC closed the WMP proceeding, noting that OEIS is now responsible for review and approval of the WMP.
OII to Examine the Late 2019 Public Safety Power Shutoff Events
On November 13, 2019, the CPUC issued an OII to determine “whether California’s IOUs prioritized safety and complied with the CPUC’s regulations and requirements with respect to their PSPS events in late 2019.”
On June 7, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision in the case that found each of the large electric IOUs to be noncompliant with CPUC-required guidelines in certain of their 2019 PSPS events. The decision included a financial remedy and a number of corrective actions. The financial remedy consists of forgoing collection of revenues from customers associated with electricity not sold during future PSPS events until it can be demonstrated that the utilities have made improvements in assessing public harm when determining whether to initiate a PSPS event. The corrective actions involve the Utility’s processes, reporting, and other aspects of its PSPS program. On July 7, 2021, the Acton Town Council filed an application to rehear the decision. Responses to the application for rehearing were filed on July 22, 2021.
Integrated Resource Planning Procurement
On November 13, 2019, the CPUC issued a decision that takes a number of steps to address the potential for system RA shortages beginning in 2021. The decision requires incremental procurement of system-level qualifying RA capacity of 3,300 MWs by all LSEs operating within the CAISO’s balancing area for the period 2021-2023, of which the Utility is responsible for 716.9 MWs for its bundled customer portion. The decision requires that at least 50% of LSE resource responsibilities come online by August 1, 2021, at least 75% by August 1, 2022, and the remaining by August 1, 2023. Additionally, the decision directs the IOUs to act as the backstop procurement agent for CCAs and energy service providers that choose not to voluntarily self-procure or that fail to meet their procurement responsibilities after electing to self-provide their assigned MWs of system RA capacity under the decision.
The Utility procured its required RA capacity for the August 1, 2021 milestone from third parties through CPUC-approved contracts for lithium-ion battery energy storage resources with terms ranging from 10-15 years. On December 22, 2020, the Utility filed an advice letter seeking CPUC approval of an additional group of similar contracts that would satisfy the balance of the Utility’s procurement obligations for the August 1, 2022 and August 1, 2023 milestones. On April 15, 2021, the CPUC approved the contracts.
On June 24, 2021, the CPUC adopted a mid-term reliability decision to address incremental electric system reliability needs between 2024 and 2026 due to, in part, the pending retirements of Diablo Canyon and once-through-cooling natural gas plants in Southern California by requiring at least 11,500 MW of additional net qualifying capacity to be procured by LSEs subject to the CPUC’s integrated resource planning authority. The decision sets procurement requirements of 2,000 MW by 2023, an additional 6,000 MW by 2024, an additional 1,500 MW by 2025, and an additional 2,000 MW by 2026. The decision sets the Utility’s share of the procurement at 2,302 MW of incremental net qualifying capacity.
On January 21, 2022, the Utility filed an advice letter with the CPUC seeking approval of a group of nine long-term RA agreements to meet a portion of its procurement requirements under the CPUC’s mid-term reliability decision. The agreements are each for a term of 15 years and collectively supply 1,598.7 MW of lithium-ion energy storage capacity with some projects expected to be operational in 2023 and others in 2024.
OIR to Further Develop a Risk-Based Decision-Making Framework for Electric and Gas Utilities
On July 20, 2020, the CPUC initiated a rulemaking proceeding to consider ways to strengthen the risk-based decision-making framework that energy utilities use to assess, manage, mitigate and minimize safety risks.
On November 4, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision adopting 32 safety and operational metrics, which can serve as triggering events in the EOEP and requiring the Utility to report on performance against these metrics on a semi-annual basis. The Utility is required to submit the first report by March 31, 2022. The Utility will propose one- and five-year targets for each metric in such report.
OIR to Revisit Net Energy Metering Tariffs
On August 17, 2020, the CPUC initiated a rulemaking proceeding to develop a successor to the existing NEM tariffs. The successor tariff is being developed pursuant to the requirements of AB 327. Under AB 327, the successor to the existing NEM tariffs should provide customer-generators with credit or compensation for electricity generated by their renewable facilities based on the value of that generation to all customers and allow customer-sited renewable generation to grow sustainably among different types of customers.
On December 13, 2021, the CPUC issued a PD that would reduce the compensation for new non-CARE NEM customers by about 80 percent for standalone solar and about 60 percent for solar-paired storage. Commercial customer NEM compensation would be reduced by about 35 percent. Additionally, the PD would reduce the legacy period for existing non-CARE NEM customers from 20 years to 15 years after which such customers would transition to the successor tariff. Comments and reply comments on the PD were filed in January 2022. The PD has not yet been scheduled to be voted on by the CPUC.
OIR to Address Energy Utility Customer Debt Accumulated during the COVID-19 Pandemic
On February 11, 2021, the CPUC initiated a rulemaking proceeding to consider arrearage relief for utility customers with outstanding utility bills when the moratorium on service disconnections ended. The OIR will evaluate a more global program beyond the currently approved arrearage management program focused on low-income residential customers that is funded by the Utility’s customers. The OIR may consider various funding approaches for this expanded debt forgiveness proposal, which could include shareholder funding.
On June 30, 2021, the CPUC issued a final decision directing the Utility and other IOUs to automatically enroll residential customers and small business customers more than 60 days in arrears in payment plans. The decision also extended the moratorium on service disconnections for residential and small business, as well as medium and large commercial and industrial customers, through September 30, 2021.
On November 19, 2021, the CPUC issued a decision authorizing IOUs to allocate payments made on past-due electric utility bills proportionally between utilities and CCAs through September 2024.
Self-Reports to the CPUC
The Utility self-reports certain errors and omissions to the CPUC. The Utility could face penalties, enforcement actions, or other adverse legal or regulatory consequences for these errors or omissions, including under the EOEP. The Utility is unable to predict the likelihood and the amount of potential fines or penalties, if any, related to these matters.
Electric Asset Inspections
The Utility has notified the CPUC of various errors relating to inspections and maintenance of its electric assets or implementation of WMP initiatives. These notices include missed inspections or the inability to locate records evidencing performance of inspections required under CPUC GOs 95 and 165 (including failure to perform inspections in compliance with GO 165 of approximately 55,000 poles in 2020) and errors regarding reporting meeting targets set by the Utility’s 2020 WMP. In these notices, the Utility describes the failures and corrective actions the Utility is taking to remediate these issues and to prevent recurrence in the future. Among other corrective measures, the Utility has developed short-term and longer-term systemic corrective actions to address these errors, including performing enhanced inspections for poles with outdated or incomplete GO 165 inspection records and strengthening the Utility’s asset registry, as well as corrective actions regarding reporting on the progress toward WMP targets.
The Utility continues to evaluate whether there are additional failures to comply with GOs 95 and 165 and the 2020 WMP, beyond those identified in submitted self-reports. The Utility intends to update the CPUC upon completion of its reviews.
On November 21, 2021, the SED issued two citations to the Utility in relation to the Utility’s self-reports. One citation was for incomplete inspections performed on distribution poles as required under GO 165, and the other citation was for the Utility’s failure to adequately inspect a transmission line. The citations resulted in penalties of $2.5 million and $5 million, respectively, which the Utility paid in full on December 22, 2021.
Subsurface Electric Ducts
On October 21, 2021, the Utility notified the CPUC of inconsistent application of the requirements to locate and mark empty subsurface electric ducts in accordance with Government Code section 4216(k), 4216(s) and 4216.3(a)(1)(A).
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY INITIATIVES
Assembly Bill 242
Assembly Bill 242, which was signed into law on September 23, 2021, expanded the definition of a “covered wildfire” from AB 1054 to also include those wildfires determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused by an electrical corporation, and those wildfires asserted to have been caused by an electrical corporation that result in a court-approved dismissal resulting from the settlement of third-party damage claims.
Assembly Bill 135
On July 16, 2021, the California governor approved AB 135, which established the CAPP. CAPP enables the IOUs to apply for a statewide total of approximately $695 million to offset customer arrearages incurred during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Utility received approximately $300 million in January 2022 to reduce the amounts owed by customer accounts in arrears. The amount of funding was determined by the California Department of Community Services and Development, which is the agency responsible for administering the CAPP.
Vaccine Mandates
On September 9, 2021, President Biden issued an EO that would require certain COVID-19 precautions for government contractors and their subcontractors, including mandatory employee vaccination. The requirements under the EO is currently stayed pending the outcome of ongoing litigation. The ultimate implementation of the EO could result in workplace disruptions, employee attrition, and difficulty securing future labor needs.
ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS
The Utility’s operations are subject to extensive federal, state, and local laws and permits relating to the protection of the environment and the safety and health of the Utility’s personnel and the public. These laws and requirements relate to a broad range of the Utility’s activities, including the remediation of hazardous wastes; the reporting and reduction of carbon dioxide and other GHG emissions; the discharge of pollutants into the air, water, and soil; the reporting of safety and reliability measures for natural gas storage facilities; and the transportation, handling, storage, and disposal of spent nuclear fuel. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, “Environmental Regulation” in Item 1. and “Environmental Remediation Contingencies” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
RISK MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES
PG&E Corporation, mainly through its ownership of the Utility, and the Utility are exposed to risks associated with adverse changes in commodity prices, interest rates, and counterparty credit. The Utility actively manages market risk through risk management programs designed to support business objectives, discourage unauthorized risk-taking, reduce commodity cost volatility, and manage cash flows. The Utility uses derivative instruments only for non-trading purposes (i.e., risk mitigation) and not for speculative purposes.
Commodity Price Risk
The Utility is exposed to commodity price risk as a result of its electricity and natural gas procurement activities, including the procurement of natural gas and nuclear fuel necessary for electricity generation and natural gas procurement for core customers. The Utility’s risk management activities include the use of physical and financial instruments such as forward contracts, futures, swaps, options, and other instruments and agreements. As long as the Utility can conclude that it is probable that its reasonably incurred wholesale electricity procurement costs and natural gas costs are recoverable, fluctuations in electricity and natural gas prices do not affect earnings. Such fluctuations, however, may impact cash flows. The Utility’s natural gas transportation and storage costs for core customers are also fully recoverable through a ratemaking mechanism.
The Utility’s current authorized revenue requirement for natural gas transportation and storage service to non-core customers is not balancing account protected. The Utility recovers these costs in its GRC through fixed reservation charges and volumetric charges from long-term contracts, resulting in price and volumetric risk. The Utility uses value-at-risk to measure its shareholders’ exposure to these risks. The Utility’s value-at-risk was approximately $5 million and $14 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. for further discussion of price risk management activities.
Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk sensitivity analysis is used to measure interest rate risk by computing estimated changes in cash flows as a result of assumed changes in market interest rates. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, if interest rates changed by one percent for all PG&E Corporation and Utility variable rate long-term debt, short-term debt, and cash investments, the pre-tax impact on net income over the next 12 months would be $76 million and $89 million, respectively, based on net variable rate debt and other interest rate-sensitive instruments outstanding. See Note 5 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. for further discussion of interest rates.
Energy Procurement Credit Risk
The Utility conducts business with counterparties mainly in the energy industry to purchase electricity or gas and related services, including the CAISO market, other California IOUs, municipal utilities, energy trading companies, pipelines, financial institutions, electricity generation companies, and oil and natural gas production companies located in the United States and Canada. If a counterparty fails to perform on its contractual obligation to deliver electricity or gas and related services, then the Utility may find it necessary to procure electricity or gas at current market prices or seek alternate services, which may be higher than the contract prices.
The Utility manages credit risk associated with its counterparties by assigning credit limits based on evaluations of their financial conditions, net worth, credit ratings, and other credit criteria as deemed appropriate. Credit limits and credit quality are monitored periodically. The Utility executes many energy contracts under master commodity enabling agreements that may require security. Security may be in the form of cash or letters of credit. The Utility may accept other forms of performance assurance in the form of corporate guarantees of acceptable credit quality or other eligible securities (as deemed appropriate by the Utility). Security or performance assurance may be required from the Utility or counterparties when current net receivables/payables and exposure exceed contractually specified limits.
The following table summarizes the Utility’s energy procurement credit risk exposure to its counterparties:
(1) Exposure is the positive exposure maximum that equals mark-to-market value on physically and financially settled contracts, plus net receivables (payables) where netting is contractually allowed minus collateral posted by counterparties and held by the Utility plus collateral posted by the Utility and held by the counterparties. For purposes of this table, parental guarantees are not included as part of the calculation. Exposure amounts reported above do not include adjustments for time value or liquidity.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP involves the use of estimates and assumptions that affect the recorded amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. The accounting policies described below are considered to be critical accounting estimates due, in part, to their complexity and because their application is relevant and material to the financial position and results of operations of PG&E Corporation and the Utility, and because these policies require the use of material judgments and estimates. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates and assumptions. These accounting estimates and their key characteristics are outlined below.
Contributions to the Wildfire Fund
The Wildfire Fund is expected to be capitalized with (i) $10.5 billion of proceeds of bonds supported by a 15-year extension of the Department of Water Resources charge to customers, (ii) $7.5 billion in initial contributions from California’s three large electric IOUs, and (iii) $300 million in annual contributions paid by California’s three large electric IOUs for a 10-year period. The contributions from the IOUs will be effectively borne by their respective shareholders, as they will not be permitted to recover these costs through rates. The costs of the initial and annual contributions are allocated among the IOUs pursuant to a “Wildfire Fund allocation metric” set forth in AB 1054 based on land area in the applicable IOU’s service territory classified as HFTDs and adjusted to account for risk mitigation efforts. The Utility’s Wildfire Fund allocation metric is 64.2% (representing an initial contribution of approximately $4.8 billion and annual contributions of approximately $193 million).
On the Emergence Date, PG&E Corporation and the Utility contributed, in accordance with AB 1054, an initial contribution of approximately $4.8 billion and first annual contribution of approximately $193 million to the Wildfire Fund to secure participation of the Utility therein. The other large electric IOUs made their initial contributions to the Wildfire Fund in September 2019. On December 30, 2020 and 2021, the Utility made its second and third annual contributions of $193 million each to the Wildfire Fund. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have seven remaining annual contributions of $193 million (based on the current Wildfire Fund allocation metric). PG&E Corporation and the Utility account for the contributions to the Wildfire Fund similarly to prepaid insurance with expense being allocated to periods ratably based on an estimated period of coverage.
As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $193 million in Other current liabilities, $1.1 billion in Other non-current liabilities, $461 million in current assets - Wildfire fund asset, and $5.3 billion in non-current assets - Wildfire fund asset in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility recorded amortization and accretion expense of $517 million and $413 million, respectively. The amortization of the asset, accretion of the liability, and acceleration of the amortization of the asset is reflected in Wildfire Fund expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Expected contributions recorded in Wildfire Fund asset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets are discounted to the present value using the 10-year U.S. treasury rate at the date PG&E Corporation and the Utility satisfied all the eligibility requirements to participate in the Wildfire Fund. A useful life of 15 years is being used to amortize the Wildfire Fund asset.
AB 1054 did not specify a period of coverage; therefore, this accounting treatment is subject to significant accounting judgments and estimates. In estimating the period of coverage, PG&E Corporation and the Utility use a Monte Carlo simulation that began with 12 years of historical, publicly available fire-loss data from wildfires caused by electrical equipment, and subsequently plan to add an additional year of data each following year. The period of historic fire-loss data and the effectiveness of mitigation efforts by the California electric utility companies are significant assumptions used to estimate the useful life. These assumptions along with the other assumptions below create a high degree of uncertainty related to the estimated useful life of the Wildfire Fund. The simulation creates annual distributions of potential losses due to fires that could be attributed to the participating electric utilities. Starting with a five-year period of historical data, with average annual statewide claims or settlements of approximately $6.5 billion, compared to approximately $2.9 billion for the 12-year historical data, would have decreased the amortization period to six years. As of December 31, 2021, a 10% change to the assumption around current and future mitigation effort effectiveness would increase the amortization period by three years assuming greater effectiveness and would decrease the amortization period by two years assuming less effectiveness.
Other assumptions used to estimate the useful life include the estimated cost of wildfires caused by other electric utilities, the amount at which wildfire claims would be settled, the likely adjudication of the CPUC in cases of electric utility-caused wildfires and determination of any amounts required to be reimbursed to the Wildfire Fund, the impacts of climate change, the level of future insurance coverage held by the electric utilities, the FERC-allocable portion of loss recovery, and the future transmission and distribution equity rate base growth of other electric utilities. Significant changes in any of these estimates could materially impact the amortization period.
PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate all assumptions quarterly and upon claims being made from the Wildfire Fund for catastrophic wildfires, and the expected life of the Wildfire Fund will be adjusted as required. The Wildfire Fund is available to other participating utilities in California and the amount of claims that a participating utility incurs is not limited to their individual contribution amounts. PG&E Corporation and the Utility assess the Wildfire Fund asset for acceleration of the amortization of the asset in the event that a participating utility’s electrical equipment is found to be the substantial cause of a catastrophic wildfire. Timing of any such acceleration of the amortization of the asset could lag as the emergence of sufficient cause and claims information can take many quarters and could be limited to public disclosure of the participating electric utility, if ignition were to occur outside the Utility’s service territory. There were fires in the Utility’s and other participating utilities’ services territories since July 12, 2019, including fires for which the cause is currently unknown, which may in the future be determined to be covered by the Wildfire Fund. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility recorded $150 million in Other noncurrent assets for Wildfire Fund receivables related to the 2021 Dixie fire and $43 million of accelerated amortization, reflected in Wildfire Fund expense.
For more information, see “Initial and Annual Contributions to the Wildfire Fund Established Pursuant to AB 1054” in Note 3 and “Wildfire Fund under AB 1054” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Loss Contingencies
As discussed below, PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recorded material accruals for various wildfire-related, enforcement and legal matters, and environmental remediation liabilities. PG&E Corporation and the Utility have also recorded insurance receivables for third-party claims.
Wildfire-Related Liabilities
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to potential liabilities related to wildfires. PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a wildfire-related liability when they determine that a loss is probable and they can reasonably estimate the loss or a range of losses. The provision is based on the lower end of the range, unless an amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount.
Potential liabilities related to wildfires depend on various factors, including negotiations and settlements or the cause of each fire, contributing causes of the fires (including alternative potential origins, weather and climate related issues), the number, size and type of structures damaged or destroyed, the contents of such structures and other personal property damage, the number and types of trees damaged or destroyed, attorneys’ fees for claimants, the nature and extent of any personal injuries, including the loss of lives, the extent to which future claims arise, the amount of fire suppression and clean-up costs, other damages the Utility may be responsible for if found negligent, and the amount of any penalties or fines that may be imposed by governmental entities. There are a number of unknown facts and legal considerations that may impact the amount of any potential liability, including the total scope and nature of claims that may be asserted against PG&E Corporation or the Utility. For example, the Utility’s wildfire-related accruals have changed in the past as new facts and information became available to the Utility, including the availability of new evidence and additional information about the scope and nature of damages.
The process for estimating wildfire-related liabilities requires management to exercise significant judgment based on a number of assumptions and subjective factors, including the factors identified above and estimates based on currently available information and prior experience with wildfires. See Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Enforcement and Litigation Matters
PG&E Corporation and the Utility are subject to various laws and regulations and, in the normal course of business, are named as parties in a number of claims and lawsuits. In addition, penalties may be incurred for failure to comply with federal, state, or local laws and regulations. PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a provision for a loss contingency when it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. PG&E Corporation and the Utility evaluate the range of reasonably estimated losses and record a provision based on the lower end of the range, unless an amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount. The assessment of whether a loss is probable or reasonably possible, and whether the loss or a range of loss is estimable, often involves a series of complex judgments about future events. Loss contingencies are reviewed quarterly and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all known information, such as negotiations, discovery, settlements and payments, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and other information and events pertaining to a particular matter. PG&E Corporation’s and the Utility’s provision for loss and expense excludes anticipated legal costs, which are expensed as incurred. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates and assumptions. See Note 14 and “Enforcement and Litigation Matters” in Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Loss Recoveries
PG&E Corporation and the Utility have recovery mechanisms available for wildfire liabilities including from insurance, through rates, and from the Wildfire Fund. The Utility has liability insurance from various insurers, which provides coverage for third-party claims. PG&E Corporation and the Utility record a receivable for a recovery when it is deemed probable that recovery of a recorded loss will occur and they can reasonably estimate the amount or its range. The assessment of whether recovery is probable or reasonably possible, and whether the recovery or a range of recoveries is estimable, often involves a series of complex judgments about future events. Loss recoveries are reviewed quarterly and estimates are adjusted to reflect the impact of all known information, including contractual liability insurance policy coverage, advice of legal counsel, past experience with similar events, conversations with the Wildfire Fund administrators, the CPUC and FERC, and other information and events pertaining to a particular matter. See “Loss Recoveries” in Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
Environmental Remediation Liabilities
The Utility is subject to loss contingencies pursuant to federal and California environmental laws and regulations that in the future may require the Utility to pay for environmental remediation at sites where it has been, or may be, a potentially responsible party. Such contingencies may exist for the remediation of hazardous substances at various potential sites, including former MGP sites, power plant sites, gas compressor stations, and sites used by the Utility for the storage, recycling, or disposal of potentially hazardous materials, even if the Utility did not deposit those substances on the site.
The Utility generally commences the environmental remediation assessment process upon notification from federal or state agencies, or other parties, of a potential site requiring remedial action. (In some instances, the Utility may initiate action to determine its remediation liability for sites that it no longer owns in cooperation with regulatory agencies. For example, the Utility has a program related to certain former MGP sites.) Based on such notification, the Utility completes an assessment of the potential site and evaluates whether it is probable that a remediation liability has been incurred. The Utility records an environmental remediation liability when site assessments indicate remediation is probable and it can reasonably estimate the loss or a range of possible losses. Given the complexities of the legal and regulatory environment and the inherent uncertainties involved in the early stages of a remediation project, the process for estimating remediation liabilities is subjective and requires significant judgment. Key factors evaluated in developing cost estimates include the extent and types of hazardous substances at a potential site, the range of technologies that can be used for remediation, the determination of the Utility’s liability in proportion to other responsible parties, and the extent to which such costs are recoverable from third parties.
When possible, the Utility estimates costs using site-specific information, but also considers historical experience for costs incurred at similar sites depending on the level of information available. Estimated costs are composed of the direct costs of the remediation effort and the costs of compensation for employees who are expected to devote a significant amount of time directly to the remediation effort. These estimated costs include remedial site investigations, remediation actions, operations and maintenance activities, post remediation monitoring, and the costs of technologies that are expected to be approved to remediate the site. Remediation efforts for a particular site generally extend over a period of several years. During this period, the laws governing the remediation process may change, as well as site conditions, thereby possibly affecting the cost of the remediation effort.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Utility’s accruals for undiscounted gross environmental liabilities were $1.3 billion each. The Utility’s undiscounted future costs could increase to as much as $2.2 billion if the extent of contamination or necessary remediation is greater than anticipated or if the other potentially responsible parties are not financially able to contribute to these costs, and could increase further if the Utility chooses to remediate beyond regulatory requirements. Although the Utility has provided for known environmental obligations that are probable and reasonably estimable, estimated costs may vary significantly from actual costs, and the amount of additional future costs may be material to results of operations in the period in which they are recognized.
Regulatory Accounting
As a regulated entity, the Utility records regulatory assets and liabilities for amounts that are deemed probable of recovery from, or refund to, customers. Despite the ongoing losses related to wildfires (see Note 14 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.), there is no actual or anticipated change in the cost of service regulation of the Utility’s operations. Therefore, the Utility continues to apply the accounting ASC 980, Regulated Operations. These amounts would otherwise be recorded to expense or income under GAAP. Refer to “Regulation and Regulated Operations” in Note 3 as well as Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. As of December 31, 2021, PG&E Corporation and the Utility reported regulatory assets (including current regulatory balancing accounts receivable) of $12.7 billion and regulatory liabilities (including current regulatory balancing accounts payable) of $13.8 billion.
Determining probability requires significant judgment by management and includes, but is not limited to, consideration of testimony presented in regulatory hearings, proposed regulatory decisions, final regulatory orders, and the strength or status of applications for rehearing or state court appeals. For some of the Utility’s regulatory assets, including utility retained generation, the Utility has determined that the costs are recoverable based on specific approval from the CPUC. The Utility also records a regulatory asset when a mechanism is in place to recover current expenditures and historical experience indicates that recovery of incurred costs is probable, such as the regulatory assets for pension benefits; deferred income tax; price risk management; and unamortized loss, net of gain, on reacquired debt. If the Utility determined that it is no longer probable that regulatory assets would be recovered or reflected in future rates, or if the Utility ceased to be subject to rate regulation, the regulatory assets would be charged against income in the period in which that determination was made. If regulatory accounting did not apply, the Utility’s future financial results could become more volatile as compared to historical financial results due to the differences in the timing of expense or revenue recognition.
A portion of the Utility's regulatory asset balances relate to items which could not be anticipated by the Utility during CPUC GRC rate requests resulting from catastrophic events, changes in regulation, or extraordinary changes in operating practices. The Utility may seek authority to track incremental costs in a memorandum account and the CPUC may authorize recovery of costs tracked in memorandum accounts if the costs are deemed incremental and prudently incurred. These accounts, which include the CEMA, WEMA, FHPMA, FRMMA, WMPMA, VMBA, WMBA, and RTBA among others, allow the Utility to track the costs associated with work related to disaster and wildfire response, and other wildfire prevention-related costs. In addition, the CPPMA and RUBA accounts track costs incurred to implement the CPUC’s Emergency Authorization and Order Directing Utilities to Implement Emergency Customer Protections to Support California Customers During the COVID-19 Pandemic. While the Utility generally believes such costs are recoverable, rate recovery requires CPUC authorization in separate proceedings or through a GRC. For more information, see “Regulatory Matters - Application for Recovery of Costs Recorded in the Wildfire Expense Memorandum Account” and “Regulatory Matters - Catastrophic Event Memorandum Accounts and Applications” above.
Additionally, SB 901 provides a mechanism for the CPUC to potentially allow recovery in future rates, through a securitization mechanism, of wildfire-related costs found to be just and reasonable by the CPUC and, only for the 2017 Northern California wildfires, any amounts in excess of the CHT. The Utility must evaluate the likelihood of recovery in future rates each period. If the criteria are met at a later date, the Utility would recognize a regulatory asset and a related gain in the consolidated income statement in the period in which it is determined that the likelihood of recovery is probable.
In addition, regulatory accounting standards require recognition of a loss if it becomes probable that capital expenditures will be disallowed for ratemaking purposes and if a reasonable estimate of the amount of the disallowance can be made. Such assessments require significant judgment by management regarding probability of recovery, as described above, and the ultimate cost of construction of capital assets. The Utility records a loss to the extent capital costs are expected to exceed the amount to be recovered. The Utility’s capital forecasts involve a series of complex judgments regarding detailed project plans, estimates included in third-party contracts, historical cost experience for similar projects, permitting requirements, environmental compliance standards, and a variety of other factors.
Asset Retirement Obligations
PG&E Corporation and the Utility account for an ARO at fair value in the period during which the legal obligation is incurred if a reasonable estimate of fair value and its settlement date can be made. At the time of recording an ARO, the associated asset retirement costs are capitalized as part of the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset. The Utility recognizes a regulatory asset or liability for the timing differences between the recognition of expenses and costs recovered through the ratemaking process. See Notes 3 and 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
To estimate its liability, the Utility uses a discounted cash flow model based upon significant estimates and assumptions about future decommissioning costs, inflation rates, and the estimated date of decommissioning. The estimated future cash flows are discounted using a credit-adjusted risk-free rate that reflects the risk associated with the decommissioning obligation.
At December 31, 2021, the Utility’s recorded ARO for the estimated cost of retiring these long-lived assets was approximately $5.3 billion. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the amount of the recorded ARO for these assets.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
PG&E Corporation and the Utility sponsor a non-contributory defined benefit pension plan for eligible employees as well as contributory postretirement health care and medical plans for eligible retirees and their eligible dependents, and non-contributory postretirement life insurance plans for eligible employees and retirees. Adjustments to the pension and other benefit obligation are based on the differences between actuarial assumptions and actual plan results. These amounts are deferred in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and amortized into income on a gradual basis. The differences between pension benefit expense recognized in accordance with GAAP and amounts recognized for ratemaking purposes are recorded as regulatory assets or liabilities as amounts are probable of recovery through rates. To the extent the other benefits are in an overfunded position, the Utility records a regulatory liability. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
The pension and other postretirement benefit obligations are calculated using actuarial models as of the December 31 measurement date. The significant actuarial assumptions used in determining pension and other benefit obligations include the discount rate, the average rate of future compensation increases, the health care cost trend rate and the expected return on plan assets. PG&E Corporation and the Utility review these assumptions on an annual basis and adjust them as necessary. While PG&E Corporation and the Utility believe that the assumptions used are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience, plan changes or amendments, or significant changes in assumptions may materially affect the recorded pension and other postretirement benefit obligations and future plan expenses. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.
In establishing health care cost assumptions, PG&E Corporation and the Utility consider recent cost trends and projections from industry experts. This evaluation suggests that current rates of inflation are expected to continue in the near term. In recognition of continued high inflation in health care costs and given the design of PG&E Corporation’s plans, the assumed health care cost trend rate for 2022 was 6.0%, gradually decreasing to the ultimate trend rate of approximately 4.5% in 2028 and beyond.
Expected rates of return on plan assets were developed by estimating future stock and bond returns and then applying these returns to the target asset allocations of the employee benefit plan trusts, resulting in a weighted average rate of return on plan assets. Returns on fixed-income debt investments were projected based on real maturity and credit spreads added to a long-term inflation rate. Returns on equity investments were projected based on estimates of dividend yield and real earnings growth added to a long-term inflation rate. For the Utility’s defined benefit pension plan, the assumed return of 5.5% compares to a ten-year actual return of 9.6%.
The rate used to discount pension benefits and other benefits was based on a yield curve developed from market data of approximately 817 Aa-grade non-callable bonds at December 31, 2021. This yield curve has discount rates that vary based on the duration of the obligations. The estimated future cash flows for the pension and other postretirement benefit obligations were matched to the corresponding rates on the yield curve to derive a weighted average discount rate.
The following reflects the sensitivity of pension costs and projected benefit obligation to changes in certain actuarial assumptions:
The following reflects the sensitivity of other postretirement benefit costs and accumulated benefit obligation to changes in certain actuarial assumptions:
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 3 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8.