Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes to those financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the “Risk Factors”, “Cautionary Notice Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Description of Business” sections and elsewhere in this annual report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “predict,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. Although we believe the expectations expressed in these forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions within the bound of our knowledge of our business, our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these statements. Factors that could contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the Risk Factors” section of this annual report. We undertake no obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements for any reason even if new information becomes available or other events occur in the future. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results. Readers are urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made throughout the entirety of this annual report, which attempt to advise interested parties of the risks and factors that may affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, and prospects.
Overview
The Company was incorporated as “Alternative Energy & Environmental Solutions, Inc.” in the State of Nevada on June 10, 2010, to develop and license an innovative biotechnology for the environmentally friendly and cost-effective extraction of natural gas (coalbed methane) from low-producing, depleted and abandoned coal mines in the U.S. The Company was not successful in developing this business and discontinued its biotechnology related operations. The Company changed its name in 2014 to Unique Growing Solutions, Inc. and again in 2015 to Point of Care Nano-Technology, Inc.
On February 25, 2015, the Company entered into the License Agreement with Lamina relating to intellectual property for diagnosing illness in humans via a saliva test. During the past few years, the Company did not have the financial resources to pursue business development relating to the Lamina license and this business was discontinued and split off.
The Company’s plan of operation over the next 12 months is to seek and acquire new business assets in the life sciences industry and begin operations with these new assets. To that end, on April 11, 2022, we, through our newly established, wholly owned subsidiary, DSI, acquired an exclusive license from Cedoga to distribute in the USA, Canada and Mexico, certain intellectual property of Cedoga relating to animal nutrition and animal supplements. On April 19, 2022, we, through DSI, signed an exclusive representative and sublicensing agreement with Lucy Pet Products Inc. pursuant to which Lucy has agreed to manufacture, market and distribute on our behalf pet products created from the Cedoga IP. There can be no assurance that we will be successful marketing the Cedoga IP or that Lucy or other sublicensees of the Cedoga IP will be successful in their business development efforts.
Additionally, we can make no guarantees that we will be successful in achieving any of our new operational objectives.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year ended July 31, 2022 compared to the Fiscal Year ended July 30, 2021
Revenues
For the year ended July 31, 2022, we generated $100,000 of revenue from product licenses as compared to $0 revenue of any kind for year ending July 31, 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold
For the years ended July 31, 2022 and July 31, 2021, we did not incur any cost of goods sold expenses from product licenses, maintenance, services or other expenses.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended July 31, 2022, we incurred $90,000 of operating expenses from product licenses, and for the year ending July 31, 2021, we did not incur any operating expenses from product licenses. We incurred administrative expenses of $73,515 for the year ended July 31, 2022 and $7,500 for the year ended July 31, 2021.
Net Other Income (Expense)
For the years ended July 31, 2021 and July 31, 2020, we did not receive any income or incur any expense from other sources.
Liquidity & Capital Resources
At July 31, 2022, we had $3,198 in cash, compared to $0 at July 31, 2021. At July 31, 2022, our accumulated stockholders’ deficit was $120,275,882 compared to $120,212,367 at July 31, 2021. There is substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
We have had no net positive cash flow for the two years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021. In the future, our cash flow will depend on the timely and successful market entry of our expected strategic offerings and our ability to raise capital.
There were no equity transactions in the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021. In 2022, we received into treasury 520,000 shares of common stock in connection with our settlement agreement with the previous director. We are required to issue 300,000 (post-reverse split) shares of our common stock for acquiring a license agreement.
Especially for strategic offerings for paradigm shifting technologies, our management’s budget plan is based on a series of assumptions regarding the amount of capital needed to pursue regulatory approval, market acceptance, readiness and pricing for any new life science product we may acquire. While management’s assumptions are based on market research, assumptions bear the risk of being incorrect and may result in a delay in projects, delays in regulatory approvals and consequently a delay or a reduction in the related strategic offerings. In case these delays have an impact on our liquidity and therefore our ability to support our operations with the necessary cash flow, we expect to depend on our ability to generate cash flow from other resources, such as debt financing from related or independent resources or as equity financing from existing stockholders or through the stock market. There can be no assurances, however, that we will be successful in raising required funding on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
We issued 1,000 shares of series A non-convertible preferred stock to Mr. Nicholas DeVito on August 2, 2021 that gives him 80% voting control of the company.
Plan of Operations
During the remainder of our fiscal year ending July 31, 2023, we will seek to acquire additional strategic assets in the life sciences space. We will need to seek external sources of capital for financing future projects. These sources may also provide the necessary funds to support our ongoing working capital needs. There can be no assurances, however, that we will be able to obtain additional funds or that such funds will be sufficient to permit us to successfully implement our intended business strategy. In the event we are not able to raise funds, our management will have to postpone the acquisition of any new assets until the required financing becomes available. Additionally, our management believes we will need to raise money to support our standard operations for the remainder of the current fiscal year ending July 31, 2023.
Our cash balance as reported in our financial statements is not sufficient to fund our growth plan for any period of time. In order to fully implement our plan of operations for the next 12-month period, we will need to raise a significant amount of capital through future offerings. After the next 12-month period, we most likely will need to raise additional financing as well. The discussion below is based on the assumption that we will be able to raise significant capital in the remainder of our fiscal year ending July 31, 2023. We do not currently have any arrangements for any such financing and there can be no assurances that we will be able to raise the required capital on acceptable terms, if at all.
We have generated minimal revenues to date and, although we expect to raise significant capital in the future, there can be no assurances that we will be successful in these endeavors. We believe that the actions presently being taken to further implement our business plan and generate revenues will provide the opportunity for us to develop into a successful business operation.
We can provide no assurances, however, that we will be able to successfully acquire additional assets or raise sufficient funds in the next six months or longer to continue to execute our plans, to reach or to develop, offer and generate revenues from any of our designated business activities and development actions. Also, we cannot assure you that we will be able to raise additional capital or debt as and when needed on acceptable terms if at all.
Additional Cash Requirements
We expect to incur additional administrative expenses during the next 12 months. We estimate that we will need the following amounts during the next 12 months to cover the indicated administrative expenses:
This capital will be used to build out our corporate infrastructure, to provide for the payment of advisory and accounting services, legal, and anticipated up-listing fees for the OTC Markets, Inc. QB tier. However, there can be no assurance that we will qualify for uplisting to the OTC QB tier or that our application to the OTC QB will be approved. The table above does not include a line item for funds required to acquire or develop life science assets. Any such funds will be in amounts in addition to those listed in the table.
Required funds may be raised through equity financing, debt financing, or other sources, which may result in further dilution in the equity ownership of our shares. There is no assurance that we will be able to generate operations at a level sufficient for an investor to obtain a return on their investment in our common stock, or that we will be able to raise sufficient capital required to implement our business plan on acceptable terms, if at all. Even if we are successful in raising sufficient capital to implement our business plan, we may continue to be unprofitable.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, the more significant of which are as follows:
Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statement include the accounts of the Company and its wholly owned subsidiary Duo Sciences Inc. (“DSI”)
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Changes in estimates are recognized in accordance with the accounting rules for the estimate, which is typically in the period when new information becomes available to management. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Financial Instruments
Financial instruments consist of cash and accounts payable and accrued liabilities. The carrying amounts of the financial instruments approximate their fair values due to their relatively short-term nature of the underlying terms are consistent with market terms. As of the financial statement date, the Company does not hold any derivate financial instruments. Financial assets and liabilities are measured upon first recognition and reviewed at the financial statement date. Changes in fair value are recognized through profit and loss. Unless otherwise noted, it is management’s opinion that the Company is not exposed to significant interest or credit risks arising from these financial instruments.
Fair Value Measurements
The Company follows FASB Codification topic (“ASC”) 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, for all financial instruments and non-financial instruments accounted for at fair value on a recurring basis. This new accounting standard establishes a single definition of fair value and a framework for measuring fair value, sets out a fair value hierarchy to be used to classify the source of information used in fair value measurement and expands disclosures about fair value measurements required under other accounting pronouncements. It does not change existing guidance as to whether or not an instrument is carried at fair value. The Company defines fair value as the price that would be received from selling an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. When determining the fair value measurements for assets and liabilities, which are required to be recorded at fair value, the Company considers the principal or most advantageous market in which the Company would transact and the market-based risk measurements or assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, such as inherent risk, transfer restrictions and credit risk.
The Company has adopted FASB ASC 825, Financial Instruments, which allows companies to choose to measure eligible financial instruments and certain other items at fair value that are not required to be measured at fair value. The Company has not elected the fair value option for any eligible financial instruments.
An asset or liability’s level within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of any input that is significant to the fair value measurement. Availability of observable inputs can vary and is affected by a variety of factors. The Company uses judgment in determining fair value of assets and liabilities, and Level 3 assets and liabilities involve greater judgment than Level 1 and Level 2 assets or liabilities.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC Topic 740”). Under ASC Topic 740, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under ASC 740-10-25, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized. As the Company has yet to produce positive cash flows from operations, no deferred tax asset or income taxes have been recorded in the financial statements.
Comprehensive Income (Loss)
The Company adopted FASB ASC 220, Reporting Comprehensive Income, which establishes standards for the reporting and display of comprehensive income and its components in the financial statements. Comprehensive income consists of net income and other gains and losses affecting stockholder’s equity that are excluded from net income, such as unrealized gains and losses on investments available for sale, foreign currency translation gains and losses and minimum pension liability. Since inception, the Company has not had any comprehensive income / loss.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
FASB ASC 260, Earnings per share, requires dual presentation of basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS) with a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator of the EPS computations. Basic earnings per share amounts are based on the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding. If applicable, diluted earnings per share would assume the conversion, exercise or issuance of all potential common stock instruments such as options, warrants and convertible securities, unless the effect is to reduce a loss or increase earnings per share. Diluted net income (loss) per share on the potential exercise of the equity-based financial instruments is not presented where anti-dilutive. Accordingly, although the diluted weighted average number of common stock outstanding is disclosed on the statements of operation, the calculated net loss per share is the same for bother basic and diluted as both are based on the basic weighted average of common stock outstanding. There were no adjustments required to net income for the period presented in the computation of diluted earnings per share.
Segment Reporting
FASB ASC 820, “Segments Reporting,” establishes standards for reporting information about operating segments on a basis consistent with the Company’s internal organization structure as well as information about geographical areas, business segments and major customers in financial statements. The Company currently operates in one principal business segment.
Intangible assets
Intangible asset are non-monetary identifiable assets, controlled by the Company that will produce future economic benefits, based on reasonable and supportable assumptions about conditions that will exist over the life of the asset. An intangible asset that does not meet these attributes will be recognized as an expense when it is incurred. Intangible assets that do, are capitalized and initially measure at cost. Those with a determinable life will be amortized on a systematic basis over their future economic life. Those with an indefinite useful life shall not be amortized until its useful life is determined to be longer than indefinite. An intangible asset subject to amortization shall be periodically reviewed for impairment. A recoverability test will be performed and, if applicable, unscheduled amortization is considered.
The license agreements has been capitalized, recorded at cost and amortized over its estimated useful life of ten years. Amortization has been determined based on a pro rata basis over the expected cash flows.
Non-cash transactions
The Company follows FASB ASC 845 then recording non-cash transactions. The value of the asset received should be based on the value of the assets surrendered. However, where that value is difficult to determine, then the value could be based on the asset received, provided it is more clearly evident than the value of the asset surrendered.
Related Parties
The Company adopted FASB ASC 850, Related Party Disclosures, for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company adopts new pronouncements relating to generally accepted accounting principles applicable to the Company as they are issued, which may be in advance of their effective date. The Company does not expect the adoption of recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial position, or cash flow.
The financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, the more significant of which are as follows: