ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “Periphas Capital Partnering Corporation,” “Periphas,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Periphas Capital Partnering Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on September 11, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Partnering Transaction”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is PCPC Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on December 9, 2020. On December 14, 2020, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 14,400,000 CAPS™
at $25.00 per CAPS™
, generating gross proceeds of $360.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $4.0 million (net of reimbursement of offering costs of approximately $350,000 from the underwriter). On December 14, 2020, the underwriter exercised the over-allotment option in full, and on December 16, 2020, purchased 2,160,000 additional CAPS™
(the “Over-Allotment CAPS™
”), generating additional gross proceeds of $54.0 million, and incurred additional offering costs of approximately $540,000 in underwriting fees (the “Over-Allotment”).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 224,000 private placement CAPS™
(the “Private Placement CAPS™
”) at a price of $25.00 per CAPS™
to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $5.6 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the Over-Allotment on December 16, 2020, we consummated the second closing of the Private Placement, resulting in the purchase of an aggregate of an additional 21,600 Private Placement CAPS™
at a price of $25.00 per CAPS™
by the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $540,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement on December 14, 2020, $360.0 million ($25.00 per CAPS™
) of the net proceeds of the sale of the CAPS™
in the Initial Public Offering and of the Private Placement CAPS™
in the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and were invested in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and (d)(4) of Rule 2a-7
under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Partnering Transaction and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below. Upon the closing of the Over-Allotment on December 16, 2020, additional net proceeds from the consummation of the Over-Allotment of $54.0 million were placed in the Trust Account, for a total of $414.0 million held in Trust Account.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) of its securities called CAPS™
(“CAPS™
”), although substantially all of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering are intended to be generally applied toward completing a Partnering Transaction. Furthermore, there is no assurance that we will be able to successfully complete a Partnering Transaction.
We will have until December 14, 2022, (or March 14, 2023, if we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for the Partnering Transaction by December 14, 2022) to complete our initial Partnering Transaction (the “Partnering Period”). If we do not complete a Partnering Transaction within this period of time (and stockholders do not approve an amendment to the certificate of incorporation to extend this date), it will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, of $25.00, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (i) and (iii), to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our Initial Public Offering in December 2020, and since the consummation of our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Partnering Transaction. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Partnering Transaction.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $8.6 million, which consisted of approximately a $9.6 million gain from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and a gain on investments held in Trust Account of approximately $90,000, partially offset by approximately $653,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $243,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, and approximately $200,000 in franchise tax expense.
For the period from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $5.2 million which consisted of approximately a $4.8 million loss from changes in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $51,000 in general and administrative expenses, approximately $14,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, approximately $12,000 in franchise tax expense, and approximately $291,000 in financing costs - derivative warrant liabilities, partially offset by a gain on investments held in Trust Account of approximately $1,000.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $0.5 million and working capital of approximately $0.4 million.
Our liquidity needs through the Initial Public Offering had been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain offering costs on our behalf in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares and the Performance Shares (as defined in Note 4), the loan under the Note from the Sponsor of approximately $148,000 (as defined in Note 4) to us, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We fully repaid the Note on December 15, 2020 and borrowing is no longer available. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Partnering Transaction, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (see Note 4). As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of its operations and search for a partner candidate company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15,
“Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have until December 14, 2022 (or March 14, 2023, if we execute a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for the Partnering Transaction by December 14, 2022) to consummate a Partnering Transaction. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Partnering Transaction by this time. If a Partnering Transaction is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Partnering Transaction not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after December 14, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay Administrative Services Agreement fees to our Sponsor that total $20,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred $240,000 in expenses in connection with such services.
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Performance Shares, Forward Purchase Shares, Private Placement Warrants and private placement shares underlying Private Placement CAPSTM
and private placement CAPSTM
that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants that are part of the Private Placement CAPSTM
, and CAPSTM
may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares and the Performance Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring the Company to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the Partnering Transaction. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
The Company’s portfolio of investments is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When the Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When the Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income on investments held in the Trust Account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480. Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 16,560,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the over-allotment option, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have three classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock, Class B common stock, and Class F common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the three classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option) and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 4,201,400 Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per common share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
We issued 4,140,000 warrants to purchase Class A common stock to investors in our Initial Public Offering and Over-Allotment (the “Public Warrants”) and issued 61,400 Private Placement Warrants (the “Private Warrants”). All of its outstanding warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40.
Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants was calculated using an option pricing method and the fair value of the Private Warrants was calculated using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model as of December 14, 2020.
Subsequently, as of December 31, 2021, the fair value of the Private Warrants was calculated using the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model, and the fair value of the Public Warrants has been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as noncurrent liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Recent Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging- Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We early adopted the ASU on January 1, 2021 using the modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Recent Issued Accounting Standards
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.