Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the section titled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described below.
Overview
Our mission is to develop drug products that improve the survival and/or quality of life for patients with high unmet medical need conditions for which few or no treatment options currently exist. We are a clinical-stage development company, not a discovery company, that seeks to identify and develop drugs for patients who need better treatment options. In order to increase the probability of development success, our pipeline only includes drugs which have previously demonstrated some efficacy in the targeted population or a drug with very similar pharmacological properties that has been shown to be effective in the population.
Our screening criteria for identifying and selecting new candidates include:
● addressing an unmet or underserved clinical need,
● having demonstrated evidence of efficacy in humans, and
● leveraging our regulatory science approach to improve the probability for approval.
In many instances, these clinical candidates have significant pre-clinical and clinical data that we may leverage to high value inflection points while de-risking the programs and adding in optionality to potential future indications. Our regulatory science approach developed by our team over decades of work with regulatory authorities attempts to balance the “benefit/risk” equation to identify a regulatory path with higher clinical benefit and/or lower clinical risk with shorter timelines to deliver better treatment options to patients, physicians and caregivers.
Our pipeline includes drugs that (i) already have clinical proof-of-concept data demonstrating the desired pharmacological activity in humans or, minimally, clinical evidence in the form of case studies or clinical experience demonstrating the drug or a similar drug pharmacologically can successfully treat patients with the targeted indication; (ii) target indications for which a single positive pivotal study demonstrating efficacy might provide enough evidence that the clinical benefits of the drug and its approval outweighs the risks associated with the drug or the present standard of care (e.g., some orphan indications, many serious life-threatening conditions, some serious quality of life conditions); and/or (iii) target indications where the prevalence of the condition and the likelihood of patients enrolling in a study meet the desired timeframe to demonstrate that the drug can, at some level, treat or potentially treat patients with the condition.
To advance our mission, we have assembled an experienced and successful development team with a track record of drug approvals and successful exits. Our team is experienced in developing drug products through all principal regulatory tiers from IND enabling studies to NDA submission. The combined scientific, development and regulatory experience of our team members has resulted in more than 30 drug approvals by the FDA, over 100 meetings with the FDA and involvement with more than 50 drug development programs, including drug products targeted to patients who have an unmet medical need. Although we believe that the skills and experience of our team members in drug development and commercialization is an important indicator of our future success, the past successes of our team members in developing and commercializing pharmaceutical products does not guarantee that they will successfully develop and commercialize drugs in our current pipeline. In addition, the growth in revenues of companies at which our executive officers and directors served in was due to many factors and does not guarantee that they will successfully operate or manage us or that we will experience similar growth in revenues, even if they continue to serve as executive officers and/or directors.
Our ability to generate meaningful revenue from any products depends on our ability to out-license the drugs before or after we obtain FDA NDA approval. Even if our products are authorized and approved by the FDA, it should be noted that the products must still meet the challenges of successful marketing, distribution and consumer acceptance.
Our Strategy
Our strategy is to obtain and develop drugs that will not only treat patients with unmet medical need conditions, but, with our regulatory science approach, also have the potential to be more efficiently developed with a greater probability of development success than what typically occurs in the biotech-pharma industry and a better return on investment given lower development costs, more efficient development and high commercial value. Given the prior successes of our regulatory science approach, we have selected drugs for our portfolio which may have greater chance for approval in a population of patients who desperately need better treatment options. We have applied rigorous standards to identify drugs for our portfolio, namely:
i. The drug must represent a treatment option to patients with a high unmet medical need condition by improving survival and/or quality of life for these patients,
ii. The drug or its metabolite or a drug with similar pharmacological properties must have demonstrated some evidence of efficacy in the target population, and
iii. The drug presents opportunities to be developed such that within 2-4 years, critical value-added clinical milestones can be achieved while advancing the drug closer to commercialization and adding to the potential for a high return on investment.
In order to add significant value to our in-licensed drugs within 2 to 4 years, the drugs must be in the clinical development stage and not in discovery stage, and during those 2 to 4 years we must be able to obtain clinical data to support the added value. The additional clinical data could range from a clinical proof-of-concept data to further demonstrate that the proposed pharmacology occurs clinically in the targeted patient population to a pivotal well-designed randomized controlled trial.
Recent Developments
License Agreement with Ocuphire Pharma, Inc. - On June 16, 2021, we executed a License Agreement with Ocuphire Pharma, Inc. (“Ocuphire Agreement”) under which we received a license to research, develop and commercialize PCS3117 (formerly RX-3117) globally, excluding the Republic of Singapore, China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.
Shelf Registration Statement - On June 30, 2021, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which became effective in July 2021. The shelf registration statement permits the offering, issuance and sale of up to $75.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, warrants and/or units in one or more offerings and in any combination of the foregoing.
“At-the-Market” (ATM) Offering - On August 20, 2021, we entered into an equity distribution agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. (the “Sales Agent”) under which we may issue and sell in a registered “at-the-market” offering shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $30.0 million from time to time through or to our Sales Agent under our shelf registration statement (the “ATM Offering”). We expect to use net proceeds from the ATM Offering over time as a source for working capital and general corporate purposes. We are not obligated to make any sales of our common stock under the Sales Agreement and no assurance can be given as to the price or amount of shares that we will sell, or the dates on which any such sales will take place. We will pay the Sales Agent an aggregate of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of the sales price per share of common stock sold through the Sales Agent under the Sales Agreement. The shares under the ATM Offering will be sold and issued pursuant to our S-3 shelf registration statement. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we sold 21,597 shares of our common stock for $174 thousand in net proceeds after paying $5 thousand in commissions to the Sales Agent.
Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC Purchase Agreement - On March 23, 2022, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which Lincoln Park has committed to purchase up to $15.0 million of shares (the “Purchase Shares”) of our common stock, $0.0001 par value per share (“Common Stock”), subject to the terms and conditions in the Purchase Agreement. We issued 123,609 shares of common stock (valued at $450,000) to Lincoln Park as a commitment fee in connection with entering into the Purchase Agreement and agreed to reimburse Lincoln Park $25,000 for fees incurred in connection with the Purchase Agreement. Concurrently with entering into the Purchase Agreement, we also entered into a registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park (the “Registration Rights Agreement”), pursuant to which we agreed to take certain actions relating to the registration under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, of the offer and sale of the shares of common stock available for issuance under the Purchase Agreement. See Note 14 for additional details concerning the Purchase Agreement.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to create uncertainties in the expected timelines for clinical stage biopharmaceutical companies such as ours, including causing delays in clinical trials and disruptions in the supply chain for raw materials used in clinical trial work. We have experienced delays in the enrollment of patients in our PCS499 Phase 2B trial due to COVID-19. Potential patients have died from COVID-19 prior to screening and continue to be reluctant to travel to our testing sites for fear of contracting COVID-19. Delays in enrollment lengthen the time of studies and increase their costs. While we are hopeful the infection rate of COVID-19 will continue to decline, we cannot predict the future impact COVID-19 will have on our current and future clinical trials. Continued delays could materially impact our business in future periods and further extend our timelines.
For more information on the risks associated with COVID-19, refer to Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” herein.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our operations loss during the periods indicated:
Revenues.
We had no revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We do not currently have any revenue under contract or any immediate sales prospects.
Research and Development Expenses.
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses include (i) amortization of the exclusive PCS499 license intangible asset used in research and development activities, (ii) program and testing related expenses including external consulting and professional fees related to the product testing and our development activities, and (iii) internal research and development staff related salaries and other payroll costs including stock-based compensation, payroll taxes and employee benefits. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services to be used in future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and expensed when the research and development activities are performed.
Research and development costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our research and development expenses increased by $3,705,636 to $6,878,021 when compared to $3,172,385 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in preclinical, clinical trial and other costs of $3,199,125, which are attributable to expenses we incurred as we commenced our Phase 2B clinical trial for PCS499, Phase 1B clinical trial for PCS6422 and for pre-IND costs for PCS12852. Expenses included payments to contract research organizations, for regulatory filings and maintenance fees, drug product testing and stability, consulting and other clinical fees. During the same period in 2020, we were completing the patient portion of our Phase 2A clinical trial for PCS499 and incurring regulatory filing and consulting fees as we prepared for our meeting with the FDA. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced increases in payroll and related costs of $511,351 resulting from hiring additional development personnel and increased employee salary rates, when compared to the same period in 2020. These increases were offset by a decrease of $4,840 in amortization expense, as the capitalized software was fully amortized during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We anticipate our research and development costs to continue to increase significantly in 2022 as we: (i) continue our clinical trials for PCS499 and PCS6422 and begin our clinical trial for PCS12852, including the cost of having drug product manufactured; (ii) complete a biomarker assay for PCS3117; and (iii) obtain IND enabling data for PCS11T.
The funding necessary to bring a drug candidate to market is subject to numerous uncertainties. Once a drug candidate is identified, the further development of that drug candidate may be halted or abandoned at any time due to a number of factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, funding constraints, safety or a change in market demand. For each of our drug candidate programs, we periodically assess the scientific progress and merits of the programs to determine if continued research and development is economically viable. Some programs may be terminated due to the lack of scientific progress and lack of prospects for ultimate commercialization. As noted above, we anticipate our research and development costs to increase in the future as we conduct the Phase 2B trial to evaluate the ability of PCS499 to completely close ulcers in patients with NL and to continue with an amended Phase 1B clinical trial for PCS6422. On May 19, 2021, we dosed the first patient in our PCS499 randomized, placebo-controlled trial, but have experienced delays in patient enrollment; and while we dosed the first patient in our PCS6422 trial on August 2, 2021, we submitted a modified Phase 1B trial protocol in February 2022 to determine the maximum tolerated dose of capecitabine and provide us with data on the timeline of DPD inhibition and de novo formation. We expect to restart the PCS6422 Phase 1B trial in the second quarter of 2022.
Our clinical trial cost accruals are based on estimates of patient enrollment and related costs at clinical investigator sites, as well as estimates for the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf.
We estimate preclinical and clinical trial expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions and clinical research organizations that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of patient enrollment and activity expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the receipt of the related series are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
Acquisition of In-Process Research and Development.
In connection with the Ocuphire Agreement, we recorded $566,583 of acquired in-process research and development expense in 2021. The total acquisition cost includes the issuance of 44,689 shares (with a fair value of $300,000) of our common stock we issued to Ocuphire, a cash payment of $200,000 and $66,583 in expenses we agreed to pay on behalf of Ocuphire. During the same period in 2020, we recorded $8.7 million of acquired in-process research and development expense in connection with our license agreements with Yuhan, Aposense and Elion. We believe the in-process research and development assets acquired have no alternative future use.
General and Administrative Expenses.
Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1,424,465 to $4,688,939 when compared to $3,264,474 for the same period in 2020. The majority of the increase was due to increased professional and other consulting fees of $1,086,673 (which includes a $620,793 increase of fees paid in stock compensation); increased payroll and related costs of $174,115 from hiring additional personnel, increased salary rates and health insurance premiums; and a $110,410 increase in employee stock-based compensation. We also experienced an increase in our insurance of $116,024, mostly due to increased insurance premiums; an increase in office and repairs and maintenance expenses of $113,465 as we purchased new/replacement computers for our new and existing employees and replaced outdated hardware and old cabling in the office; and an increase of $10,825 in other miscellaneous expenses. These increased expenses were offset by decreases in depreciation, equipment rent, taxes and travel of $179,724. We share office space with CorLyst, a related party, and during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, they reimbursed us $126,324 and $119,001, respectively, for rent and other costs we incurred on their behalf.
We expect the general and administrative expenses to continue to increase as we add staff to support our growing research and development activities and the administration required to operate as a public company.
Other Income and (Expense)
Net other income and (expense) was $175,398 and ($277,948) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During 2021, we recognized $163,771 as other income for the principal amount and related accrued interest related to the forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program loan. Interest income represents interest earned on money market funds. Interest expense in 2021 was related to our Paycheck Protection Program loan while interest expense in 2020 was related to our $805,000 8% Senior Notes sold in 2019 and 2020 and borrowings on a related party LOC. Included in interest expense is the amortization of debt issuance costs totaling $199,900 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Benefit.
An income tax benefit of $530,611 and $1,001,019 was recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. A deferred tax liability was created as a result of our acquisition of CoNCERT’s license and “Know-How” in exchange for Processa stock that had been issued in the Internal Revenue Code Section 351 transaction on March 19, 2018. The Section 351 transaction treated the acquisition of the Know-How for stock as a tax-free exchange. As a result, under ASC 740-10-25-51 Income Taxes, Processa recorded a deferred tax liability of $3,037,147 for the acquired temporary difference between the financial reporting basis of $11,038,929 and the tax basis of $1,782. The deferred tax liability will be reduced for the effect of the non-deductibility of the amortization of the intangible asset and may be offset by the deferred tax assets resulting from net operating tax losses (see Note 4 - Income Taxes). This offset results in the recognition of a deferred tax benefit shown in the consolidated statements of operations.
Liquidity
At December 31, 2021 we had $16.5 million in cash and cash equivalents.
On February 24, 2021, we closed a private placement for the sale of 1,321,132 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $7.75 per share to accredited and institutional investors for gross proceeds of $10.2 million. Net proceeds from the offering were $9.9 million. We also completed an underwritten public offering in late 2020 where we raised net proceeds from the offering of approximately $17.1 million.
On August 20, 2021, we entered into the Sales Agreement under which we may issue and sell shares of our common stock in a registered ATM Offering having an aggregate offering price of up to $30.0 million from time to time through or to our Sales Agent. We expect to use net proceeds from the ATM Offering over time as a source for working capital and general corporate purposes. We are not obligated to make any sales of our common stock under the Sales Agreement and no assurance can be given as to the price or amount of shares that we will sell, or the dates on which any such sales will take place. We will pay the Sales Agent an aggregate of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of the sales price per share of common stock sold through the Sales Agent under the Sales Agreement. The shares under the ATM Offering will be sold and issued pursuant to our S-3 shelf registration statement. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we sold 21,597 shares of common stock under the ATM Offering for net proceeds of $174 thousand. We have not yet sold any shares under the ATM Offering in 2022.
On March 23, 2022, we entered into a Purchase Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) under which we have the right, but not the obligation, to sell to Lincoln Park, and Lincoln Park is obligated to purchase up to $15,000,000 of our shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, subject to the terms and conditions in the Purchase Agreement, during the term of the Purchase Agreement as more fully described in Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We have incurred losses and net cash used in our operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, which we expect to continue for the foreseeable future. We do not currently nor have since our inception had any sales. We have incurred losses since our inception, devoting substantially all of our efforts toward research and development, and have an accumulated deficit of approximately $36.8 million at December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated a net loss of approximately $11.4 million, of which $4.5 million are non-cash expenses. Based on our current plans, we believe our current cash balance is adequate for at least the next twelve months without considering amounts available from the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement or potential sales under our ATM Offering. Our ability to execute our longer-term operating plans, including unplanned future clinical trials for our portfolio of drugs depend on our ability to obtain additional funding from the sale of equity and/or debt securities, a strategic transaction or other funding transactions. We plan to continue to actively pursue financing alternatives, but there can be no assurance that we will obtain the necessary funding in the future when necessary.
Our estimate of future cash needs is based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available cash sooner than we currently expect. Our ultimate success depends on the outcome of our planned clinical trials and our research and development activities, as disclosed above. We expect to incur additional losses in the future, and we will need to raise additional capital to fully implement our business plan if the cost of our clinical trials are greater than we expect, or they take longer than anticipated. We also expect to incur increased general and administrative expenses in the future. We also plan to develop a biomarker assay for PCS3117 and obtain IND enabling data for PCS11T. In addition, there may be costs we incur as we develop these drug products that we do not currently anticipate requiring us to need additional capital sooner than currently expected.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the cost of clinical trials for PCS499, PCS6422 and PCS12852, and the cost of third-party manufacturing;
● the cost of developing the biomarker assay and clinical trials for PCS3117;
● the delays in patient enrollment due to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of drug manufacturing, pre-clinical studies, and clinical trials of PCS11T and any other future product candidates;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
● the outcome, timing, and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
● the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our pre-clinical and clinical activities increase;
● the emergence of competing therapies and other adverse market developments;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, expanding, defending, and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
● the extent to which we in-license or acquire other products and technologies; and
● the costs of operating as a public company.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our capital requirements, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and licensing arrangements or other capital sources. We also have an effective S-3 shelf registration statement on file with the SEC, which provides us flexibility and optionality to raise capital, including pursuant to the ATM Offering and the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement, but there can be no assurance that capital will continue to be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities
We used net cash in our operating activities of $8,717,291 and $3,143,196 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the comparable period in 2020 was primarily related to costs we incurred related to our Phase 2B clinical study for PCS499, Phase 1B clinical study for PCS6422, pre-clinical costs for PCS12852, as well as increased professional fees and salaries. Our prepaid expenses increased by $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to deposits paid to our CROs for clinical trial related costs. Of this amount, $186,491 represents deferred offering costs which impacted net cash provided by financing activities. As a result, the change in prepaid expenses impacting net cash used in operating activities is $1.0 million.
As we continue our clinical trials for PCS499 and PCS6422, begin a Phase 2A clinical trial for PCS12852, and continue to evaluate and develop the other drugs in our portfolio, we anticipate our research and development efforts and ongoing general and administrative costs will continue to generate negative cash flows from operating activities for the foreseeable future. We expect these amounts to increase in the future.
Net cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $9,875,550 in net proceeds from our February 2021 private placement transaction and $173,987 in net proceeds from the sale of 21,597 shares of our common stock under our ATM Offering. We incurred $186,941 in expenses related to our ATM Offering, $186,493 of which we have capitalized and will amortize as we sell additional shares under our ATM Offering.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $17,867,884 ($17.1 million in net proceeds) was from our 2020 underwritten public offering, borrowings totaling $700,000 under a related-party LOC Agreement, and $162,459 we received from the Bank of America pursuant to a promissory note under the Paycheck Protection Program.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021:
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, clinical supply manufacturers and vendors for pre-clinical studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and, therefore, are cancelable contracts and not included in the table above.
We have also entered into license and collaboration agreements with third parties, which are in the normal course of business. We have not included future payments under these agreements in the table of contractual obligations above since obligations under these agreements are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, or royalties on net product sales
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are most critical to aid in understanding and evaluating our financial results reported in our consolidated financial statements.
Valuation of Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets consist of the capitalized costs of $20,500 for a software license and $11,038,929 associated with the exercise of the option to acquire the exclusive license from CoNCERT related to patent rights and Know-How to develop and commercialize compounds and products for PCS499 and each metabolite thereof and the related income tax effects. The capitalized costs for the license rights to PCS499, in addition to the fair value of the common stock issued, also includes $1,782 in transaction costs and $3,037,147 associated with the initial recognition of an offsetting deferred tax liability related to the acquired temporary difference for an asset purchased that is not a business combination and has a nominal tax basis in accordance with ASC 740-10-25-51 Income Taxes. In accordance with ASC Topic 730, Research and Development, we capitalized the costs of acquiring the exclusive license rights to PCS499 as the exclusive license rights represent intangible assets to be used in research and development activities that have future alternative uses.
We used a market approach to estimate the fair value of the common stock issued to CoNCERT in this transaction. Our estimate was based on the final negotiated number of shares of stock issued and the volume weighted average market price over a 45-day period preceding the mid-February 2018 finalized negotiation of the modification to the option and license agreement with CoNCERT. We believe the fair values used to record intangible assets acquired in this transaction are based upon reasonable estimates and assumptions given the facts and circumstances as of the related valuation dates.
We determined our intangible assets to have finite useful lives and review them for impairment when facts or circumstances suggest that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable.
Clinical Trial Accruals / Research and Development
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, CROs and consultants and under clinical site agreements related to conducting our clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts vary and may result in payment flows that do not match the period over which materials or services are provided under such contracts.
Our clinical trial accruals are based on estimates of patient enrollment and related costs at clinical investigator sites as well as estimates for the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. During a clinical trial, we will adjust the clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from estimates. We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are partially dependent on the accurate reporting by the CRO and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect estimates to differ materially from actual amounts, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that may be too high or too low for any reporting period.
Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the receipt of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered. We expense research and development costs as they are incurred.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense is based on the grant-date fair value estimated in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. We expense stock-based compensation over the requisite service period based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Stock-based awards with graded-vesting schedules are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the award. No expense is recognized for stock-based awards with performance-vesting conditions until management believes it is probable the performance-vesting condition will be met. We value restricted stock awards (RSAs) and restricted stock units (RSUs) based on the closing share price on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of stock option and warrant grants using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent management’s best estimates and involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. We account for forfeitures in the period in which they occur, rather than estimate expected forfeitures.
See Note 5 - Stock-Based Compensation for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
All stock-based compensation costs are recorded in general and administrative or research and development costs in the consolidated statements of operations based upon the underlying individual’s role.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes. Under the asset and liability method, deferred income taxes are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the year in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect of changes in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period such changes are enacted. A valuation allowance is provided against net deferred tax assets if recoverability is uncertain on a more likely than not basis. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have established a valuation allowance to offset certain deferred tax assets.
We recognize the impact of an uncertain tax position if the position will more likely than not be sustained upon examination by a taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position. Our policy is to record interest and penalties related to income taxes as part of its income tax provision. As of December 31, 2021, we had no unrecognized tax benefits and as such, no liability, interest or penalties were required to be recorded. We do not expect this to change significantly in the next twelve months.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements for new accounting pronouncements or changes to the recent accounting pronouncements during the year ended December 31, 2021.