Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
General
This section is intended to help investors understand the consolidated financial performance of PCSB Financial through a discussion of the factors affecting our financial condition at June 30, 2022 and 2021 and our results of operations for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. This section should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes to the consolidated financial statements contained in this annual report.
Overview
Income. Our primary source of income is net interest and dividend income. Net interest and dividend income is the difference between interest and dividend income, which is the income that we earn on our loans and investments, and interest expense, which is the interest that we pay on our deposits and borrowings. Other sources of income include earnings from customer service fees (mostly from service charges on deposit accounts), bank-owned life insurance and gains on the sale of securities.
Provision for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level representing management’s best estimate of probable incurred losses in the loan portfolio, based upon management’s evaluation of the portfolio’s collectability. The allowance is established through the provision for loan losses, which is charged against income. Charge-offs are charged to the allowance. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Allocation of the allowance may be made for specific loans or pools of loans, but the entire allowance is available for the entire loan portfolio.
Expenses. The noninterest expenses we incur in operating our business consist of salaries and employee benefits, occupancy and equipment, data processing, federal deposit insurance, merger-related expenses and other general and administrative expenses.
Salaries and employee benefits consist primarily of salaries and wages paid to our employees, payroll taxes, and expenses for health insurance, retirement plans, stock-based compensation and other employee benefits.
Occupancy and equipment expenses, which are the fixed and variable costs of buildings and equipment, consist primarily of depreciation charges, rental expenses, furniture and equipment expenses, maintenance, real estate taxes and costs of utilities. Depreciation of premises and equipment is computed using a straight-line method based on the estimated useful lives of the related assets or the expected lease terms, if shorter. Data processing expenses are the fees we pay to third parties for the use of their software and for processing customer information, deposits and loans.
Federal deposit insurance premiums are payments we make to the FDIC for insurance of our deposit accounts.
Other expenses include expenses for professional services, advertising, office supplies, postage, telephone, insurance and other miscellaneous operating expenses.
Merger-related expenses consist primarily of professional services as well as other miscellaneous expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies
A summary of our accounting policies is described in Note 1 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical accounting estimates are necessary in the application of certain accounting policies and procedures and are particularly susceptible to significant change. Critical accounting policies are defined as those involving significant judgments and assumptions by management that could have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes that the most critical accounting policies, which involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments, are as follows:
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred loan losses. The allowance for loan losses is increased by provisions for loan losses charged to income. Losses are charged to the allowance for loan losses when all or a portion of a loan is deemed to be uncollectible. Recoveries of loans previously charged off are credited to the allowance when realized. See Note 4 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete discussion of the allowance for loan losses.
Selected Financial Data
The summary information presented below at or for each of the fiscal years presented is derived in part from and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements of the Company presented in Item 8.
(1)Noninterest expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 includes $1.3 million of merger-related expenses.
(2)In connection with the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the Company recorded a $1.6 million charge to income tax expense for the year ended June 30, 2018, primarily reflecting a write-down of our deferred tax asset resulting from a decrease in the federal corporate income tax rate from 34% to 21%.
(1)Represents net income divided by average total assets.
(2)Represents net income divided by average equity.
(3)Represents tax-equivalent net interest income as a percent of average interest-earning assets.
(4)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of this measure.
(5)Dividends declared per share divided by net income per share.
(6)Represents average equity divided by average total assets.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Their Reconciliation with GAAP Financial Measures
Using non-GAAP financial measures can help investors in providing a more meaningful picture of the Company’s performance and value. It can also provide additional insight into Company’s business beyond that found in the Financial Statements.
We identify “efficiency ratio” and “tangible book value per common share” as non-GAAP financial measures. In accordance with the SEC’s rules, we classify a financial measure as being a non-GAAP financial measure if that financial measure excludes or includes amounts, or is subject to adjustments that have the effect of excluding or including amounts, in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures do not include operating and other statistical measures or ratios, or statistical measures calculated using exclusively either financial
measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, operating measures or other measure that are not non-GAAP financial measures or both.
The non-GAAP financial measures that we discuss in this annual report should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the most directly comparable or other financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Tangible book value per common share is a non-GAAP measure and equals total shareholders’ equity, less goodwill and other intangible assets, divided by shares outstanding. We believe this disclosure may be meaningful to those investors who seek to evaluate our equity without giving effect to goodwill and other intangible assets.
Tax equivalent net interest income is a non-GAAP measure and equals net interest income plus income tax benefits arising from income earned on loans and securities exempt from federal, state, and/or local taxes. We believe this disclosure may be meaningful to those investors who seek to evaluate our net interest income.
Loan Portfolio
General. Loans are our primary interest-earning asset. At June 30, 2022, net loans represented 66.8% of our total assets. The following tables set forth certain information about our loan portfolio.
Loan Portfolio Analysis. The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan at the dates indicated.
Loan Maturity. The following table sets forth certain information at June 30, 2022 regarding the dollar amount of loan maturities for the periods indicated. The table does not include scheduled amortization or any estimate of prepayments that significantly shorten the average loan life and may cause actual repayment experience to differ from that shown below.
The following table sets forth the amount of loans at June 30, 2022 that are due after June 30, 2023 and have either fixed interest rates or floating or adjustable interest rates.
Loan Originations, Purchases and Sales. Loan originations come from a variety of sources. The primary sources of loan originations are current customers, business development by our relationship managers, walk-in traffic, referrals from customers, and other professionals. We generally originate loans for our portfolio rather than for sale in the secondary market.
We occasionally purchase whole loans and loan participation interests from other financial institutions, which consist of interests in commercial mortgage loans, multi-family mortgage loans and residential mortgage loans, primarily in our market area. At June 30, 2022, we had $168.0 million in purchased whole loan and participation interests.
Asset Quality
Credit Risk Management. Our strategy for credit risk management focuses on having well-defined credit policies and uniform underwriting criteria and providing prompt attention to potential problem loans. Management of asset quality is accomplished by internal controls, monitoring and reporting of key risk indicators, and both internal and independent third-party loan reviews. The primary objective of our loan review process is to measure borrower performance and assess risk for the purpose of identifying loan weakness in order to minimize loan loss exposure. From the time of loan origination through final repayment, the borrowers on individual commercial real estate, construction and land development and commercial business loans are assigned a risk rating, including a collateral rating, based on pre-determined criteria and levels of risk. The borrower and collateral risk ratings are generally monitored annually, or more frequently should we become aware of a material adverse change in the borrower’s condition, and may change during the life of the loan as appropriate.
Internal and independent third-party loan reviews vary by loan type, as well as the nature and complexity of the loan. Depending on the size and complexity of the loan, some loans may warrant detailed individual review, while other loans may have less risk based upon size or be of a homogeneous nature reducing the need for detailed individual analysis. Assets with these characteristics, such as consumer loans and loans secured by residential real estate, may be reviewed on the basis of risk indicators such as delinquency or credit rating. In cases of significant concern, a total re-evaluation of the loan and associated risks are documented by completing a loan risk assessment and action plan. Some loans may be re-evaluated in terms of their fair market value or net realizable value in order to determine the likelihood of potential loss exposure and, consequently, the adequacy of specific and general loan loss reserves.
When a borrower fails to make a required loan payment, we take a number of steps to have the borrower cure the delinquency and restore the loan to current status, including contacting the borrower by letter and phone at regular intervals. When the borrower is in default, we may commence collection proceedings. If a foreclosure action is instituted and the loan is not brought current, paid in full, or refinanced before the foreclosure sale, the real property securing the loan generally is sold at foreclosure. Management informs the Loan Committee of the Board of Directors monthly of the amount of loans delinquent more than 30 days and the Board of Directors monthly of the amount of loans delinquent 90 days or more.
Delinquent Loans. The following table sets forth our loan delinquencies, including non-accrual loans, by type and amount at the dates indicated.
Real estate that we acquire as a result of foreclosure or by deed-in-lieu of foreclosure is classified as foreclosed real estate until it is sold. When property is acquired, it is initially recorded at the fair value less costs to sell at the date of foreclosure, establishing a new cost basis. Holding costs and declines in fair value after acquisition of the property result in charges against income.
The following table sets forth information regarding our non-performing assets at the dates indicated. This table excludes $1.2 million of loans modified in troubled debt restructurings that are accruing interest.
Interest income that would have been recorded for the year ended June 30, 2022 had non-accruing loans been current according to their original terms, amounted to $342,000.
Potential Problem Loans. Certain loans are identified during our loan review process that are currently performing according to their contractual terms and we expect to receive payment in full of principal and interest, but it is deemed probable that we will be unable to collect all the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. This may result from deteriorating conditions such as cash flows, collateral values or creditworthiness of the borrower.
Other potential problem loans are those loans that are currently performing, but where known information about possible credit problems of the borrowers causes us to have concerns as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with contractual loan repayment terms. These loans include non-impaired classified loans. At June 30, 2022, other potential problem loans totaled $7.0 million.
Classified Assets. The following table sets forth information regarding our classified assets, as defined under applicable regulatory standards, at the dates indicated.
Troubled Debt Restructurings. The Company may choose to modify the terms of certain loans where the modification qualifies as troubled debt restructurings as a result of the borrower experiencing financial difficulty and/or the Company providing a more than insignificant concession to the borrower that it would not otherwise consider. In order to determine whether a borrower is experiencing financial difficulty, an evaluation is performed of the probability that the borrower will be in payment default on any of its debt in the foreseeable future without the modification. This evaluation is performed under the Company’s internal underwriting policy. The modification of the terms of such loans qualifying as a concession by the Company may include one or a combination of the following: a reduction of the stated interest rate of the loan; an extension of the maturity date at a stated rate of interest lower than the current market rate for new debt with similar
risk; or a permanent reduction of the recorded investment in the loan. As of June 30, 2022, the Company had 9 loans classified as troubled debt restructurings totaling $1.4 million.
COVID-19 Related Loan Payment Deferrals. The COVID-19 pandemic has created extensive disruptions to the local economy and our customers. In accordance with emergency regulations promulgated by New York State Department of Financial Services, financial institutions are required to provide payment accommodations, which may include payment deferrals, to any consumer or small business who can demonstrate financial hardship caused by COVID-19. Throughout the pandemic and through June 30, 2022, the Company has granted loan payment deferrals for 114 residential mortgage loans and home equity lines of credit totaling $32.1 million, as well as deferrals for 217 commercial mortgage, commercial loan and construction loans totaling $188.2 million. As of June 30, 2022 there were no loans remaining on deferral, compared to 19 loans totaling $27.3 million as of June 30, 2021.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at levels considered adequate by management to provide for probable incurred loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the consolidated balance sheet reporting dates. The allowance for loan losses is based on management’s assessment of various factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, delinquent and non-accrual loans, national and local business conditions, loss experience and an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral.
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses for the years indicated.
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses. The following tables set forth the allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in other categories.
See Note 4 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete discussion of the allowance for loan losses. Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may be necessary and our results of operations could be adversely affected if circumstances differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the determinations. Furthermore, while we believe we have established our allowance for loan losses in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, there can be no assurance that regulators, in reviewing our loan portfolio, will not require us to increase our allowance for loan losses. In addition, because future events affecting borrowers and collateral cannot be predicted with certainty, there can be no assurance that the existing allowance for loan losses is adequate or that increases will not be necessary should the quality of any loans deteriorate as a result of the factors discussed above. Any material increase in the allowance for loan losses may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Securities Portfolio
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and estimated fair value of our held to maturity and available for sale securities portfolios at the dates indicated.
At June 30, 2022, we had no investments in a single issuer, other than securities issued by the U.S. government and government agencies, which had an aggregate book value in excess of 10% of our shareholders’ equity.
Securities Portfolio Maturities and Yields. The following table sets forth the stated maturities and weighted average yields of investment securities at June 30, 2022. The table does not include any estimate of principal payments or prepayments that significantly shorten the average life of mortgage-backed securities. Certain mortgage-backed securities, corporate and other debt securities have adjustable interest rates and will reprice periodically within the various maturity ranges. These repricing schedules are not reflected in the following table. Weighted average yield calculations on investment securities available for sale do not give effect to changes in fair value that are reflected as a component of equity. At June 30, 2022, we did not have any investments in any private-label collateralized mortgage obligations.
Other-than-temporary Impairment. Each reporting period, we evaluate all securities with a decline in fair value below the amortized cost of the investment to determine whether or not the impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary. Other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) is required to be recognized if (1) we intend to sell the security; (2) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis; or (3) for debt securities, the present value of expected cash flows is not sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis. For impaired debt securities that we intend to sell, or more likely than not will be required to sell, the full amount of the depreciation is recognized as OTTI, resulting in a realized loss that is charged to earnings through a reduction in our noninterest income. For all other impaired debt securities, credit-related OTTI is recognized through earnings and non-credit related OTTI is recognized in other comprehensive income/loss, net of applicable taxes. We did not recognize any OTTI during the years ended June 30, 2022 or 2021.
Deposits
Deposits have traditionally been our primary source of funds for our lending and investment activities. The substantial majority of our deposits are from depositors who reside in our primary market area. Deposits are attracted through the offering of a broad selection of deposit instruments for both individuals and businesses. The following table sets forth the distribution of total deposits by account type at the dates indicated.
Deposits of local governments held by PCSB Bank were $127.5 million and $74.4 million at June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Additionally, as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, deposits included brokered time deposits of $20.0 million and $30.0 million, respectively. At June 30, 2022, brokered time deposits had remaining maturities of 20 months.
At June 30, 2022, the aggregate amount of all uninsured deposits (the portion of deposit accounts that exceed the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 per accountholder) was $436.1 million. At June 30, 2022, the aggregate amount of all uninsured time deposits was $43.6 million. At June 30, 2022, there were no time deposits that were uninsured for any reason other than being in excess of the FDIC limit.
The following table sets forth, by time remaining until maturity, the uninsured time deposits, that exceed the FDIC insurance limit of $250,000 per account, at June 30, 2022 (in thousands).
The following table sets forth time deposit accounts classified by rate and maturity at June 30, 2022.
Borrowings
We primarily utilize advances from the FHLBNY to supplement our supply of investable funds. At June 30, 2022 we had the ability to borrow up to $280.9 million from the FHLBNY, of which $48.3 million was outstanding as of June 30, 2022. Additionally, as of June 30, 2022, we had an available line of credit with the FRBNY’s discount window program of
$96.3 million as well as $25.0 million of fed funds lines of credit, neither of which had outstanding balances as of June 30, 2022.
Financial Condition
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents decreased $40.8 million, or 25.6%, to $118.5 million at June 30, 2022 from $159.3 million at June 30, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to a $99.9 million increase in net loans receivable, $52.1 million increase in total investment securities, a $17.7 million decrease in FHLB advances and a $6.0 million decrease in other liabilities, partially offset by a $134.6 million increase in deposits.
Investment Securities Portfolio
The following table is a summary of the Company's investment securities portfolio at carrying value (Dollars in thousands):
The increase in investment securities was the result of the Company deploying excess liquidity.
Loans Receivable Portfolio
The following table is a summary of the Company's loan portfolio (Dollars in thousands):
The increase in loans receivable was primarily the result of increases in commercial mortgage loans and construction loans, partially offset by decreases in commercial loans, residential mortgage loans and home equity lines of credit. The decrease in commercial loans includes a decrease in PPP loans of $35.1 million, driven by loan forgiveness and paydowns, largely offset by a net increase of $20.7 million in all other commercial loans.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at levels considered adequate by management to provide for probable incurred loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the consolidated balance sheet reporting dates. The allowance for loan losses is based on management’s assessment of various factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, delinquent and non-accrual loans, national and local business conditions, loss experience and an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral.
The allowance for loan losses increased $1.0 million, or 13.3%, to $8.9 million at June 30, 2022 from $7.9 million at June 30, 2021. The increase is primarily due to loan portfolio growth and net recoveries of $274,000. Non-performing loans as a percent of total loans receivable (excluding PPP loans) were 0.69% as of June 30, 2022, an increase from 0.48% as of June 30, 2021, however the allowance for loan losses associated with loans individually evaluated for impairment decreased $2,000 from the prior year to $119,000 as of June 20, 2022
The COVID-19 pandemic has created extensive disruptions to the local economy and our customers. From March 2020 to December 2021, the Company has granted loan payment deferrals on 331 commercial and consumer loans totaling $220.3 million for borrowers experiencing financial hardship due to the pandemic. The Company had no loans on COVID-19 related payment deferral as of June 30, 2022, compared to $27.3 million (19 loans), or 2.21% of gross loans, as of June 30, 2021.
Deposits. Deposits have traditionally been our primary source of funds for our lending and investment activities. The substantial majority of our deposits are from depositors who reside in our primary market area. Deposits are attracted through the offering of a broad selection of deposit instruments for both individuals and businesses.
The following table is a summary of the Company's deposits (Dollars in thousands):
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances. FHLB advances decreased $17.7 million to $48.3 million at June 30, 2022 as compared to $66.0 million at June 30, 2021. This decrease is due to maturities and principal paydowns of $17.6 million.
Total Shareholder’s Equity. Total shareholders’ equity increased $2.6 million, or 0.9%, to $277.2 million at June 30, 2022 from $274.6 million at June 30, 2021. This increase was primarily due to net income of $14.9 million and $5.0 million of stock-based compensation and reduction in unearned ESOP shares for plan shares earned during the period, partially offset by the repurchase of $8.2 million (443,788 shares) of common stock, $5.5 million of other comprehensive losses related primarily to unrealized losses on available for sale investment securities driven by higher market interest rates and $3.6 million of cash dividends declared and paid. We would expect that further increases in market interest rates would lead to additional unrealized losses on available for sale investment securities. On February 3, 2021, a repurchase plan was authorized to repurchase up to 801,856 shares, or 5% of the Company’s then outstanding common stock. As of June 30, 2022, the Company repurchased 682,561 shares of common stock at an average cost of $18.23 per share under this plan. At June 30, 2022, the Bank was considered “well capitalized” under applicable regulatory guidelines.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021
Net Income. Net income increased $2.5 million, or 19.8%, to $14.9 million for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to $12.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was primarily due to increases of $5.1 million in net interest income and $1.3 million in noninterest income, partially offset by increases of $1.9 million in noninterest expense, $1.4 million in provision for loan losses and $620,000 in income tax expense.
Net Interest Income.
The following tables present information regarding average balances of assets and liabilities, the total dollar amounts of interest income and dividends from average interest-earning assets, the total dollar amounts of interest expense on average interest-bearing liabilities, and the resulting annualized average tax equivalent yields and costs. The yields and costs for the periods indicated are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balances of assets or liabilities, respectively, for the periods presented. Average balances have been calculated using daily balances. Nonaccrual loans are included in average balances only. Loan fees are included in interest income on loans and are not material (Dollars in thousands).
(1)Tax exempt yield is shown on a tax equivalent basis for proper comparison using a statutory federal income tax rate of 21% for all periods presented. See reconciliation of non-GAAP measures in the table below.
(2)Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the average yield on average interest-earning assets and the average cost of average interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)Net interest margin represents tax equivalent net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets. See reconciliation of non-GAAP measures in the table below.
The following table presents information regarding tax equivalent adjustment used in the calculation of certain financial metrics (in thousands).
Rate/Volume Analysis. The following table sets forth the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume
column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The net column represents the sum of the prior columns. Changes attributable to changes in both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionally based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume (in thousands).
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses increased for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to the previous year. The increase is primarily due to higher loan portfolio growth in the current year as well as a $944,000 benefit for loan losses recorded in the prior year associated with the release of allowance for loan loss established in the year-ended June 30, 2020 associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Recoveries, net of charge-offs, were $274,000 for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to charge-offs, net of recoveries, of $85,000 for the previous year. Substandard loans were $12.6 million as of June 30, 2022, a decrease from $21.6 million as of June 30, 2021.
Noninterest Income
The following table displays noninterest income for the years ended June 30, (Dollars in thousands).
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company sold a parcel of unused land, resulting in the gain on sale of premises. The increase in swap income is due to increased loan originations. The increase in fees and service charges compared to the previous year was primarily the result of increases in debit card and interchange income, as well as increases in overdraft, ATM and wire fees which declined substantially during the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic and have since recovered to near pre-pandemic levels. The increase in Bank-owned life insurance income is due to additional investments made in the prior fiscal year.
Noninterest Expense
The following table displays noninterest expense for the years ended June 30, (Dollars in thousands).
The increase in salaries and employee benefits in the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the previous year is primarily due to higher salary and ESOP costs. Merger-related expenses relate to the proposed Brookline Bancorp merger and primarily include professional services as well as other miscellaneous expenses. The decrease in other operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the previous year is primarily due to lower pension costs in the current year.
Income Tax Expense. The effective income tax rate was 21.0% for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to 21.2% for the previous year, with the decrease largely driven by an increase in tax-exempt interest income on municipal investments and bank-owned life insurance income, largely offset by non-deductible merger-related expenses incurred in the current year.
Management of Market Risk
General. The majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. Consequently, our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk. Our assets, consisting primarily of loans, have longer maturities than our liabilities, consisting primarily of deposits. As a result, a principal part of our business strategy is to manage our exposure to changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, we have established a management-level Asset/Liability Management Committee, which takes initial responsibility for developing an asset/liability management process and related procedures, establishing and monitoring reporting systems and developing asset/liability strategies. On at least a quarterly basis, the Asset/Liability Management Committee reviews asset/liability management with the Investment Asset/Liability Committee of the Board of Directors. This Committee also reviews any changes in strategies as well as the performance of any specific asset/liability management actions that have been implemented previously. On a quarterly basis, an outside consulting firm provides us with detailed information and analysis as to asset/liability management, including our interest rate risk profile. Ultimate responsibility for effective asset/liability management rests with our Board of Directors.
We have sought to manage our interest rate risk in order to minimize the exposure of our earnings and capital to changes in interest rates. We have implemented the following strategies to manage our interest rate risk: originating loans with adjustable interest rates; utilizing interest rate swaps, promoting core deposit products; and adjusting the interest rates and maturities of funding sources, as necessary. By following these strategies, we believe that we are better positioned to react to changes in market interest rates.
Net Portfolio Value Simulation. We analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through a net portfolio value of equity (“NPV”) model. NPV represents the present value of the expected cash flows from our assets less the present value of the expected cash flows arising from our liabilities. The NPV ratio represents the dollar amount of our NPV divided by the present value of our total assets for a given interest rate scenario. NPV attempts to quantify our economic value using a discounted cash flow methodology while the NPV ratio reflects that value as a form of equity ratio. We estimate what our NPV would be at a specific date. We then calculate what the NPV would be at the same date throughout a series of interest rate scenarios representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve. We currently calculate NPV under the assumptions that interest rates increase and decrease 100 and 200 basis points from current market rates. As a result of increases in market rates over the past year, the 50 basis point decrease scenario utilized in the prior year analysis was replaced by the 200 basis point decrease scenario.
The following table presents the estimated changes in our NPV that would result from changes in market interest rates at June 30, 2022 and 2021. All estimated changes presented in the table are within the policy limits approved by our Board of Directors (Dollars in thousands).
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes require making certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. The above table assumes that the composition of our interest-sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the date indicated remains constant uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the table provides an indication of our interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurements are not intended to and do not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on our NPV and will differ from actual results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity. Liquidity is the ability to meet current and future financial obligations of a short-term nature. Our primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, loan repayments and maturities and sales of securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and mortgage prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition.
We regularly review the need to adjust our investments in liquid assets based upon our assessment of: (1) expected loan demand, (2) expected deposit flows, (3) yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities, and (4) the objectives of our asset/liability management program. Excess liquid assets are invested generally in interest-earning deposits and short- and intermediate-term securities.
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At June 30, 2022, cash and cash equivalents totaled $118.5 million, a decrease from $159.3 million as of June 30, 2021. Unpledged securities classified as available for sale, which provide an additional source of liquidity, totaled $18.5 million at June 30, 2022, a decrease from $28.9 million as of June 30, 2021.
We had the ability to borrow up to $280.9 million from the FHLBNY at June 30, 2022, of which $48.3 million was outstanding as of June 30, 2022. Additionally, as of June 30, 2022, we had an available line of credit with the FRBNY’s discount window program of $96.3 million and $25.0 million of fed funds lines of credit, neither of which had outstanding balances as of June 30, 2022.
We have no material commitments or demands that are likely to affect our liquidity other than as set forth below. If loan demand was to increase faster than expected, or any unforeseen demand or commitment was to occur, we could access our borrowing capacity with the FHLBNY or the FRBNY.
We had $33.2 million of loan commitments outstanding as of June 30, 2022, and $160.8 million of approved, but unadvanced, funds to borrowers. We also had $2.9 million in outstanding letters of credit at June 30, 2022.
Time deposits due within one year of June 30, 2022 totaled $198.6 million, a decrease of $28.3 million from $226.9 million as of June 30, 2021. If these deposits do not remain with us, we will be required to seek other sources of funds, including other time deposits and FHLBNY advances. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay on the time deposits at June 30, 2022. We believe, however, based on past experience that a significant portion of our time deposits will remain with us. We have the ability to attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered.
Liquidity is needed for financing and investing activities. The following table sets forth our primary investing and financing activities for the periods presented (in thousands).
The Company is a separate legal entity from the Bank and must provide for its own liquidity to pay any dividends to its stockholders and for other corporate purposes. The Company’s primary source of liquidity is dividend payments it may receive from the Bank. The Bank’s ability to pay dividends to the Company is governed by applicable law and regulations. At June 30, 2022, the Company (on an unconsolidated, stand-alone basis) had liquid assets of $18.4 million.
Capital Resources. PCSB Bank is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the NYSDFS and the FDIC. At June 30, 2022, PCSB Bank exceeded all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and the Bank was considered “well capitalized” under applicable regulatory guidelines. See Note 15 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to originate loans, unused lines of credit and standby letters of credit, which involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. Our exposure to credit loss is represented by the contractual amount of the instruments. We use the same credit policies in making commitments as we do for on-balance sheet instruments. See Note 9 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.