Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following commentary presents a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations by its management. This review highlights the principal factors affecting earnings and the significant changes in balance sheet items for the years 2021 and 2020. Financial information for 2020 is presented in the Company’s Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which the Company filed with the SEC on March 12, 2021. The objective of this financial review is to enhance investor understanding of the accompanying tables and charts, the consolidated financial statements, notes to financial statements, and financial statistics appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Where applicable, this discussion also reflects management’s insights with respect to known events and trends that have or may reasonably be expected to have a material effect on the Company’s operations and financial condition.
You should read this discussion of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with, and we qualify our discussion in its entirety by, the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere within this annual report, the material contained under Part 1, Item 1. “Description of Business” and Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this annual report, and the cautionary disclosure about forward-looking statements at the front of Part I of this annual report.
Introduction
PCTEL is a leading global provider of wireless technology, including purpose-built Industrial IoT devices, antenna systems, and test & measurement solutions. We strive to solve complex wireless challenges to help organizations stay connected, transform, and grow. We have two businesses (antennas/Industrial IoT devices and test & measurement products). Our antennas and Industrial IoT devices include antennas deployed in small cells, enterprise Wi-Fi access points, fleet management and transit systems, and in network equipment and devices for the Industrial IoT. We believe that our test & measurement products improve the performance of wireless networks globally. Mobile operators, neutral hosts, and network equipment manufacturers rely on our products to analyze, design, and optimize next generation wireless networks.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic and associated counter-acting measures implemented by governments and businesses around the world, as well as subsequent recoveries in global business activity, have increased uncertainty in the global business environment and led to supply chain disruptions and shortages in global markets for commodities, logistics and labor, and increased inflation.
Our foremost focus as we respond to the pandemic has been on the health and safety of our employees. We continue to maintain our enhanced health and safety protocols at our facilities and are encouraging our employees to obtain vaccinations. We will continue to closely monitor the risks posed by COVID-19 and the guidance from relevant authorities. We will adjust our practices accordingly, as we have throughout the pandemic.
Activity in many of the end markets we serve improved throughout 2021, although we still were subject to pandemic related slowdowns for spectrum auctions and 5G rollouts in Europe and parts of Southeast Asia. The recovery in demand has had business impacts, including material cost inflation, labor availability issues and logistics costs increases. Some of our businesses have also been impacted by supplier component shortages. Currently our expectation is that the impact of material cost inflation, labor constraints and logistics challenges and to some extent supplier component shortages will continue in 2022.
The public health situation, as well as global measures and corresponding impacts on various markets remain fluid and uncertain and may lead to sudden changes in trajectory and outlook. We will continue to proactively respond to the situation and may take further actions that alter our business activity as may be required by governmental authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and operations.
Smarteq Acquisition
On April 30, 2021, we acquired all the outstanding stock of Smarteq Wireless Aktiebolag, a Swedish company based in Kista, Sweden, that designs antennas for specialized Industrial IoT and vehicular applications (“Smarteq”), pursuant to a SPA between PCTEL and Allgon Aktiebolag, a Swedish company and holder of the outstanding stock of Smarteq (the “Agreement”). Smarteq owns all the outstanding stock of SAS Smarteq France, which engages in sales of Smarteq products. PCTEL paid cash consideration of SEK 56.8 million ($6.8 million) at the close of the transaction, all of which was provided from PCTEL’s existing cash. We believe the acquisition of Smarteq provides a strong European presence, expertise, and channel partners that we expect will accelerate our growth in Europe, as well as a complementary portfolio of products for our Industrial IoT and intelligent transportation customers worldwide. The results for Smarteq are combined with the Company’s antenna and Industrial IoT device product line.
Financial Summary
Revenues were $87.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of 13.4% from the prior year. By product line, revenues increased by $12.5 million (24.7%) to $63.0 million for antennas & Industrial IoT devices and decreased by $1.9 million (6.8%) to $25.7 million for test & measurement products. Gross profits of $40.5 million were higher by $2.5 million due to the impact of higher revenues, but the gross profit percentage decreased by 2.9% in 2021 due to a higher mix of antenna & Industrial IoT devices products which have a lower gross profit than test & measurement products. Operating expenses were $40.2 million in 2021 and increased by $5.6 million because of $1.7 million for costs associated with the newly acquired Smarteq operation, $0.8 million for higher restructuring expenses, and higher expenses for salaries, incentive compensation, and acquisition related expenses. Other income declined by $0.2 million because interest income declined by $0.3 million offset by lower net foreign exchange losses. The net impact of these changes resulted in income before tax of $0.2 million in 2021 compared to income before tax of $3.4 million in 2020.
REVENUES BY PRODUCT LINE
Revenues for antennas and Industrial IoT devices of $63.0 million increased $12.5 million (24.7%) in 2021 compared to 2020 due to both revenues from the business acquired from Smarteq in April 2021 and higher organic revenues for fleet, public safety, and enterprise wireless antenna applications.
Revenues for test & measurement products of $25.7 million decreased by $1.9 million (6.8%) in 2021 compared to 2020 as revenues for products with 5G technologies were partially offset by revenues for products for public safety applications.
GROSS PROFIT BY PRODUCT LINE
The gross profit percentage was 46.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of 2.9% compared to 2020. A decrease of approximately 2.8% in the gross profit percentage is attributable to a lower mix of test & measurement products in 2021 compared to 2020. The proportion of revenues from test & measurement products as a percentage of total revenues decreased from 36% in 2020 to 29% in 2021. The gross profit percentage for antennas and Industrial IoT devices was lower by 1.6% in 2021 compared to 2020 due to an increase in amortization expense for intangible assets and the fair value step-up of inventory related to the Smarteq acquisition, as well as higher freight and logistics costs offset the favorable impact from operating leverage due to higher revenues. The gross profit percentage increased by 2.8% in 2021 compared to 2020 for test & measurement products due to customer and product mix.
CONSOLIDATED OPERATING EXPENSES
Research and development expenses increased by $0.8 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the inclusion of the expenses related to the Smarteq acquisition as well as higher expenses for payroll, incentive compensation, and depreciation offset lower expense for professional fees. Expenses related to Smarteq were $0.5 million in 2021 from the date of acquisition in April 2021. Payroll expense, including permanent and temporary employees was higher by $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year due to salary increases and higher average headcount for both product lines to support new product development. Depreciation expense increased by $0.1 million in 2021 because of capital expenditures in 2020 and 2021 for 5G test equipment for the Clarksburg, Maryland office. Expenses for incentive compensation were higher by $0.1 million offsetting lower expenses for professional services for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. We had 58 and 56 full-time equivalent employees in research and development at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Sales and marketing expenses include costs associated with the sales and marketing employees, sales representatives, product line management, and other direct marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased by approximately $2.2 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the inclusion of the expenses related to the Smarteq acquisition, as well as higher employee sales commissions, employee payroll and related costs, and higher travel expenses. Expenses related to Smarteq were $0.7 million in 2021 from the date of acquisition in April 2021. Excluding Smarteq, employee sales commissions were higher by $0.8 million due to higher achievement of sales quotas in 2021 compared to 2020. Salaries and related benefits were higher by $0.6 million primarily due to salary increases but also due to higher average headcount in the sales organization. Higher spending on travel and marketing expenses offset decreases in other spending areas. We had 54 and 50 full-time equivalent employees in sales and marketing at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
General and administrative expenses include costs associated with the general management, finance, human resources, information technology, legal, public company costs, and other operating expenses to the extent not otherwise allocated to other functions. General and administrative expenses increased by $1.6 million from 2020 to 2021 due to the inclusion of the expenses related to the Smarteq acquisition as well as higher employee and payroll costs, acquisition related expenses, incentive compensation expenses, and stock compensation expenses. Expenses related to Smarteq were $0.3 million in 2021 from the date of acquisition in April 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, incentive compensation expenses were higher by $0.5 million, payroll expense was higher by $0.2 million, and stock compensation expenses were higher by $0.1 million compared to the prior year. Acquisition related expenses, primarily for legal services, were $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We had 36 and 34 full-time equivalent employees in general and administrative functions at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Amortization of intangible assets within operating expenses was approximately $0.2 million and $32 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in amortization expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was due to intangible assets recorded as part of the acquisition of Smarteq in April 2021.
Restructuring expenses of $0.9 million in 2021 consisted of $0.8 million for employee severance and payroll related costs associated with the termination of 14 employees in Beijing and $0.1 million for employee severance and payroll related costs associated with the termination of 16 employees as a result of transitioning manufacturing from our Tianjin, China facility to contract manufacturers.
The restructuring expense of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of employee severance and related costs associated with the termination of 12 employees as a result of transitioning manufacturing from our Tianjin, China facility to contract manufacturers.
See Note 5 to the financial statements for additional information related to Tianjin restructuring.
OPERATING PROFIT
Total operating profit decreased $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 as higher operating expenses, restructuring expenses, and intangible amortization offset the favorable impact of higher gross margins from higher revenues.
OTHER (EXPENSE) INCOME, NET
Other (expense) income, net consists of interest income, foreign exchange losses, and interest expense. For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest income decreased by $0.3 million due to lower average interest rates and lower investment balances. Foreign exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2021 were related to fluctuation in the Chinese yuan and Swedish krona compared
to the U.S. dollar. The foreign exchange losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 were related to the fluctuations in the Chinese Yuan compared to the U.S. dollar.
EXPENSE FOR INCOME TAXES
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was lower than the statutory rate of 21.0% by approximately 0.7% primarily because we have a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets.
In accordance with ASC 740 “Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), we evaluate our deferred income tax assets quarterly to determine if valuation allowances are required or should be adjusted. ASC 740 requires that companies assess whether valuation allowances should be established against their deferred tax assets based on consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, using a “more likely than not” standard of whether the deferred tax assets will be realized. Our net deferred tax assets consist of assets related to net operating losses and credits as well as assets related to timing differences.
While we recorded pretax book income for both 2021 and 2020 and we believe our financial outlook remains positive, our earnings declined in 2021 and we did not meet our expectations during two of the past three years. Because of difficulties with forecasting financial results historically, and due to the uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2021. Our performance versus our 2020 and 2021 projections is considered significant negative evidence that is difficult to overcome on a “more likely than not” standard through objectively verifiable data. While we believe our financial outlook remains positive, under the accounting standards, objective verifiable evidence will have greater weight than subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. Based on an evaluation in accordance with the accounting standards, as of December 31, 2021, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets in each of our tax jurisdictions to measure the deferred tax assets that are more likely than not to be realized based on the weight of all the available evidence. We have a valuation allowance of $11.9 million recorded for our net U.S. deferred tax assets, a valuation allowance of $1.2 million recorded for our net China deferred tax assets, and a valuation allowance of $2.2 million recorded for our net Sweden deferred tax assets. The net deferred tax assets and corresponding valuation allowance related to Sweden were recorded as part of the acquisition of Smarteq in April 2021.
Until an appropriate level of profitability is attained, we expect to maintain a full valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets. Any U.S., China, or Sweden tax benefits or tax expense recorded on our Consolidated Statement of Income will be offset with a corresponding valuation allowance until such time that we change our determination related to the realization of deferred tax assets. If we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust the valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
The analysis that we prepared to determine the valuation allowance required significant judgment and assumptions regarding future market conditions as well as forecasts for profits, taxable income, and taxable income by jurisdiction. Due to the sensitivity of the analysis, changes to the assumptions in subsequent periods could have a material effect on the valuation allowance.
See Note 6 of the consolidated financial statements for more information on income taxes.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
On December 31, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments were approximately $30.8 million, and we had working capital of approximately $48.6 million. On December 31, 2021 we had $2.8 million of cash held in China bank accounts. These funds are currently considered permanently reinvested, but we will incur a local withholding tax rate of 10% if the funds are repatriated. At December 31, 2021, we also had $1.0 million held in Swedish bank accounts. Our primary source of liquidity is cash provided by operations and a significant balance of cash, with short term swings in liquidity supported by short-term investments. The balance has fluctuated with cash from operations, acquisitions and divestitures, payment of dividends and the repurchase of our common shares.
Within operating activities, we are historically a net generator of operating funds from our income statement activities. In periods of expansion, we expect to use cash from our balance sheet.
Within investing activities, capital spending historically ranges between 2.0% and 4.0% of our revenues and the primary use of capital is for manufacturing and engineering development requirements. Our capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately 2.7% of revenues.
We historically have significant transfers between investments and cash as we rotate large cash balances and short-term investment balances between money market funds, which are accounted for as cash equivalents, and other investments. We have a history of supplementing our organic revenue growth with acquisitions of product lines or companies, resulting in significant uses of our cash and short-term investment balances from time to time. We expect the historical trend for capital spending and the variability caused by moving money between cash and investments and periodic acquisition activity to continue in the future.
Within financing activities, we are a net user of funds. We have historically used funds for quarterly dividends and generated funds from the proceeds from the issuance of common stock through our Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”). We also periodically repurchase shares of our common stock through share repurchase programs. We used $3.2 million of cash during 2021 for the repurchase of 495,144 shares.
We believe that cash generated by operating activities, our short-term investment balances, and cash on our balance sheet will be sufficient to support our operations for the next 12 months, including dividend payments and capital expenditures.
The following table is a summary of cash flow activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities:
We generated $5.7 million of funds from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash from operating activities includes net income of $153, an add-back of $6.6 million for non-cash expenses, and negative net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.1 million. The balance sheet used cash because of increased working capital due to higher inventories and accounts receivable balances offsetting higher accrued liabilities. Inventories increased by $2.5 million due to support higher revenues for antennas and to ease supply chain constraints for both product lines. Accounts receivable increased by $0.9 million because revenues were higher in the fourth quarter 2021 compared to the fourth quarter 2020. Accrued liabilities increased primarily due to the timing of inventory purchases and by increased by $1.4 million with higher accruals for restructuring expenses and higher incentive compensation in the fourth quarter 2021 compared to the fourth quarter 2020.
We generated $13.4 million of funds from operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash from operating activities includes net income of $3.4 million, an add-back of $5.5 million for non-cash expenses, and positive net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $4.5 million. The balance sheet provided cash due to lower inventories of $2.1 million, higher accounts payable of $1.1 million and lower accounts receivables of $1.0 million. The decrease in inventories was primarily within the antenna product line due to lower revenues in the fourth quarter of 2020, and due to the transition of manufacturing to contract manufacturers. Accounts payable were higher due to timing of purchases in the fourth quarter 2020 and by extending the payment cycle for certain vendors. Accounts receivable declined because revenues were lower in the fourth quarter 2020.
Investing Activities:
Our investing activities generated $4.1 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021. Redemptions and maturities of our short-term investments during the year provided $38.6 million in cash and we rotated $25.9 million of cash into new short-term and long-term investments. We used $6.3 million, net of cash acquired, for the purchase of Smarteq in April 2021 and we used $3.2 million of cash for capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our investing activities used $6.8 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020. Redemptions and maturities of our short-term investments during the year provided $47.0 million in cash and we rotated $49.7 million of cash into new short-term and long-term investments. We used $4.1 million of cash for capital expenditures during the year ended December 31, 2020. The capital expenditures during 2020 included $2.1 million for leasehold improvements and furniture and equipment for the new Clarksburg, Maryland office.
Financing Activities:
We used $7.2 million of cash for financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021. We completed our share repurchase programs in September 2021, and we used $3.2 million for such repurchases during 2021. During 2021, we used $4.0 million for cash dividends paid quarterly and $0.8 million for payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation, the latter of which, related to common stock issued in connection with the vesting of restricted stock awards under our short-term incentive plan. We received $0.8 million in proceeds from the purchase of shares through our ESPP in 2021.
We used $8.2 million of cash for financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. We used $2.0 million for the common stock repurchases during the first quarter and $1.8 million for common stock repurchases during the fourth quarter. We used $4.1 million for cash dividends paid quarterly during 2020 and $1.1 million for payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation, the latter of which related to common stock issued in connection with the vesting of restricted stock awards under our short-term incentive plan. We received $0.9 million in proceeds from the purchase of shares through our ESPP. On April 16, 2020, we received a $3.5 million paycheck protection program (“PPP”) loan from the Small Business Administration. Based upon subsequent guidance regarding PPP loan eligibility, we returned the funds on April 30, 2020.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations primarily relate to non-cancelable purchase obligations. Expected timing of those payments are as follows:
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the period reported. By their nature, these estimates and judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience, market trends, and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Valuation Allowances for Deferred Tax Assets - We establish an income tax valuation allowance when available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider the amounts and timing of expected future deductions or carryforwards and sources of taxable income that may enable utilization. We maintain an existing valuation allowance until enough positive evidence exists to support its reversal. Changes in the amount or timing of expected future deductions or taxable income may have a material impact on the level of income tax valuation allowances. Our assessment of the realizability of the deferred tax assets requires judgment about our future results. Inherent in this estimation is the requirement for us to estimate future book and taxable income and possible tax planning strategies. These estimates require us to exercise judgment about our future results, the prudence and feasibility of possible tax planning strategies, and the economic environment in which we do business. It is possible that the actual results will differ from the assumptions and require adjustments to the allowance. Adjustments to the allowance would affect future net income.
Impairment Reviews of Goodwill - We perform an annual impairment test of goodwill as of the end of the first month of the fiscal fourth quarter (October 31st), or at an interim date if an event occurs or if circumstances change that would indicate that an impairment loss may have been incurred. In performing our annual impairment test, we may consider qualitative factors that would indicate possible impairment. A quantitative fair value assessment is performed at the reporting unit level. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, the implied fair value of goodwill is then compared against the carrying value of goodwill to determine the amount of impairment.
The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is subjective because it requires the use of estimates and assumptions in determining a reporting unit’s fair value. We calculate the fair value of each reporting unit by using the income approach based on the present value of future discounted cash flows. The discounted cash flow method requires us to use estimates and judgments about the future cash flows of the reporting units. Although we base cash flow forecasts on assumptions that are consistent with plans and estimates we use to manage the underlying reporting units, there is significant judgment in determining the cash flows attributable to these reporting units, including markets and market share, sales volumes and mix, research and development expenses, tax rates, capital spending, discount rate and working capital changes. Cash flow forecasts are based on reporting unit operating plans for the early years and business projections in later years. We believe the accounting estimate related to the valuation of goodwill is a critical accounting estimate because it requires us to make assumptions that are highly uncertain about the future cash flows of our reporting units.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.