ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis is intended to assist the reader in understanding our results of operations and financial condition. Management’s Discussion and Analysis is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K (this "Annual Report"). This Annual Report includes certain statements that may be deemed to be “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). All statements, other than statements of historical fact, included in this Annual Report that address activities, events or developments that we expect, project, believe, or anticipate will or may occur in the future, including matters having to do with expected and future revenue, our ability to fund our operations and repay debt, business strategies, expansion and growth of operations and other such matters, are forward-looking statements. These statements are based on certain assumptions and analyses made by our management in light of its experience and its perception of historical trends, current conditions, expected future developments, and other factors it believes are appropriate in the circumstances. These statements are subject to a number of assumptions, risks and uncertainties, including general economic and business conditions, the business opportunities (or lack thereof) that may be presented to and pursued by us, our performance on our current contracts and our success in obtaining new contracts, our ability to attract and retain qualified employees, and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. You are cautioned that these forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and those actual results or developments may differ materially from those projected in such statements.
Overview
Park City Group, Inc., a Nevada corporation (“Park City Group”, “we”, “us”, “our” or, the “Company”) is a Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) provider, and the parent company of ReposiTrak, Inc. a Utah corporation (“ReposiTrak”), a business-to-business (“B2B”) e-commerce, compliance, and supply chain management platform company that partners with retailers, wholesalers, and product suppliers to help them source, vet, and transact with their suppliers in order to accelerate sales, control risks, and improve supply chain efficiencies. The Company’s fiscal year ends on June 30. References to fiscal 2022 refer to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Sources of Revenue
The principal customers for the Company’s products are multi-store retail chains, wholesalers and distributors, and their suppliers. The Company has a hub and spoke business model, whereby the Company is typically engaged by retailers and wholesalers (“Hubs”), which in turn require their suppliers (“Spokes”) to utilize the Company’s services. The Company’s services are grouped in three application suites: (i) ReposiTrak MarketPlace (“MarketPlace”), encompassing the Company’s supplier discovery and B2B e-commerce solutions, which helps the Company’s customers find new suppliers; (ii) ReposiTrak Compliance and Food Safety (“Compliance and Food Safety”) solutions, which help the Company’s customers vet suppliers to mitigate the risk of doing business with these suppliers; and (iii) ReposiTrak’s Supply Chain (“Supply Chain”) solutions, which help the Company’s customers to more efficiently manage their various transactions with their suppliers. The Company derives revenue from five sources: (i) subscription fees, (ii) transaction-based fees, (iii) professional services fees, (iv) license fees, and (v) hosting and maintenance fees.
A significant portion of the Company’s revenue is generated from its Supply Chain solutions and Compliance and Food Safety solutions in the form of recurring subscription payments from the suppliers. Subscription fees can be based on a negotiated flat fee per supplier, or some volumetric metric, such as the number of stores, or the volume of economic activity between a retailer and its suppliers. Subscription revenue contains arrangements with customers for use of the application, application and data hosting, maintenance of the application, and standard support.
Revenue from the Company’s MarketPlace sourcing solution historically has been transactional, based on the volume of products sourced via the application. MarketPlace revenue can come from several sources depending on the customer’s specific requirements. These include acting as an agent for a supplier, providing supply chain technology services, and enabling a Hub to reduce its number of new suppliers by acting as the supplier for any number of products.
The Company also provides professional consulting services targeting implementation, assessments, profit optimization and support functions for its applications and related products, for which revenue is recognized on a percentage-of-completion or pro rata basis over the life of the subscription, depending on the nature of the engagement. Premier customer support includes extended availability and additional services and is available along with additional support services such as developer support and partner support for an additional fee.
In some instances, the Company will sell its software in the form of a license. License arrangements are a time-specific and perpetual license. Software license maintenance agreements are typically annual contracts, paid in advance or according to terms specified in the contract. When sold as a license, the Company’s software is usually accompanied by a corresponding maintenance and/or hosting agreement to support the service.
Software maintenance agreements provide the customer with access to new software enhancements, maintenance releases, patches, updates and technical support personnel. Our hosting services provide remote management and maintenance of our software and customers’ data, which is physically located in third-party facilities. Customers access “hosted” software and data through a secure internet connection.
Revenue Recognition
Effective July 1, 2018, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09: Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), and its related amendments (“ASU 2014-09”). ASU 2014-09 provides a unified model to determine when and how revenue is recognized and enhances certain disclosure around the nature, timing, amount and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customers.
ASU 2014-09 represents a change in the accounting model utilized for the recognition of revenue and certain expense arising from contracts with customers. We adopted ASU 2014-09 using a “modified retrospective” approach and, accordingly, revenue and expense totals for all periods before July 1, 2018 reflect those previously reported under the prior accounting model and have not been restated.
Other Metrics - Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements, historically we have provided investors with Adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP income per share, both of which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that these non-GAAP measures may provide useful information regarding certain financial and business trends relating to our financial condition and operations. Our management uses these non-GAAP measures to compare the Company’s performance to that of prior periods for trend analyses and planning purposes. These measures are also presented to our Board of Directors.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). These non-GAAP financial measures exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in the Company’s financial statements and are subject to inherent limitations. Investors should review the reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the comparable GAAP financial measures that are included in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Critical Accounting Policies
This “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” discusses the Company’s financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expense during the reporting period.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and assumptions based on historical experience of operations and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Income Taxes
In determining the carrying value of the Company’s net deferred income tax assets, the Company must assess the likelihood of sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions, based on estimates and assumptions, to realize the benefit of these assets. If these estimates and assumptions change in the future, the Company may record a reduction in the valuation allowance, resulting in an income tax benefit in the Company’s statements of operations. Management evaluates quarterly whether to realize the deferred income tax assets and assesses the valuation allowance.
Goodwill and Other Long-Lived Asset Valuations
Goodwill is assigned to specific reporting units and is reviewed for possible impairment at least annually or upon the occurrence of an event or when circumstances indicate that a reporting unit’s carrying amount is greater than its fair value. Management reviews the long-lived tangible and intangible assets for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Management evaluates, at each balance sheet date, whether events and circumstances have occurred which indicate possible impairment.
The carrying value of a long-lived asset is considered impaired when the anticipated cumulative undiscounted cash flows of the related asset or group of assets is less than the carrying value. In that event, a loss is recognized based on the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair market value of the long-lived asset. Economic useful lives of long-lived assets are assessed and adjusted as circumstances dictate.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes the cost of employee services received in exchange for awards of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of those awards. The Company records compensation expense on a straight-line basis. The fair value of any options granted are estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model with assumptions for the risk-free interest rate, expected life, volatility, dividend yield and forfeiture rate.
Capitalization of Software Development Costs
The Company accounts for research costs of computer software to be sold, leased or otherwise marketed as expense until technological feasibility has been established for the product. Once technological feasibility is established, all software costs are capitalized until the product is available for general release to customers. Judgment is required in determining when technological feasibility of a product is established.
We have determined that technological feasibility for our software products is reached shortly after a working prototype is complete and meets or exceeds design specifications including functions, features, and technical performance requirements. Costs incurred after technological feasibility is established have been and will continue to be capitalized until such time as when the product or enhancement is available for general release to customers.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenue and results of operation, liquidity or capital expenditures.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02 Leases (Topic 842) (“ASU 2016-02”). Under ASU 2016-02, lessees will be required to recognize for all leases (with the exception of short-term leases) a lease liability, which is a lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from a lease, measured on a discounted basis and a right-of-use asset, which is an asset that represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the lease term.
Effective July 1, 2019, the Company adopted the requirements of ASU 2016-02. All amounts and disclosures set forth in this Annual Report have been updated to comply with ASU 2016-02, with results for reporting periods beginning after July 1, 2019 presented under ASU 2016-02, while prior period amounts and disclosures are not adjusted and continue to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for the prior period.
Results of Operations - Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
Revenue
During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the Company had revenue of $18,046,941 as compared to $21,007,076 for the year ended June 30, 2021, a decrease of 14%. The decrease in revenue was due to significant MarketPlace revenue contribution during the height of COVID-19 that occurred in fiscal 2021 that did not reoccur in 2022. Given its volatility and non-recurring nature, the Company’s strategic plan is to eliminate all non-core non-recurring revenue. Year to date, this includes approximately $3,600,000, in non- recurring Marketplace revenue, and $600,000 in recurring revenue for products and services that had little upside and very low margin. This was partially offset by revenue growth in compliance subscription, supply chain services and other recurring revenue.
During fiscal 2021, as COVID-19 disrupted supply chains and generated shortages in products, our ability to source hard to find items for our customers resulted in increased revenue attributable to MarketPlace. These products largely consisted of personal protective equipment used in connection with COVID-19 (“PPE”). While the Company experienced a significant increase in MarketPlace revenue for PPE during the height of COVID-19, that demand significantly decreased in 2022, and future demand is uncertain. The uncertainty regarding future demand for MarketPlace is heightened due to recent geopolitical conflicts, including the current war in Ukraine. While we don’t currently anticipate that such uncertainties will materially affect our future results from operations, no assurances can be given.
Although no assurances can be given, we continue to focus our sales efforts on marketing our software services on a recurring subscription basis and placing less emphasis on transactional revenue. However, we believe there will continue to be a small percentage of customers that will require buying a particular service outright (i.e., a license). We will continue to make our best effort to reduce this non-recurring transactional revenue when we are able.
Cost of Services and Product Support
Cost of services and product support was $3,186,712 or 18% of total revenue, and $6,884,647 or 33% of total revenue for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, a decrease of 54%. This decrease is the result of planned elimination of low margin products, services and ongoing cost control. We eliminated high cost, low margin MarketPlace transactional revenue which significantly reduced procurement costs. With lower MarketPlace transactions, we realized significantly less Cost of Services. In addition, we sunsetted two vendor managed pricing products and the associated headcount which also contributed to lower Cost of Services. We also eliminated certain 3rd party vendor software services which contributed to the reduction.
While we experienced a significant increase in MarketPlace costs and corresponding revenue during fiscal 2021 due to demand in PPE, those costs and corresponding revenue were not continued in fiscal 2022. It is uncertain what Marketplace transactional revenue, if any, we can expect going forward since the Company has chosen to eliminate all non-core non-recurring revenue.
Sales and Marketing Expense
The Company’s sales and marketing expense was $4,853,926, or 27% of total revenue, and $4,995,578, or 24% of total revenue, for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, a decrease of 3%. This was due primarily to a decrease in variable compensation, a reduction in trade show expense, and lower sales and marketing travel expense.
General and Administrative Expense
The Company’s general and administrative expense was $4,716,131, or 26% of total revenue, and $5,214,936 or 25% of total revenue for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, a decrease of 10%. The decrease in general and administrative expense is primarily due to the termination of hosted software applications including its CRM provider, employee expense management software, and a decrease in maintenance costs associated with certain fixed assets.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
The Company’s depreciation and amortization expense was $875,551 and $1,019,515 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, a decrease of 14%. This decrease is due to the disposal of certain assets in the current fiscal year.
Other Income and Expense
Net other expense was $281,558 compared to net other income of $1,301,892 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The change in other income (expense) was due to (1) recognition of a gain on debt extinguishment for the Company’s PPP loan in fiscal 2021 that did not occur in fiscal 2022; (2) an increase in interest expense associated with financing arrangements with a bank for the Company’s stock repurchase plan; and (3) realized losses of certain short-term investments held in U.S. treasuries and other securities. Given rising interest rates, the Company recognized a decline in its bond portfolio and other fixed income instruments on excess cash.
Preferred Dividends
Dividends accrued on the Company’s Series B Preferred and Series B-1 Preferred was $586,444 and $586,444 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Dividends remained flat in the comparable periods.
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our existing cash and short-term investments, together with funds generated from operations, are sufficient to fund operating and investment requirements for at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including macroeconomic conditions, our rate of revenue growth, sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending required for research and development efforts and the continuing market acceptance of our products and services.
We have historically funded our operations with cash from operations, equity financings, and borrowings from the issuance of debt, including our Credit Agreement with U.S. Bank N.A., which was revised on October 6, 2021 (See Note 8 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained within this Annual Report).
Cash was $21,460,948 and $24,070,322 at June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. This 11% decrease is principally the result of a $6.0 million payoff of financing arrangements with a bank, cash used for the Share Repurchase Program, partially offset by lower overall cash operating expense and collections on accounts receivable.
Net Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities is summarized as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $6,101,617 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $5,401,815 for the year ended June 30, 2021. Net cash provided by operating activities increased 13% due largely to elimination of low margin products, services, and overall cost control. Noncash expense increased by $940,429 in the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021 as a result of loss on sale of property and equipment, a modification of an operating lease resulting in a decrease of a right-of-use asset and an increase in stock compensation expense. Additionally, a gain on debt extinguishment occurred in the year ended June 30, 2021 that did not recur in the year ended June 30, 2022.
Net Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $1,323,262 compared to net cash used in investing activities of $318,873 for the year ended June 30, 2021. This increase in cash provided by investing activities for the fiscal year was due to the sale of property and equipment.
Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $10,034,253 for the year ended June 30, 2022 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $1,357,950 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase in net cash used in financing activities is primarily attributable to our line of credit arrangement with a bank and purchase of stock under the Share Repurchase Program.
Liquidity and Working Capital
At June 30, 2022, the Company had positive working capital of $20,485,875, as compared with positive working capital of $20,400,991 at June 30, 2021. This $84,884 increase in working capital is primarily due to a decrease in cash as a result of the $6.0 million payoff of a financing arrangement with a bank and purchase of stock under the Share Repurchase Program.
Current assets as of June 30, 2022 totaled $26,582,709, a decrease of $3,119,065, as compared to $29,701,774 as of June 30, 2021. The decrease in current assets is primarily attributable to a net decrease in cash of $2,609,374 from paying off a credit arrangement, an increase in contract assets and prepaid expense of $216,808 and a decrease in accounts receivable of $726,499.
Current liabilities totaled $6,096,834 as of June 30, 2022 as compared to $9,300,783 as of June 30, 2021. The comparative decrease in current liabilities is primarily attributable to the corresponding payoff of $6.0 million in our line of credit, as discussed below.
On October 6, 2021, the Company and the Bank executed the Credit Agreement, with an effective date of September 30, 2021. The Credit Agreement replaces the Company’s prior $6.0 million Revolving Credit Agreement and Stand-Alone Revolving Note between the Company and the Bank, as amended and revised on January 9, 2019, and provides the Company with a $10.0 million revolving line of credit that matures on March 31, 2023. Any amounts drawn down by the Company under the Credit Agreement accrue interest at an annual rate equal to 1.75% plus the one-month LIBOR rate. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants and conditions to borrowing, as well as customary events of default. Among other things, the Company must maintain liquid assets equal to the outstanding balance of the Note and maintain a Senior Funded Debt (as defined in the Credit Agreement) to EBITDA Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not more than 3:1.
While no assurances can be given, management currently believes that the Company will continue to increase its cash flow from operations and working capital position in subsequent periods. The Company’s increase in anticipated cash flow from operations and working capital position is expected to be offset by the use of cash required to fund the Company’s quarterly cash dividend announced on September 28, 2022, of $0.015 per share. The Company believes it will have adequate cash resources to fund its operations, satisfy its debt obligations, and fund its anticipated quarterly cash dividend for at least the next 12 months.
Contractual Obligations
Total contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of June 30, 2022 are summarized in the following table:
Inflation
The impact of inflation has historically not had a material effect on the Company’s financial condition or results from operations; however, higher rates of inflation may cause retailers to slow their spending in the technology area, which could have an impact on the Company’s sales.