Item 7.
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 8, 2021 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and, after the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the period from January 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $414,623, which consisted of change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,383,964, interest income on bank of $36, interest earned on investment held in Trust Account of $102,660, offset by general and administrative expenses of $1,606,123 and transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $465,914.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of our initial public offering, the Company’s only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B ordinary shares by our Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On March 11, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 36,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $360,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 9,200,000 Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $9,200,000.
On March 17, in connection with the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, the Company sold an additional 4,845,476 Units at $10.00 per Unit and sold an additional 969,095 Private Placement Warrants at $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant. Following such closing, an additional $48,454,760 of net proceeds was deposited in the Trust Account, resulting in $408,454,760 held in the Trust Account.
Transaction costs amounted to $23,053,090 consisting of $8,169,095 of underwriting fees, $14,295,917 of deferred underwriting fees and $588,078 of other offering costs.
For the period from January 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,216,433. Net income of $414,623 was affected by change in fair value of warrants of $2,383,964, transactions costs incurred in connection with the warrant liabilities of $465,914, interest income earned from investments in the trust account of $102,660 and formation expenses paid by the Sponsor of $5,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $384,654 of cash from operating activities.
At December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $408,557,420. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable (if applicable) and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the post-Business Combination entity, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $215,489 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, properties or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth
due diligence and negotiating and consummating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we
become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15,
“Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after April 22, 2021.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
We entered into an agreement to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a monthly fee of $40,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative support services to the Company until the Company’s initial business combination or liquidation and, upon the earlier of the Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, at such affiliate’s election, a payment equal to $960,000 less any amounts previously paid. We began incurring these fees on March 11, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees on a monthly basis until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
We have an agreement to pay the underwriters a deferred fee of $14,295,917 in the aggregate, which will become payable to them from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement entered into on March 8, 2021, the holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights. The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination. However, the registration and shareholder rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lockup period. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40-15-7D
under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject tore-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value. As stated in Note 2, the Company concluded it should revise its financial statements to classify all Public Shares in temporary equity (See Note 2).
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
Debt -debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging -Contracts in Entity’ Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. Management is currently evaluating the new guidance but does not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.