ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Introduction to PDS Biotechnology Corporation
We are a clinical-stage immunotherapy company developing a growing pipeline of molecularly targeted immunotherapies designed to overcome the limitations of current immunotherapy and vaccine technologies. We own proprietary T-cell activating platforms designed to train the immune system to better attack and destroy disease; Versamune®, for treatments in oncology and Infectimune™, for treatments in infectious disease. When paired with an antigen, which is a disease-related protein that is recognizable by the immune system, Versamune and Infectimune have both been shown to induce, in vivo, large quantities of high-quality, highly potent polyfunctional CD4+ helper and CD8+ killer T-cells, a specific sub-type of T-cell that is more effective at killing infected or target cells. Infectimune is also designed to promote the induction of disease-specific neutralizing antibodies. Our immuno-oncology product candidates are of potential interest for use as a component of combination product candidates (for example, in combination with other leading technologies such as checkpoint inhibitors) to provide more effective treatments across a range of advanced and/or refractory cancers. We are also evaluating our immunotherapies as monotherapies in early-stage disease. We are developing targeted product candidates to treat several cancers including Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-associated cancers, melanoma, colorectal, lung, breast and prostate cancers. Our infectious disease candidates are of potential interest as vaccines to prevent COVID-19 and universal influenza.
It is well documented that the most critical attribute of an effective cancer immunotherapy is the induction of high levels of active antigen-specific CD8+ (killer) T-cells. Priming adequate levels of active CD8+ T-cells in-vivo continues to be a major obstacle facing immunotherapy. PDS0101 in its first human clinical trial provided data supporting the earlier promising preclinical study results and demonstrated the unique in-vivo induction of high levels of active HPV-specific CD8+ T-cells in humans.
We believe that the Versamune platform has the potential to become an industry-leading immuno-oncology technology and is currently being applied to the development of a robust pipeline of valuable “new-generation, multi-functional” immunotherapies, both as single agents and as part of combination therapies with other leading immuno-oncology technologies.
We believe that the key differentiating attributes of the Infectimune platform technology, are strong induction of CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells as well as antibodies, which can be leveraged to improve treatment and preventive options in several infectious disease indications. Specifically, the COVID-19 pandemic has provided a unique opportunity to highlight Infectimune’s potentially transformative utility in the development of more effective and longer lasting protective vaccines.
PDS0101 in Combination with KEYTRUDA® Clinical Trial:
In November 2020, our VERSATILE-002 Phase 2 clinical trial evaluating the combination of PDS0101 (Versamune plus a mixture of HPV16 antigens) in combination with Merck’s anti-PD-1 therapy, KEYTRUDA® (pembrolizumab) for first-line treatment of recurrent/ metastatic HPV16-positive head and neck cancer opened and is actively recruiting patients. The clinical trial will evaluate the efficacy and safety of this therapeutic combination as a first-line treatment in patients with recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer and high-risk HPV16 infection.
In this sponsored trial, patients whose cancer has returned or spread following initial treatment, will take this combination of two immuno-therapy drugs in lieu of chemotherapy. Enrolling patients with more functional immune systems earlier in disease recurrence that have not been compromised by extensive chemotherapy may allow improved efficacy of the combination. Patients in the trial will receive a total of 5 cycles of combination therapy in the context of standard of care KEYTRUDA® therapy administered every three weeks until disease progression or intolerance to therapy.
The original trial design for this combination trial was restricted to patients naïve to checkpoint inhibitor (CPI) therapy. PDS amended the protocol in May 2021 to expand this trial to include patients with advanced head and neck cancer who have failed multiple treatments, including CPI therapy (CPI refractory patients), a treatment refractory population with extremely high unmet medical need. The amended trial design is a Simon two stage design that will evaluate objective response rate- or ORR - at six months following initiation of treatment in both the original CPI naïve arm and in the expansion CPI refractory arm. Objective response is measured by radiographic tumor responses according to RECIST 1.1. There will be a lead-in cohort of 12 patients for the entire trial to assess the safety of the combination. In the CPI naïve arm of the trial, the first seventeen (17) patients will be evaluated for efficacy with a minimum of four (4) or more patients with documented objective response required to progress to full enrollment of this arm. In the expansion CPI refractory arm, the first twenty-one (21) patients will be evaluated for efficacy with a minimum of two (2) or more patients with documented objective response required to progress to full enrollment of this arm.
Index
In the first quarter of 2022, at the Multidisciplinary Head and Neck Cancers Symposium, we announced the safety data for this trial in more detail, which showed that PDS0101 in combination with KEYTRUDA® for the treatment of recurrent or metastatic head and neck cancer is likely safe and well tolerated without evidence of enhanced or significant toxicity.
Also, in the first quarter of 2022, we announced we had met the preliminary efficacy milestone in the checkpoint inhibitor naïve arm and the arm could proceed to full enrollment of 54 patients. As pre-specified in the clinical trial design, the achievement of an objective response as measured by radiographic tumor responses according to RECIST 1.1 (tumor reduction of 30% or more) confirmed by two separate measurements among at least four or more of the first 17 patients in the CPI naïve arm to progress to full enrollment. The enrollment continues in the first stage of the CPI refractory arm.
PDS0101 in Combination with Bintrafusp alfa (M7824) and NHS-IL12 NCI-led Clinical Trial:
In June 2020, the first patient was dosed under a PDS0101 Cooperative Research and Development Agreement, which we refer to as the CRADA, in a National Cancer Institute, or NCI, led Phase 2 clinical trial evaluating PDS0101, in combination with two investigational immune-modulating agents Bintrafusp alfa (M7824), a bifunctional “trap” fusion protein targeting TGF-β and PD-L1, and NHS-IL12 (M9241), a tumor-targeting immune-cytokine. Both Bintrafusp alfa and NHS-IL12 are owned by and are being developed by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany. The NCI-led trial is evaluating the novel triple combination for the treatment of both CPI naïve and refractory patients with advanced HPV-associated cancers that have progressed or returned after treatment. Almost all types of HPV-related cancers (anal, cervical, head and neck, vaginal and vulvar cancers) are represented among the trial subjects to date. Objective response (tumor reduction > 30%) is measured by radiographic tumor responses according to RECIST 1.1. The NCI recently achieved the intended enrollment objective of 30 patients in the CPI refractory arm of the trial. The trial has enrolled 45 patients and enrollment in the trial will continue until the total enrollment of 56 patients is achieved.
The trial was accepted for oral presentation at the 2021 meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) held June 4-8, 2021. On May 20, 2021, we announced the abstract summarizing interim data of 14 patients from the trial. Objective responses were observed in 83% (5 of 6) of HPV16-positive checkpoint inhibitor naïve patients with advanced disease. Objective responses were observed in 63% (5 of 8) of HPV16-positive advanced cancer patients who had also failed checkpoint inhibitor therapy.
On June 7, 2021, updated interim data (Abstract 2501) was presented at ASCO by the trial’s Principal Investigator Dr. Julius Strauss. This data included an update on the initial 14 patients with an additional four (4) subsequently recruited CPI refractory HPV16-positive patients whose data became available after the abstract submission as well as an additional seven (7) HPV16-negative patients (patients whose cancer was not caused by HPV16 infection) who were not discussed in the abstract. Tumor reduction and objective response was seen in 83% (5/8) of CPI naïve patients with one (1) achieving a complete response. After a median of eight (8) months of follow-up, 100% (6/6) of these patients were alive, compared to the historical median survival of 7-11 months. In the CPI refractory arm, tumor reduction was observed in 58% (7/12) patients. These 12 patients included the initial 8 patients reported in the abstract where 5 of 8, or 63% had tumor reduction. Of the 4 additional patients in this updated data set, 2 patients already had ongoing tumor reduction but had not yet met the criteria for objective response. Objective response was achieved in 42% (5/12) patients with one (1) achieving a complete response in this refractory arm. The objective response rates reported in checkpoint refractory, advanced HPV-cancer patients are lower than those naïve to checkpoint inhibitors, generally only 5-12%. Importantly, 83% (10/12) of all checkpoint inhibitor refractory patients were still alive at median eight (8) months of follow-up; historic average median survival for this patient population is 3-4 months. Overall, tumor reduction occurred in 67% (12/18) of the HPV16-positive patients, including both CPI naïve and CPI refractory patients. Of note, in the 7 HPV16-negative patients- those with an HPV type other than HPV16 that do not express the molecular target of PDS0101, zero (0) of seven (7) patients experienced tumor reduction or an objective response, providing insight into the potential role of PDS0101 in the observed activity of the triple combination. These data suggest that HPV16-specific CD8+ and CD4+ T-cell induction by PDS0101 as demonstrated in preclinical studies and phase 1 clinical studies, may promote tumor reduction and enhanced clinical benefit of the triple combination.
Moreover, PDS0101 did not appear to compound the toxicities already reported to be induced by Bintrafusp alfa and NHS-IL12. This is an important consideration for combination oncology treatment regimens where a key goal is to avoid additional or excess toxicity associated with limited anti-tumor activity. As would be expected with both PDS0101 and M9241 being delivered subcutaneously, injection site reactions were seen in 20% of patients. No new or additional toxicities have been observed to date from the addition of PDS0101 to the combination of the other two immunotherapies.
In the first quarter of 2022, the NCI provided us with data that as of December 31, 2021, the median survival of all patients had increased to 12 months and on-going.
Index
PDS0101 in Combination with Chemo-Radiotherapy Clinical Trial (IMMUNOCERV):
In October 2020, a third PDS0101 phase 2 clinical trial was initiated with The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and is actively recruiting patients. This clinical trial is investigating the safety and preliminary anti-tumor efficacy of PDS0101 in combination with standard-of-care chemo-radiotherapy, or CRT, and their correlation with critical immunological biomarkers in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer. The trial goals include evaluation of the rate of regression in patients with a primary tumor that is greater than or equal to 5cm among approximately thirty-five (35) patients. The rate of complete metabolic response is measured by PET-CT at day 170 and the rate of > 90% tumor volume reduction evaluated by MRI at 30-40 days from the start of treatment. Preliminary data is expected from this trial in 2022. We believe that Versamune’s strong T-cell induction has the potential to meaningfully enhance efficacy of the current standard of care CRT treatment in this indication.
PDS0101 as a Monotherapy and in Combination with KEYTRUDA® in a Pre-Surgical Oropharynx Clinical Trial (Mayo Clinic):
In February 2022, a fourth phase 2 clinical trial was initiated with Mayo Clinic. This study is currently open for enrollment. This investigator initiated clinical trial (MC200710), for PDS0101 as a monotherapy or in combination with KEYTRUDA®, in patients with HPV oropharynx cancer (HPV+OPSCC) at high risk for recurrence. The trial treatment will be administered before patients proceed to transoral robotic surgery with curative intent. Treatment in this setting is referred to as neoadjuvant treatment. This trial will explore wither PDS0101 with or without checkpoint inhibition may increase HPV-specific anti-tumor responses, potentially resulting in tumor shrinkage, pathologic regression and decrease in circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA).
Other Versamune -Based Products in Development:
PDS0102 - Versamune + TARP antigens
The TARP antigen is over-expressed in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), prostate and breast cancers. In the U.S. 450,000 patients are projected to be diagnosed with prostate or breast cancer this year and 19,900 patients are projected to be diagnosed with AML. One hundred percent of adult and pediatric AML overexpress the TARP tumor antigen while approximately 90% of prostate cancers and 50% of breast cancers overexpress TARP, providing a potentially significant therapeutic opportunity to impact these diseases. In an early human clinical study, the National Cancer Institute demonstrated that its proprietary TARP antigens (TARP mix) were recognized by the immune system in prostate cancer patients with PSA biochemical recurrence leading to a notable reduction in tumor growth rates. In preclinical studies, a dramatically enhanced TARP-specific CD8+ killer T-cell response was observed when our designed TARP antigens were combined with Versamune (PDS0102). Preclinical development is ongoing. On November 5, 2021 PDS and NCI entered into a non-exclusive, worldwide Patent License Agreement to develop and commercialize a product including TARP antigens. The patent for the TARP antigens extends through 2034. This license agreement is an important step in the development of PDS0102. We are evaluating the next steps in the clinical development of PDS0102 and are seeking nondilutive financings to move to human trials.
PDS0103 - Versamune + MUC1 antigens
In April 2020, the PDS-NCI CRADA was expanded beyond PDS0101 to include clinical and preclinical development of PDS0103. PDS0103 is an investigational immunotherapy owned by PDS and designed to treat cancers associated with the mucin-1, or MUC1, oncogenic protein. PDS0103 combines Versamune with novel highly immunogenic agonist epitopes of MUC1 developed by the NCI and licensed by PDS. MUC1 is highly expressed in multiple solid tumors and has been shown to be associated with drug resistance and poor disease prognosis in breast, colorectal, lung and ovarian cancers, for which PDS0103 is being developed. In preclinical studies, and similarly to PDS0101 and PDS0102, PDS0103 demonstrated the ability to generate powerful MUC1-specific CD8+ killer T-cells. PDS0103 is currently in late preclinical development, and we requested a pre-IND meeting with the FDA to align on a clinical development plan. In the first quarter of 2022, we held a pre-IND meeting with the FDA on PDS0103. We were satisfied with the responses and believe we will submit our IND package and will start human trials at the end of 2022.
Index
PDS0104 - Versamune + TRP-2 and melanoma antigens
Rates of melanoma have been rising rapidly over the past few decades and approximately 96,480 new melanomas will be diagnosed this year alone. More than 7,000 of these will prove fatal. PDS0104 combines Versamune with various melanoma antigens including the Tyrosinase-related protein 2 (TRP2) antigen which is highly expressed in melanoma. In preclinical B16 animal models of aggressive melanoma, PDS0104 has been shown to have unique and significant anti-tumor activity as a monotherapy and has also demonstrated strong anti-tumor synergy in combination with checkpoint inhibitors. As the first approval indications for checkpoint inhibitors occurred in melanoma, there is a growing unmet medical need to identify combination regimens with potential activity in checkpoint inhibitor refractory patients with this disease. Preclinical development is ongoing.
Infectious Diseases
Our primary focus remains on developing our oncology products and progressing the clinical trials described above. However, we are also developing preventive vaccines to address several infectious diseases. Based on the key characteristics of Versamune we are progressing preclinical development of PDS0202, a universal influenza vaccine candidate, which combines Versamune with COBRA (Computationally Optimized Broadly Reactive Antigen) antigens. These COBRA antigens were designed by renowned influenza expert Dr. Ted Ross at the University of Georgia. PDS0202 leverages Versamune’s ability to induce the immune system to generate high levels of flu-specific neutralizing antibodies, CD4 helper and CD8 killer T-cells, as well as long-acting memory T-cells to potentially provide broad and long-term protection against multiple influenza strains. PDS0202 preclinical development is being supported by an agreement with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Collaborative Influenza Vaccine Innovation Centers, or CIVIC program. We have completed preclinical formulation and we have entered into an agreement to license COBRA antigens with the University of Georgia initially to progress into a human clinical trial.
PDS0203 is being designed with the goal to potentially provide long-term and broad protection against infection from COVID-19 and its potential mutations, based on the understood potential of Versamune to prime the immune system to generate both antibodies for near term protection and T-cell responses for immune memory and long-term protection against pathogens. Farmacore Biotechnology has licensed Versamune in Latin America to develop PDS0203 in Brazil. Farmacore is developing and manufacturing the antigen component of the vaccine, leads all regulatory and clinical trial efforts in Brazil and has selected a top clinical research organization to conduct clinical trials.
On February 22, 2021, PDS Biotechnology and Farmacore announced that Blanver Farmoquímica e Farmacêutica S.A joined their efforts (collectively the “Consortium”) to develop and commercialize a novel COVID-19 vaccine in Latin America. Under the terms of the agreement, São Paulo-based Blanver will manufacture, promote, distribute, and commercialize the Infectimune-based COVID-19 vaccine in Latin America.
On March 11, 2021 we announced that the Consortium received a commitment from the Secretary for Research and Scientific Training of the MCTI, Brazil to fund up to approximately US$60 million to support the clinical development and commercialization of an Infectimune-based COVID-19.
The progression of the Farmacore development program was delayed in the fourth quarter of 2021. After a review of the program by PDS and Farmacore, the agreement with Farmacore was extended for six months to May 31, 2022 to provide additional time to Farmacore to commence manufacturing and scale up of drug product for use in clinical trials and any necessary process development work. PDS will continue to monitor Farmacore’s progress with this program.
Index
Our current pipeline of Versamune-based targeted immunotherapies and Infectimune-based therapies focuses on the use of selected disease-associated antigens that have been demonstrated to be associated with a variety of solid tumors, as well as specific infectious diseases. Our pipeline is shown below:
We have never been profitable and have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $16.9 million, and $14.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $60.7 million. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with its research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with these operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $65.2 million in cash and cash equivalents.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
●
the timing and costs of our planned clinical trials;
●
the timing and costs of our planned preclinical studies of our Versamune platform;
●
the outcome, timing and costs of seeking regulatory approvals;
●
the terms and timing of any future collaborations, licensing, consulting or other arrangements that we may enter into;
●
the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of any patents or patent applications or other intellectual property rights; and
●
the extent to which we license or acquire other products and technologies.
Index
Selected Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenues from commercial product sales and do not expect to generate any such revenue in the near future. We may generate revenue in the future from a combination of research and development payments, license fees and other upfront payments or milestone payments.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include employee-related expenses, licensing fees to use certain technology in our research and development projects, costs of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials, as well as fees paid to consultants and various entities that perform certain research and testing on our behalf. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided by vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements as prepaid or accrued expenses. Costs incurred in connection with research and development activities are expensed as incurred.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase significantly over the next several years as we advance our Versamune-based immuno-oncology, or I-O, candidates into and through clinical trials, pursues regulatory approval of our injectable Versamune candidates and prepare for a possible commercial launch, all of which will also require a significant investment in contract and internal manufacturing and inventory related costs.
The process of conducting human clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for our injectable I-O candidates. The probability of successful commercialization of our I-O candidates may be affected by numerous factors, including clinical data obtained in future trials, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred for the periods indicated (in thousands):
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, related to our executive, finance, legal, business development and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include travel expenses, professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services and facility-related costs.
Other Income
Other income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Index
Critical Accounting Policies
Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As described in Note 2, the preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various market specific and other relevant assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Estimates are assessed each period and updated to reflect current information. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Income Taxes
We file U.S. federal income tax returns and New Jersey state tax returns. Our deferred tax assets are primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards and are recorded using enacted tax rates expected to be in effect in the years in which these temporary differences are expected to be utilized. At December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating losses, or NOLs, carryforwards of approximately $108.7 million, $30.0 million of which expire at various dates between 2028 and 2037, losses generated in 2018 or later of $78.7 million will carry forward indefinitely. At December 31, 2021, we had federal research and development credits carryforwards of approximately $1.7 million. We may be subject to the net operating loss utilization provisions of Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. The effect of an ownership change would be the imposition of an annual limitation on the use of NOL carryforwards attributable to periods before the change. The amount of the annual limitation depends upon our value immediately before the ownership change, changes to our capital during a specified period prior to the change, and the federal published interest rate. Although we have not completed an analysis under Section 382 of the Code, it is likely that the utilization of the NOLs will be limited.
Accrued Clinical Expenses
When preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued clinical expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. If we underestimate or overestimate the cost associated with a trial or service at a given point in time, adjustments to research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods. Historically, our estimated accrued clinical expenses have approximated actual expense incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of our stock-based option awards to employees, directors and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the following assumptions: (1) the expected volatility of our stock is based on volatilities of a peer group of similar companies in the biotechnology industry whose share prices are publicly available, (2) the expected term of the award is based on the simplified method, which is the midpoint between the requisite service period and the contractual term of the option, as we have a limited history of being a public company from March 15, 2019 (the date of closing of the reverse merger between us and Edge Therapeutics, Inc.) to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and employment duration for our options, (3) the risk-free interest rate based on U.S. Treasury notes with a term approximating the expected life of the option and (4) expected dividend yield of 0, since we have never paid cash dividends and have no present intention to pay cash dividends.
Index
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development expenses increased to approximately $11.3 million compared to approximately $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $3.4 million was primarily attributable to an increase in regulatory and clinical costs of $2.6 million, non-cash stock-based compensation of $1.1 million and personnel costs of $0.4 million, partially offset by an overall decrease in manufacturing and facility costs of $0.7 million.
General and Administrative Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, general and administrative expenses increased to approximately $10.2 million compared to approximately $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $3.2 million increase was primarily attributable to an increase in personnel costs of $1.0 million, non-cash stock-based compensation of $2.5 million, and facilities costs of $0.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in professional fees of $0.4 million.
Benefit from Income Taxes
Income tax benefit was $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. In the second quarter of 2021, we recognized approximately $4.5 million as a Benefit from Income Taxes from the sale of our NJ tax benefits pursuant to the New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Net Operating Loss program. This transaction reduced our reported net loss and comprehensive income for the year ended December 31, 2021 to approximately $16.9 million, or approximately $2.1 million less than reported for the same period in 2020 which did not include a similar sale of NJ tax benefits.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In July 2019, we entered into a common stock purchase agreement, or the Aspire Purchase Agreement, with Aspire Capital pursuant to which, we have the right, in our sole discretion, to present Aspire Capital Fund, LLC, or Aspire Capital, with a purchase notice, directing Aspire Capital (as principal) to purchase up to 100,000 shares of our common stock per business day, in an aggregate amount of up to $20.0 million of our common stock, or the Purchased Shares, over the 30-month term of the Aspire Purchase Agreement. We may sell an aggregate of 1,034,979 shares of our common stock (which represented 19.99% of our outstanding shares of common stock on the date of the Aspire Purchase Agreement) without stockholder approval. We may sell additional shares of our common stock above the 19.99% limit provided that (i) we obtain stockholder approval or (ii) stockholder approval has not been obtained at any time the 1,034,979 share limitation is reached and at all times thereafter the average price paid for all shares issued under the Aspire Purchase Agreement, is equal to or greater than $5.76, which was the consolidated closing bid price of our common stock on July 26, 2019. The minimum price at which we can sell shares under the Aspire Purchase Agreement is $0.50. On July 29, 2019, we issued 100,654 shares of our common stock to Aspire Capital, as consideration for entering into the Aspire Purchase Agreement, which we refer to as the Commitment Shares. We recorded the fair value of the shares at July 29, 2019 of $603,924 as an expense in the third quarter of 2019. Concurrently with the Aspire Purchase Agreement, we entered into a registration rights agreement with Aspire Capital, or the Registration Rights Agreement. In accordance with the Registration Rights Agreement, on August 20, 2019 we filed a Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-232988) to cover the resale of the Commitment Shares and any Purchased Shares issuable to Aspire Capital under the Aspire Purchase Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, no Purchase Shares have been sold to Aspire Capital under the Aspire Purchase Agreement. The Aspire Purchase Agreement expired in January 2022.
Index
In February 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering, in which we sold 10,000,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $1.30 per share. The shares sold included 769,230 shares issued upon the exercise by the underwriter of its option to purchase additional shares at the public offering price, minus underwriting discounts and commissions. We received gross proceeds of approximately $13 million and net proceeds of approximately $11.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions.
In July 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement, or the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement, with the SEC, for the issuance of common stock, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debt securities and units, which we refer to collectively as the Shelf Securities, up to an aggregate amount of $100 million. The 2020 Shelf Registration Statement was declared effective on July 31, 2020. On August 13, 2020, we sold 6,900,000 shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $2.75 per share pursuant to the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement, which includes 900,000 shares issued upon the exercise by the underwriter of its option to purchase additional shares at the public offering price, minus underwriting discounts and commissions. We received gross proceeds of approximately $19.0 million and net proceeds of approximately $17.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses.
In May 2021, we received approximately $4.5 million from the net sale of tax benefits to an unrelated, profitable New Jersey corporation pursuant to our participation in the New Jersey Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Net Operating Loss program for State Fiscal Year 2020.
In June 2021, we sold 6,088,235 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $8.50 per share pursuant to the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement, which includes 794,117 shares issued upon the exercise by the underwriter of its option to purchase additional shares at the public offering price, minus underwriting discounts and commissions. We received gross proceeds of approximately $51.7 million and net proceeds of approximately $48.5 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and offering expenses. Approximately $29,300,000 of Shelf Securities remain available for future sale under the 2020 Shelf Registration Statement
As of December 31, 2021, we had $65.2 million of cash and cash equivalents.
Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, primarily research and development expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We evaluated whether there are any conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern within one year beyond the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our budgeted cash requirements in 2022 and beyond include expenses related to continuing development and clinical studies. Based on our available cash resources and cash flow projections as of the date the consolidated financial statements were available for issuance, we believe there are sufficient funds to continue operations and research and development programs for at least 12 months from the date of this report.
We plan to continue to fund our operations and capital funding needs through equity and/or debt financings. However, we cannot be certain that additional financing will be available when needed or that, if available, financing will be obtained on terms favorable to us or our existing stockholders. We may also enter into government funding programs and consider selectively partnering for clinical development and commercialization. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. Incurring debt financing would result in debt service obligations, and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on acceptable terms, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market immunotherapies that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. Any of these actions could harm our business, results of operations and prospects. Failure to obtain adequate financing also may adversely affect its ability to operate as a going concern.
Index
Cash flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for each of the years indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $12.5 million and $13.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash used in operating activities of $0.6 million includes the $4.5 million NOL sale. Excluding the NOL sale, net cash used in operating activities would have increased $3.9 million primarily due to the increase in the loss before income taxes of $6.6 million, prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.9 million, offset by an increase in stock-based compensation of $3.6 million.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the receipt of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $48.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the receipt of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $29.8 million.
Operating Capital Requirements
To date, we have not generated any product revenue. We do not know when, or if, we will generate any product revenue and we do not expect to generate significant product revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize one of our current or future product candidates. We anticipate that we will continue to generate losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our tablet vaccine candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved vaccine candidates. We are subject to all of the risks incident to the development of new products, and may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may harm our business. We expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company and anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
We evaluated whether there are any conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year beyond the filing of this Annual Report. Our budgeted cash requirements in 2022 and beyond include expenses related to continuing development and clinical studies. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 are sufficient to continue operations and research and development programs for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report. Until we can generate significant cash from our operations, we expect to continue to fund our operations with available financial resources. These financial resources may not be adequate to sustain our operations.
Index
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
●
the initiation, progress, timing, costs and results of our planned clinical trials;
●
the effects of health epidemics, pandemics, or outbreaks of infectious diseases, including the recent COVID-19 pandemic, on our business operations, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows;
●
the outcome, timing and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, the European Medicines Agency, or EMA, and other comparable foreign regulatory authorities;
●
the cost of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
●
the cost of defending potential intellectual property disputes, including patent infringement actions brought by third parties against us now or in the future;
●
the effect of competing technological and market developments;
●
the cost of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities in regions where we choose to commercialize our tablet vaccines on our own; and
●
the initiation, progress, timing and results of our commercialization of our tablet vaccine candidates, if approved, for commercial sale.
Please see the section titled “Risk Factors” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional risks associated with our operations.
Purchase Commitments
We have no material non-cancelable purchase commitments with service providers as we have generally contracted on a cancelable, purchase order basis.
Operations and Liquidity
While the potential economic impact brought by and over the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic may be difficult to assess or predict, the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in significant disruption of global financial markets, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. In addition, a recession or market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic could affect our business. We have taken proactive, aggressive action throughout the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the health and safety of our employees and expect to continue to implement these measures until we determine that the COVID-19 pandemic is adequately contained for purposes of our business. We may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees. Given the nature and type of our short-term investments, we do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material impact on our current investment liquidity.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Index
Smaller Reporting Company
As of January 1, 2021, we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. However, we remain a “smaller reporting company,” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. We will cease to be a smaller reporting company if we have a non-affiliate public float in excess of $250 million and annual revenues in excess of $100 million, or a non-affiliate public float in excess of $700 million, determined on an annual basis. Even though we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a smaller reporting company. As a smaller reporting company, we are permitted and intend to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not smaller reporting companies. These exemptions include:
•
being permitted to provide only two years of audited consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” disclosure;
•
reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation;
•
not being required to furnish a contractual obligations table in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”; and
•
not being required to furnish a stock performance graph in our annual report.
We expect to continue to take advantage of some or all of the available exemptions.