ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Pear’s actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under in the “Risk Factors” section included in Part 1, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31. For purposes of this section, all references to “we,” “us,” “our,” “Pear,” or the “Company” refer to Pear Therapeutics, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis should also be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 101
Overview
Pear is a commercial-stage healthcare company pioneering a new class of medicine, referred to as PDTs, which use software to treat diseases. Our vision is to advance healthcare through the widespread use of PDTs.
Recent global trends are converging to highlight a significant unmet need for new and innovative solutions for the treatment of diseases. We believe our PDTs are well suited to satisfy this growing unmet need for the treatment of diseases, including addiction and insomnia.
Pear is a leader in the PDT industry. Our marketed PDTs, reSET, reSET-O, and Somryst, were among the first three PDTs authorized by FDA. We believe PDTs have the potential to improve clinical outcomes, facilitate improved care coordination, improve practice efficiency, and provide data tracking over time.
Two of our FDA-authorized PDTs are for the treatment of addiction, which currently affects more than 20 million people in the US. Our first product, reSET, is indicated for the treatment of SUD as a monotherapy. Our second product, reSET-O, is indicated for the treatment of OUD in combination with buprenorphine.
Our third product, Somryst, is indicated for the treatment of chronic insomnia, which currently affects more than approximately 30 million people in the US.
Operating Segments
We operate our business in a single segment and as one reporting unit, which is how our chief operating decision maker (who is our president and chief executive officer) reviews financial performance and allocates resources.
Key Business Metrics
We monitor the key non-financial operating performance metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions. We began using these metrics in 2021 as we began to generate product revenue, primarily from sales of reSET and reSET-O. The metrics include the following:
Prescriptions Written - the number of prescriptions written by a clinician for one of Pear’s three commercial products, reSET®, reSET-O®, and Somryst®.
Fulfillment Rate - the percentage of prescriptions written by a clinician for one of Pear’s three commercial products that result in patients downloading and accessing therapeutic software content.
Covered Lives - the estimated number of persons with access to Pear’s PDTs by either listing on a formulary or on a fee schedule as a covered benefit with payors, including self-insured employers, IDNs, PBMs, commercial payors, and government payors. Covered lives is a proxy metric for payment rate, which is the percentage of fulfilled prescriptions for which Pear receives payment. As we are early in the development of the PDT category, most payors do not yet cover PDTs; therefore, Pear does not yet receive payment for most fulfilled prescriptions.
To illustrate how prescriptions written, fulfillment rate, and covered lives relate to product revenue, we believe it is helpful to provide a hypothetical scenario of 100 prescriptions written with a 50% fulfillment rate and a 50% payment rate. We use covered lives as a metric that is expected to impact payment rate because, as we grow the number of covered lives for our three products, the payment rate should increase. In this hypothetical scenario, Pear has 50 filled prescriptions, of which 25 are paid. Product revenue for the 100 prescriptions written would be
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 102
calculated by multiplying (a) 25 paid prescriptions by (b) the wholesale acquisition cost (WAC) for the respective prescription, reduced by (c) any applicable discounts and rebates as well as estimated contingency management costs, if applicable.
Factors Affecting Our Performance and Results of Operations
We believe that our performance and future success depend on many factors that present significant opportunities for us, but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed more fully under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Product Revenue
We generate product revenue from the sale of our three FDA-authorized PDTs: reSET, reSET-O, and Somryst. We began our efforts to self-commercialize reSET and reSET-O in Q4 2019 and Somryst in Q4 2020. Through at least 2023, sales of our existing products are not expected to reduce our continued net losses.
We enter into arrangements with health care providers and payers that provide for government-mandated and/or privately negotiated rebates and discounts with respect to the purchase of our product. A portion of the product revenue is recognized when the products are made available to the customer (under a bulk order) or when a prescription is fulfilled, and a portion of the product revenue related to the clinician’s access to our proprietary clinician dashboard is deferred and recognized ratably over the term of the PDT or if purchased under a bulk purchase agreement is deferred and recognized ratably over the term of the contract. See Note 2, Revenue Recognition, in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
If our development efforts for our PDT product candidates are successful and result in regulatory marketing authorization, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales or payment from collaboration or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties or any combination thereof. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of the product candidates that we currently have under development or potential future product candidates.
Product revenue from our existing three FDA-authorized PDTs, as well as potential future product candidates, is and will be impacted by the many factors, including the following variables: patient and clinician adoption of PDTs, pricing, reimbursement, contingency management, and product mix.
Patient and Clinician Adoption of PDTs - To continue to grow our business, we will need to execute on our current business strategy of achieving and maintaining broad market acceptance of our PDTs by patients and physicians. Market acceptance and adoption of our PDTs depends on educating people with chronic conditions, as well as self-insured employers, commercial and government payors, health plans and physicians, and other government entities, as to the distinct features, therapeutic benefits, cost savings, and other advantages of our PDTs as compared to competitive products or other currently available methodologies. We have a market access team focused educating payors on the clinical outcomes and value proposition of our products and to seek to secure favorable coverage policies and to maximize the covered lives that have reimbursement for our products by expanding approvals with IDNs, PBMs, and other payers. If we are not successful in demonstrating to existing or potential patients and prescribers the benefits of our products, or if we are not able to achieve the support of patients, healthcare providers, and payors for our products, our sales may decline, or we may fail to increase our revenue.
Pricing - In the future, we expect to grow the number of commercially available PDTs in our product portfolio, offering a broad range of PDTs spanning multiple price points. PDTs may be subject to competition which may impact our pricing, and in addition, our products may be subject to legislative prescription-pricing practices.
Reimbursement - As of December 31, 2021 , we have more than 30 organizations across more than 31.7 million covered lives providing access to our three FDA-authorized products via listing on formulary, as a covered benefit, bulk purchase, or funding a study. Pear’s payor strategy focuses across all major payor channels, including
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 103
employers, IDNs, PBMs, commercial payors, and government payors, including Medicaid and Medicare. We expect to increase our number of payors, and the pricing for such payors may vary as net prices for our products may be reduced by mandatory discounts or rebates required by government healthcare programs or private payors and can be subject to customary discounts and rebates. In addition, some of our products may be subject to certain customer incentive programs. Even if coverage is provided, the approved reimbursement amount may not be high enough to allow us to establish or maintain pricing sufficient to achieve profitability. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 21% of activated prescriptions (prescriptions written multiplied by fulfilled prescription rate) were paid prescriptions. In the future, as our market access team educates payors on the clinical attributes of our products we expect our products to secure favorable coverage policies and to maximize the covered lives that have reimbursement for our products.
Contingency Management - Costs related to clinically-validated rewards that patients earn as they complete treatment goals within our reSET and reSET-O PDTs is recorded as contra revenue.
Product Mix - Sales of certain products have, or are expected to have, higher gross margins than others. As a result, our financial performance depends, in part, on the mix of products we sell during a given period.
Collaboration and License Revenue
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have collaboration and licensing agreements from which we would recognize significant collaboration and licensing revenue. Our historical collaboration and license revenue is from Novartis Institute of Biomedical Research (“NIBR”). In June 2020, NIBR terminated their collaboration agreement with the Company, or the NIBR Agreement, related to our schizophrenia and multiple sclerosis product candidate development programs. We will not recognize any revenue under these agreements in the future.
If our development efforts for our PDT candidates are successful and result in regulatory marketing authorization or collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from collaboration or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties. We cannot predict if, when, or to what extent we may enter into future licensing or collaboration agreements. Further, we may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates that are currently under development.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue consists primarily of costs that are closely correlated or directly related to the delivery of the Company’s products, including pharmacy costs, royalties paid under license agreements related to our commercialized products, amortization of milestone payments capitalized related to commercialized products, hosting costs, and personnel-related costs, including salaries and bonuses, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation attributable to employees in a particular function. We expect the cost of product revenue to increase as we further commercialize our products and increase the volume of prescriptions filled.
Research and Development Expenses
As of December 31, 2021, we have multiple product candidates in our pipeline, and we have incurred and will continue to incur significant research and development, or R&D, costs for their development. Developing PDTs requires a significant investment of resources over a prolonged period of time, and a core part of our strategy is to continue making sustained investments in this area. We have chosen to leverage our platform to initially focus on advancing our PDTs in the area of psychiatry. We expect our R&D expenses will increase substantially as we continue to invest in the development of our pipeline of product candidates, future clinical development activities, and testing of our product candidates.
R&D expenses consist of costs incurred in performing R&D activities, which include:
•expenses incurred in connection with the development of our pipeline of PDTs;
•costs in connection with third-party licensing agreements, including development and regulatory milestones;
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 104
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for employees engaged in R&D functions;
•cost of clinical trials;
•expenses incurred in connection with the discovery and development of our PDTs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants;
•expenses incurred under agreements with consultants who supplement our internal capabilities, including software development; and
•facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses, such as rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other operating costs for space and costs directly related to R&D functions.
Each of our product candidates has technical, clinical, regulatory, and commercial risk, including those discussed more fully under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
We expense R&D costs as incurred and do not track the costs at a project level. Advance payments made for goods or services to be received in the future for use in R&D activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the benefits are consumed. In the early phases of development, our R&D costs are often devoted to product platform and proof-of-concept studies that are not necessarily allocable to a specific product.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation related to commercial, marketing, executive, finance and accounting, information technology, corporate and business development, and human resource functions. Other SG&A expenses include marketing initiatives, market research, and analysis, conferences and trade shows, travel expenses, professional services fees (including legal, patent, accounting, audit, tax, and consulting fees), insurance costs, amortization of internal-use software, general corporate expenses, and allocated facilities-related expenses, including rent and maintenance of facilities.
We expect SG&A expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we increase potential customers’ awareness and our sales and marketing functions to support existing products and future product launches. In addition, the Company expects to increase expenditures to expand our infrastructure to both drive and support the anticipated growth of the Company as well as additional expenses related to legal, accounting, information technology, investor and public relations, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance costs, and other expenses associated with being a public company and implementing additional controls over financial reporting.
Interest and other income (expense), net
Interest expense includes interest due under the Perceptive Credit Facility (as defined below) and accretion of the debt discount on the Perceptive Credit Facility as well as the change in the fair value of our derivative liabilities and earn-out liabilities that occurred during the period. In addition, it includes the accretion of the interest of the seller financing in connection with the Waypoint asset acquired in November 2021. See Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash balances held in interest-bearing accounts. We expect our interest income will fluctuate based on the timing and ability to raise additional funds as well as the amount of expenditures for our commercial products and R&D for our product candidates and ongoing business operations.
Loss on issuance of convertible preferred stock
In December 2020 and February 2021, the Company issued shares of Series D-1 and D-2 convertible preferred stock to investors. The shares are recorded at their estimated fair market value on the date of issuance. In
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 105
connection with the Series D-1 preferred stock and D-2 preferred stock financing, the Company recorded a loss on the issuance of convertible preferred stock for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, of $2.1 million and $16.8 million, respectively, which represents the amount by which the estimated fair value of the shares exceeded the sale price.
Loss/gain on extinguishment of debt
In connection with the extinguishment of the SVB Term Loan (as defined below), in June 2020, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income taxes
Deferred income taxes are provided for the effects of temporary differences between the amounts of assets and liabilities recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts recognized for income tax purposes. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. We regularly assess the need to record a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Accordingly, we have recorded a valuation allowance of $66.7 million and $40.3 million, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The future realization of deferred tax assets is subject to the existence of sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character (e.g., ordinary income or capital gain) as provided under the carryforward provisions of tax law. We consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities (including the effect in available carryback and carryforward periods), future projected taxable income (including the character and jurisdiction of such income), and tax-planning strategies in making this assessment. Unrecognized tax benefits arise when the estimated benefit recorded in the financial statements differs from the amounts taken or expected to be taken in a tax return because of the considerations described above. As of December 31, 2021, we had no unrecognized tax benefits.
Financial Highlights
Year-over-year product revenue grew significantly primarily due to an increase in sales of reSET and reSET-O, which increased approximately 24x year over year. Year-over-year total revenue declined due to non-recurring $9.2 million of collaboration revenue recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020 under an agreement terminated in March 2020 and under which no further revenue will be recognized
We incurred a net loss of $65.1 million and $97.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, representing a period-over-period decrease of $31.9 million or 32.9%. This decrease was primarily due to a change in the fair value of the earn-out liabilities of $47.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and a $14.8 million decrease in loss on issuance of convertible preferred stock, offset by an $8.8 million decrease in collaboration revenues. In addition, we had a $2.6 million increase in personnel-related expenses, primarily related to new hires as we expanded our commercial team from an average of 59 people in the year ended December 31, 2020, to an average of 94 people for the year ended December 31, 2021, and as we prepared to become a public company. Further, we had a $5.0 million increase in marketing-related expenses, a $4.1 million increase in professional fees, and a $2.4 million increase in interest expense related to the borrowing of $30.0 million under the Perceptive Credit Facility on June 30, 2020. In June 2020, the Company recorded a $1.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt.
To date, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of convertible preferred stock, proceeds as a result of the business combination, payments received in connection with collaboration and license agreements, product sales, and proceeds from borrowings under various credit facilities. Since our inception, we have received gross cash proceeds of $175.3 million as a result of the business combination (see Note 3 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K), gross cash proceeds of $268.2 million from sales of our convertible preferred stock, and currently have $30.0 million of debt outstanding under a credit facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we completed a tender offer to purchase $32.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our common stock in connection with the Legacy Pear Series D-2 preferred stock offering that was conducted in conjunction with the Legacy Pear Series D-1 stock offering.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 106
Recent Events
Business Combination
On December 3, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we consummated a business combination, pursuant to the terms of the business combination agreement (“Business Combination Agreement”) dated June 21, 2021. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, Oz Merger Sub, a newly formed subsidiary of THMA, merged with and into Pear, with Pear surviving. THMA, was renamed Pear Therapeutics, Inc (collectively, “Pear”) and Pear Therapeutics, Inc. was renamed Pear Therapeutics (US), Inc. (“Legacy Pear”). Legacy Pear is deemed the accounting predecessor and the post-company successor SEC registrant, which means Legacy Pear financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in this Form 10-K. Future period reports filed with the SEC will include Pear Therapeutics, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
The business combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, THMA was treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes. The most significant change in the post-combination Company’s reported financial position and results was an increase in cash of $175.0 million. We paid $32.8 million in transaction costs relating to the business combination. We recorded a liability related to the Public and Private Placement Warrants of $16.5 million and $95.4 million related to the earn-out shares that holders of Legacy Pear Common Shares and Legacy Pear Preferred Shares prior on the Closing Date who received the contingent right to receive up to 12,395,625 additional shares of Class A common stock (the “Earn-Out Shares”) upon the achievement of certain earn-out targets.
As a consequence of the business combination, we became the successor to an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company and we have hired additional personnel and implemented procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Economic Conditions (Impact of COVID-19)
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the global outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. The pandemic has significantly impacted the economic conditions in the US, as federal, state and local governments react to the public health crisis, creating significant uncertainties in the US economy. The downstream impact of various lockdown orders and related economic pullback affect our business and our customers to varying degrees. There Company is closely monitoring the impact of COVID-19 on all aspects of its business, including how it will impact its customers, patients, employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners. The Company is unable to predict the specific impact that COVID-19 may have on its business, financial position, and operations moving forward due to the numerous uncertainties. Any estimates made herein may change as new events occur and additional information is obtained, and actual results could differ materially from any estimates made herein under different assumptions or conditions.
For further details see the information under the heading “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A in this Form 10-K. Pear is unable to predict the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on its future results of operations, liquidity, and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic and the actions that may be taken by government authorities across the US. However, COVID-19 is not expected to result in any significant changes in costs going forward. As a result of COVID -19 pandemic we shifted our workforce to a hybrid model in which employees in one of our three offices work both remotely and onsite, and we anticipate we will continue to use this model going forward. In addition, our workforce has deep domain knowledge across a range of healthcare, technology, and general business, which was partially achieved by having certain of our employees working remotely across the US. Pear will continue to monitor the performance of its business and assess the impacts of COVID-19.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 107
Results of Operations
The table and discussion below present the results for the periods indicated:
__________________
* Percentage change not meaningful.
Product revenue-Product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $3.7 million, an increase of $3.6 million, or 24x, compared to the prior year primarily driven by increased bulk sales of reSET and reSET-O.
Collaboration and license revenue-Collaboration and license revenue was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $9.2 million in connection with the NIBR Agreement, which was terminated in June 2020. See Note 9 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Cost of product revenue-Cost of product revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $5.2 million, an increase of approximately $3.5 million compared to the prior year primarily due to increased product revenue as discussed above.
Due to our increased commercialization efforts, we saw an increase in our pharmacy costs, minimum royalties related to licensing agreements for commercialized products, and hosting costs for our PDTs. In addition, in November 2020, the Company launched Somryst, which further increased our cost of product revenue.
Research and development-R&D expenses were $37.0 million and $28.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $9.0 million was primarily due to the following:
•An increase of $3.9 million of personnel-related costs and an increase of $1.0 million of recruiting fees as we continued shifting our software development work from external to internal resources, and coinciding with an increase in average R&D headcount from 88 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 107 for the year ended December 31, 2021; and
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 108
•Increases of $2.1 million of consultant costs, $1.0 million of professional and recruiting fees, and $1.0 of software expenses.
Selling, general, and administrative-SG&A expenses were $67.6 million and $56.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $11.4 million was primarily due to further building out of our commercial operations, which resulted in the following increases:
•$5.3 million in personnel-related costs as a result of an increase in average headcount from approximately 90 in 2020 to approximately 120 in 2021, primarily the commercial team;
•$5.0 million in marketing and advertising costs as a result of targeted media and market awareness, education, and advocacy initiatives;
•$2.2 million in professional fees, including increases in legal and accounting fees as a result of becoming a public company;
•$1.4 million of transaction costs directly incurred in connection with the Business Combination;
•$1.3 million of depreciation and amortization expense, primarily related to amortization of software used in our patient support center;
•$1.2 million of software related expenses; and
•$1.1 million of license and subscription costs.
The results for the year ended December 31, 2020, included a $7.2 million stock compensation charge from the tender offer used to purchase and re-sell Legacy Pear shares as part of the Legacy Pear Series D preferred share issuance.
Interest and other (expense) income, net-Interest and other income (expense), net was an expense of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to expense of $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was primarily related to $4.3 million of interest related to the Perceptive Credit Facility that closed on June 30, 2020, compared to $2.5 million of interest under the Perceptive Credit Facility and SVB Term Loan for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also recognized $0.7 million of interest income on cash and investments.
Change in fair value of earn-out liabilities-For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a $47.0 million gain as a result of the change in fair value of the earn-out liabilities from its initial recognition on the December 3, 2021, the date of the Merger, until December 31, 2021.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities-Legacy Pear Warrants, which were exercised in 2021 prior to the business combination, for the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a $8.3 million loss due to the change in fair value of outstanding warrant liabilities, compared to a $0.8 million loss on Legacy Pear Warrants for the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss on the Legacy Pear Warrants for the year ended December 31, 2021 was offset by a gain on the Public and Private Placement Warrants $8.0 million, which were issued by THMA prior to the business combination.
Loss on issuance of extinguishment of debt-In June 2020, the Company paid the outstanding principal on the SVB Term Loan prior to the maturity date resulting in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 7 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Loss on issuance of legacy convertible preferred stock-In December 2020, the Company issued shares of Legacy Pear Series D-1 and D-2 convertible preferred stock. The shares are recorded at their estimated fair market value on the date of issuance. In connection with the Legacy Pear D-1 and D-2 Preferred Stock Financing, the Company recorded a loss of $16.8 million, net of issuance costs, for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents the amount by which the estimated fair value of the shares exceeded the sale price. In February 2021, the Company issued additional shares of Legacy Pear Series D-1 Preferred Stock. The shares are recorded at their
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 109
estimated fair market value on the date of issuance. In connection with the Legacy Pear Series D-1 Preferred Stock, the Company recorded a loss of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which represents the amount by which the estimated fair value of the shares exceeded the sale price, net of issuance costs. See Note 10 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Income tax-We did not incur income tax expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020. Given our lack of prior earnings history, we have a full valuation allowance primarily related to our net operating loss and R&D credit carryforwards that we do not consider more likely than not to be realized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our primary sources of capital have been proceeds from sales of convertible preferred stock, payments received in connection with collaboration agreements, proceeds from borrowings under various credit facilities, and the business combination that occurred December 3, 2021. See Recent Events in Part II, Item 7 of this Form 10-K and Note 3 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
We have three commercial products: reSET, reSET-O, and Somryst. The revenue from the sale of these products at the present time is not sufficient to cover the operating costs incurred. Our ability to achieve sufficient revenue to cover our costs is highly dependent on our PDTs achieving and maintaining broad market acceptance by patients and physicians and obtaining reimbursement from third-party payors. The Company has incurred recurring losses from inception and anticipates net losses and negative operating cash flows for the near future. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net operating losses of $65.1 million and $97.0 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $248.0 million and $182.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had outstanding debt of $27.0 million and $26.3 million, net of debt issuance costs, respectively. Our cash flows may fluctuate and are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $169.6 million and $110.9 million, respectively.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be for the near future, funding operating activities, including expanding our commercial operations and further development of our product pipeline. We have in the past and we expect in the future to capitalize labor costs related to the development of our internal-use software. We may also pursue acquisitions, investments, joint ventures, and other strategic transactions.
In the future, we will need to raise additional capital to pursue our growth strategy and support continuing operations. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue to fund operations, we expect to seek additional capital from the issuance of equity, debt, or other capital transactions. If sufficient funds on acceptable terms are not available when needed, we will be required to significantly reduce our operating expenses. Further, we may be unable to increase our revenue, raise additional funds, or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates and other strategic initiatives. We are also subject to various covenants related to the Perceptive Credit Facility, and given the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, there is a risk that we may not meet our covenants in the future. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we concluded that these circumstances raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Cash and cash equivalents
As of December 31, 2021 we had $169.6 million of cash and cash equivalents. Our future capital requirements may vary from those currently planned and will depend on various factors, including the timing and extent of R&D spending and spending on other strategic business initiatives, including expanding our commercial operations.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 110
Liquidity Risks
We expect to incur substantial additional expenditures in the near term to support our ongoing activities, including as a result of operating as a public company. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. Our ability to fund our product development and clinical operations as well as commercialization of our product candidates will depend on the amount and timing of cash available to fund operations. Our future liquidity and capital funding requirements will depend on numerous factors, including:
•our revenue growth;
•the ability to obtain third-party payor reimbursement for our current products;
•the amount and timing of sales and other revenues from our product candidates, if approved, including the sales price and the availability of coverage and adequate third-party payor reimbursement;
•our commercial activities, including sales and marketing;
•our R&D efforts;
•the emergence and effect of competing or complementary products;
•the outcome, timing, and cost of meeting regulatory requirements established by the FDA, or comparable foreign regulatory authorities;
•the progress, timing, scope, and costs of our preclinical studies, clinical trials, potential future clinical trials, and other related activities;
•the costs of commercialization activities for any of our product candidates that receive marketing authorization, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing and hosting capabilities, or entering into strategic collaborations with third parties to leverage or access these capabilities;
•the cash requirements of developing our programs and our ability and willingness to finance their continued development;
•the cash requirements of any future discovery of product candidates;
•our ability to retain our current employees and the need and ability to hire additional management and sales, technical and medical personnel;
•the time and cost necessary to respond to technological and market developments, including other products that may compete with one or more of our product candidates;
•debt service requirements;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in business, products, or technology; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the sale of our products or the development of product candidates. Further, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. See the information under the heading “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A this Form 10-K.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated product development programs.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 111
Funding Requirements
Please see the risks associated with our substantial capital requirements explained more fully under the heading “Risk Factors-The Company will need substantial additional funding, and if it is unable to raise capital when needed or on terms favorable to the Company, the Company’s business, financial condition, and results of operation could be materially and adversely affected” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Debt Financing and Covenants
Borrowings under our $50.0 million secured Perceptive Credit Facility were $30.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, which was used to extinguish the former SVB Term Loan and for general business purposes. The Perceptive Credit Facility matures in June 2025. We are required to pay a variable rate of interest based upon the one-month LIBOR rate plus 11.0%, subject to a LIBOR floor of 1.0%. As of December 31, 2021, the annual interest rate was 12.0%. The Company is required to make interest-only payments until May 31, 2024, after which point the Company will be required to make monthly payments of principal equal to 3.0% of the then outstanding principal until maturity on June 30, 2025.
The Perceptive Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company, including our intellectual property. The Perceptive Credit Facility requires the Company to (i) maintain a minimum aggregate cash balance of $5.0 million in one or more controlled accounts, and (ii) as of the last day of each fiscal quarter commencing with the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022, report revenues for the trailing 12-month period that exceed the amounts that range from $5.8 million for the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2022, to $125.0 million for the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2025. The Perceptive Credit Facility contains various affirmative and negative covenants that limit the Company’s ability to engage in specified types of transactions. The Company was in compliance with the covenants under the Perceptive Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
See Note 7 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. In the future, we may seek to obtain other additional sources of financing, including incurring term debt or issuing equity or debt securities.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $0.4 million in a letter of credit outstanding in connection with our leased property in San Francisco, California.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments, and Contingencies
We lease our headquarters in Boston, Massachusetts, under a non-cancelable operating lease with an expiration date of June 1, 2028. We also lease office space in San Francisco, California, under a non-cancelable operating lease that expires on July 31, 2025, and office space in Raleigh, North Carolina, under a non-cancelable operating lease that expires on May 31, 2026.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with various vendors, which are generally cancellable upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of service providers, up to the date of cancellation.
In addition, under various licensing agreements to which we are a party, we are obligated to pay annual license maintenance fees and may be required to make milestone payments and to pay royalties and other amounts to third parties. The payment obligations under these agreements are contingent upon future events, such as our achievement of specified milestones or generating product revenue, and the amount, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known. Amounts related to contingent milestone payments are not considered contractual obligations as they are contingent on the successful achievement of certain milestones. These contingent milestones may not be achieved. We cannot estimate or predict when, or if, these amounts will become due.
On June 17, 2021, and later amended on August 3, 2021, the Company entered into a non-cancelable purchase obligation for a subscription to the Palantir Foundry cloud platform, including support services, updates, and related professional services with Palantir for $9.3 million payable over three years, continuing through September 30, 2024.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 112
See Note 8 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data for each applicable period:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $109.0 million for 2021. Net cash used in operating activities consists of a net loss of $65.1 million, adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments primarily include the change in fair value of earn-out liabilities of $47.0 million, stock-based compensation of $3.8 million, loss on issuance of convertible preferred stock of Legacy Pear of $2.1 million, and depreciation of $1.7 million and net changes in operating assets and liabilities (working capital) of $5.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $67.9 million for 2020. Net cash used in operating activities consists of a net loss of $97.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items and the effect of changes in working capital. Non-cash adjustments primarily include loss on the issuance of convertible preferred stock of Legacy Pear of $16.8 million, stock-based compensation expense of $9.0 million, depreciation expense of $0.4 million, loss on the extinguishment of debt of $1.0 million, and the change in fair value of Legacy Pear warrants of $0.8 million (increase in ending warrant liability).
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $2.9 million for 2021 related primarily to the maturities of investments offset by the purchase of investments, $3.3 million investment in property and equipment which is primarily internal-use software, and $1.4 million in intangible assets, and a $1.0 million regulatory milestone payment.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $58.9 million for 2020 and related primarily to the maturities of investments offset by a regulatory milestone payment and investment in internal-use software.
Financing Activities
Through December 31, 2021, Pear has financed its operations primarily through the Business Combination with THMA (discussed above), the sale of Legacy Pear convertible preferred stock, payments received in connection with collaboration agreements, and borrowings under various credit facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $164.1 million for 2021 and related to proceeds from the Business Combination of $144.3 million and proceeds of $19.9 million from the issuance of Legacy Pear preferred convertible stock, offset by transaction costs associated with the Business Combination of $32.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $91.7 million for 2020 and primarily related to net proceeds from the issuance of Legacy Pear Series D convertible preferred stock of $111.1 million, proceeds from the drawdown on the Perceptive Credit Facility of $30.0 million, $1.0 million of borrowings under the former SVB Term Loan, and proceeds of $0.4 million from the exercise of stock options offset by the repurchase of Legacy Pear common and convertible preferred stock of $32.0 million and the payment to extinguish the former SVB Term Loan in the amount of $17.3 million.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 113
Related Party Transactions
During the year ended December 31, 2020, in connection with the Legacy Pear Series D-2 preferred stock offering, the Company completed a tender offer whereby the Company purchased 2,788,732 shares of Legacy Pear common stock from its President & Chief Executive Officer, and 41,100 Legacy Pear common shares from certain eligible employees, at a purchase price of $3.9433 per share totaling $11.2 million and resulting in a stock-based compensation expense of $7.3 million, representing the difference between the purchase price and the fair value of the Legacy Pear common stock on the date of the sale.
Certain holders of Legacy Pear Series A preferred stock had representation on the Company’s then board of directors and purchased shares of Legacy Pear Series B preferred stock. Certain holders of Legacy Pear Series A and B preferred stock had representation on the Company’s then board of directors and purchased shares of Legacy Pear Series C preferred stock. Certain holders of Legacy Pear Series A, B, and C preferred stock had representation on the Company’s then board of directors and purchased shares of Legacy Pear Series D preferred stock. Certain holders of Legacy Pear Series A, B, C, and D preferred stock had representation on the Company’s then board of directors and purchased PIPE Shares.
Emerging Growth Company Status (JOBS Act)
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can choose not to take advantage of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies, and any such election to not take advantage of the extended transition period is irrevocable. We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in Section 2(A) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period.
We expect to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public business entities and nonpublic business entities until the earlier of the date we (a) are no longer an emerging growth company or (b) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. This may make it difficult or impossible to compare our financial results with the financial results of another public company that is either not an emerging growth company or is an emerging growth company that has chosen not to take advantage of the extended transition period exemptions because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
In addition, we have chosen to take other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act and are not required to, among other things:
(a) provide an auditor’s attestation report on Pear’s system of internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
(b) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; and
(c) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and its assessment, to the extent it has made one, of their potential impact on its financial condition and results of operations.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 114
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with US generally accepted accounting principles, or US GAAP, and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported. See Note 2 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further information. Management bases these estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We monitor our estimates on an ongoing basis for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are recorded in the period in which they become known.
Legacy Pear Preferred and Common Stock Valuations
The fair value of Legacy Pear’s preferred and Legacy Pear common stock underlying stock awards was determined by the then board of directors. Given the absence of a public trading market, the then board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of Legacy Pear’s common stock at each board of directors meeting in which stock awards were approved. These factors included, but were not limited to:
•the prices at which we sold our preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•our results of operations, financial position, and capital resources;
•contemporaneous third-party valuations common stock;
•the rights, preferences, and privileges of convertible preferred stock relative to common stock;
•the lack of marketability of common stock;
•stage and development of Pear’s business;
•the history and nature of our business, industry trends and competitive environment,
•general economic conditions; and
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or sale of Pear, given prevailing market conditions.
We determined the fair value per share of the underlying Legacy Pear preferred and Legacy Pear common stock by taking into consideration results obtained from third-party valuations and additional factors that were deemed relevant. The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our Legacy Pear preferred and Legacy Pear common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different. The fair value of the underlying Legacy Pear common stock was determined by the then board of directors until we were listed on Nasdaq on December 3, 2021.
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 115
Revenue Recognition
We determine both product and collaboration and license revenue recognition through the following five-step framework in accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) and its related amendments, or, collectively, ASC 606:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, Pear satisfies a performance obligation.
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the goods and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods and services, the Company applies judgment to determine whether promised goods and services are both capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. To the extent the goods and services are distinct, it requires an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis unless the transaction price is variable and meets the criteria to be allocated entirely to a performance obligation or to a distinct service that forms part of a single performance obligation. The consideration to be received is allocated among the separate performance obligations based on relative standalone selling prices. The Company typically determines standalone selling prices using an adjusted market assessment approach model.
The Company satisfies performance obligations either over time or at a point in time. Revenue is recognized over time if either (i) the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by the entity’s performance, (ii) the entity’s performance creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced, or (iii) the entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. If the entity does not satisfy a performance obligation over time, the related performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time by transferring the control of a promised good or service to a customer.
Our collaboration and license revenue to date has primarily been generated through two collaboration and license agreements: the Sandoz Agreement and the NIBR Agreement.
In October 2019, Sandoz terminated the Sandoz Agreement, and thereafter Pear assumed the responsibility to commercialize its two lead products, reSET and reSET-O. In October 2019, we began our efforts to self-commercialize reSET and reSET-O. In addition, in June 2020, NIBR terminated their collaboration agreement with the Company related to our schizophrenia and multiple sclerosis product candidate development programs. We will not recognize any revenue under these agreements in the future.
To date, while we have recognized product revenue from the sale of our PDTs, reSET, reSET-O, and Somryst, and although we expect to continue to recognize revenue from the sale of these PDTs, we do not expect to generate significant revenue until 2023.
Valuation of Earn-Out Liabilities
As discussed in Notes 1, 3, and 4 in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K, on December 3, 2021, we completed a Business Combination. In connection with the Business Combination and pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, eligible Legacy Pear Shareholders are entitled to receive an aggregate of 12,395,625 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock (“Earn-Out Shares”) upon the Company achieving certain earn-out triggering events. At the time of closing, the Company recorded the earn-out liabilities upon issuance at its then estimated fair value of the Earn-Out Shares. The fair
Pear Therapeutics, Inc.| 2021 Form 10-K |Page 116
value of the Earn-Out Shares was derived utilizing a Monte Carlo Simulation Method (“MCSM”) to assess the likelihood of a triggering event occurring in the specified time frame. Under each scenario, the occurrence of a triggering event is tracked. If one of the thresholds is reached, then the underlying fair value of the common stock at the time of the trigger event is utilized to determine the fair value of the Earn-Out Shares that would be issued. The mean value of the shares estimated over the course of numerous iterations are calculated to arrive at the fair value of the Earn-Out shares. The MCSM utilizes a number of inputs which include the trading price and volatility of the underlying common stock, expected term, risk-free interest rates, expected date of a qualifying event, and qualifying traded share price within the specified time frame. The determination of the fair value of these financial instruments is complex and highly judgmental due to the significant estimation required. In particular, the fair value estimate was sensitive to certain assumptions, such as the volatility of underlying shares. The earn-out liabilities to the Legacy Pear shareholders are measured at the end of each reporting period at fair value with changes in fair value reported in our statement of operations.
If the applicable triggering event is achieved for a tranche, the Company will account for the Earn-Out Shares for such tranche as issued and outstanding common stock.
Stock-Based Compensation
Accounting for stock-based compensation is a critical accounting policy due to the broad-based equity awards provided to employees at all levels and the use of equity awards as part of the strategy to retain employees as a result of a change of control events. Pear issues stock-based compensation to employees and non-employees, generally in the form of stock options and starting in 2022, restricted stock units, or RSUs. Compensation expenses for stock options are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. Forfeitures are accounted for when they occur. The fair value of the stock options is measured on the grant date using the Black-Scholes model, which utilizes the following estimates as inputs:
•Expected volatility: determined based on an average of the historical volatility of a peer group of similar public companies;
•Expected term: as our employee stock options have “plain vanilla” characteristics, the expected term is determined using the simplified method, which represents the average of the contractual term of the option and the weighted average vesting period of the option; the contractual life of the option is used for the expected life of non-employee stock options;
•Risk-free interest rate: based upon the US Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant; and
•Expected dividend yield: based on our history and current expectation of not paying dividends in the foreseeable future.