ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
We develop, market, license, host, and support enterprise software that helps organizations simplify business complexity. Our powerful low-code platform for workflow automation and AI-powered decisioning enables the world’s leading brands and government agencies to hyper-personalize customer experiences, streamline customer service, and automate mission-critical business processes and workflows. With Pega, our clients can leverage our intelligent technology and scalable architecture to accelerate their digital transformation. Our client success teams, world-class partners, and clients themselves leverage our Pega Express™ methodology to design and deploy mission-critical applications quickly and collaboratively.
Our target clients are Global 3000 organizations and government agencies that require solutions to distinguish themselves in the markets they serve. Our solutions achieve and facilitate differentiation by increasing business agility, driving growth, improving productivity, attracting and retaining customers, and reducing risk. Along with our partners, we deliver solutions tailored to our clients’ specific industry needs.
Subscription transition
We are transitioning our business to sell software primarily through subscription arrangements. Until we fully complete our subscription transition, which we expect will occur in 2023, our revenue and operating cash flow growth may be impacted. Operating performance and the actual mix of revenue and new arrangements in each period can fluctuate based on client preferences for our perpetual and subscription offerings. See risk factor "If we fail to manage our transition to a more subscription-based business model successfully, our results of operations and/or cash flows could be negatively impacted" in Item 1A of this Annual Report for additional information.
Coronavirus (‘COVID-19”)
As of December 31, 2021, COVID-19 has not had a material impact on our results of operations or financial condition.
Performance metrics
We use performance metrics to analyze and assess our overall performance, make operating decisions, and forecast and plan for future periods, including:
Annual contract value (“ACV”) | Increased 20% since December 31, 2020
ACV represents the annualized value of our active contracts as of the measurement date. The contract's total value is divided by its duration in years to calculate ACV for term license and Pega Cloud contracts. Maintenance revenue for the quarter then ended is multiplied by four to calculate ACV for maintenance. ACV is a performance measure that we believe provides useful information to our management and investors, particularly during our subscription transition. Foreign currency exchange rate changes were a 1% headwind to ACV growth in 2021.
Remaining performance obligations (“Backlog”) | Increased 25% since December 31, 2020
Expected future revenue from existing non-cancellable contracts:
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenue
Subscription transition
We are transitioning our business to sell software primarily through subscription arrangements. This transition has impacted revenue growth as revenue is recognized differently for subscription services than for license sales. Revenue from Pega Cloud and maintenance arrangements is typically recognized over the contract term, while revenue from license sales is recognized when the license rights become effective, typically upfront.
(A) Revenue from term licenses.
The change in revenue in 2021 generally reflects the impact of our subscription transition. Additional contributing factors were:
•An increasing portion of our term license contracts include multi-year committed maintenance periods instead of annually renewable maintenance. Under multi-year committed maintenance arrangements, a larger portion of the total contract value is recognized as maintenance revenue over the contract term rather than upon the effectiveness of the license rights as subscription license revenue. In 2021, multi-year committed maintenance contributed $17.1 million to maintenance revenue growth and reduced subscription license revenue growth by $4.0 million.
•Maintenance renewal rates remained over 90% in 2021.
•The increase in perpetual revenue was primarily due to license rights becoming effective in 2021 related to several large software license contracts entered into in prior years.
•The increase in consulting revenue in 2021 was primarily due to an increase in billable hours, which offset the impact of reduced billable travel expenses due to COVID-19. As part of our long-term strategy, we intend to continue growing and increasingly leveraging our ecosystem of partners on future implementation projects, potentially reducing our future consulting revenue growth rate.
Gross profitThe increase in gross profit in 2021 was primarily due to overall revenue growth and cost-efficiency gains as Pega Cloud grows and scales because of our subscription transition.
Operating expenses
•The increase in selling and marketing in 2021 was primarily due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $82.7 million, attributable to increases in headcount and incentive compensation. The increase in headcount reflects our efforts to increase our sales capacity to deepen relationships with existing clients and target new accounts.
•The increase in research and development in 2021 was primarily due to an increase in compensation and benefits of $24.8 million, attributable to increases in headcount and incentive compensation. The increase in headcount reflects additional investments in the development of our solutions, particularly for Pega Cloud.
•The increase in general and administrative in 2021 was primarily due to an increase of $14.4 million in legal fees and related expenses arising from proceedings that originated outside of the ordinary course of business. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional expenses for these proceedings in 2022. See "Note 19. Commitments And Contingencies" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
•In February 2021, we agreed to accelerate our exit from our prior Cambridge, Massachusetts headquarters to October 1, 2021, in exchange for a one-time payment from our landlord of $18 million. This agreement was the primary contributor to decreases in facilities expenses of $5.1 million in selling and marketing, $5.6 million in research and development, and $2.7 million in general and administrative, in 2021.
Other income and expenses
* not meaningful
•The change in foreign currency transaction (loss) gain in 2021 was primarily due to the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates associated with our foreign currency-denominated cash, receivables, and intercompany balances held by our subsidiary in the United Kingdom.
•The decrease in interest income in 2021 was primarily due to declines in market interest rates and invested funds.
•The decrease in interest expense in 2021 was primarily due to our adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. See "Note 11. Debt" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Interest expense related to the Notes:
•The decrease in the (loss) gain on capped call transactions in 2021 was due to fair value adjustments on the Capped Call Transactions. See "Note 11. Debt" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
•The decrease in other income, net in 2021 was due to a smaller gain from our venture investments portfolio in 2021.
(Benefit from) income taxes
During 2021, the change in our effective income tax benefit rate was primarily due to the impact of excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation and changes in statutory tax rates applicable to our U.K.-based deferred tax assets. See "Note 17. Income Taxes" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Stock-based compensation increases the variability of our effective tax rates. The impact on our effective tax rate in each period depends on our profitability and the tax deductions from our stock compensation activity, which depend upon our stock price and the award holders' exercise behavior.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We believe that our current cash, cash flow from operations, and borrowing capacity will be sufficient to fund our operations, stock repurchases, and quarterly cash dividends for at least the next 12 months and to meet our known long-term cash requirements. Whether these resources are adequate to meet our liquidity needs beyond that period will depend on our future growth, operating results, and the investments needed to support our operations. If we require additional capital resources, we may utilize available funds or additional external financing.
If it becomes necessary to repatriate foreign funds, we may have to pay U.S. and foreign taxes upon repatriation. Due to the complexity of income tax laws and regulations, it is impracticable to estimate the amount of taxes we would have to pay. See risk factor "If it becomes necessary or desirable to repatriate any of our foreign cash balances to the United States, we may be subject to increased taxes, other restrictions, and limitations" in Item 1A of this Annual Report for additional information.
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities
We are transitioning our business to sell software primarily through subscription arrangements. This transition has impacted and is expected to continue impacting our billings and cash collections, as the timing of billings and cash collections generally differs between our subscription and perpetual license arrangements. Subscription license and services are generally billed and collected over the contract term, while perpetual license arrangements usually are billed and collected upfront when the license rights become effective.
The change in cash provided by (used in) operating activities in 2021 was primarily due to a significant increase in client collections. In addition, in 2021 we incurred $18.2 million in legal fees and related expenses arising from proceedings that originated outside of the ordinary course of business. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur additional expenses for these proceedings in 2022. See "Note 19. Commitments And Contingencies" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Corporate headquarters
In February 2021, we agreed to accelerate our exit from our previous corporate headquarters to October 1, 2021, in exchange for a one-time payment from our landlord of $18 million, which was received in October 2021. The accelerated exit from this lease reduced our future lease liabilities by $21.1 million. On March 31, 2021 we leased office space at One Main Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts, to serve as our corporate headquarters. The 4.5 year lease includes a base rent of $2 million per year.
New Waltham Office
On July 6, 2021, we entered into an office space lease for 131 thousand square feet in Waltham, Massachusetts. The lease term of 11 years began on August 1, 2021. The annual rent equals the base rent plus a portion of building operating costs and real estate taxes. Rent first becomes payable on August 1, 2022. Base rent for the first year is approximately $6 million and will increase by 3% annually. In addition, we will receive an improvement allowance from the landlord of up to $11.8 million. This lease increased our lease liabilities and lease-related right of use assets by $42.1 million on August 1, 2021.
Investing activities
The change in cash provided by (used in) investing activities in 2021 was primarily driven by investments in financial instruments, an acquisition, and a decrease in office space related capital expenditures.
Financing activities
Debt financing
In February 2020, we issued $600 million in aggregate principal amount of convertible senior notes which mature on March 1, 2025.
In November 2019, and as amended as of February 2020, July 2020, and September 2020, we entered into a five-year $100 million senior secured revolving credit agreement with PNC Bank, National Association. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility.
See "Note 11. Debt" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Stock repurchase program
Changes in the remaining stock repurchase authority:
(1) On June 8, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors extended the current stock repurchase program’s expiration date to June 30, 2022 and increased the remaining common stock repurchase authority to $60 million.
(2) Purchases under this program have been made on the open market.
Common stock repurchases
During 2021 and 2020, instead of receiving cash from the equity holders, we withheld shares with a value of $56.1 million and $59.6 million, respectively, for the exercise price of options. These amounts have been excluded from the table above.
Dividends
We intend to pay a quarterly cash dividend of $0.03 per share. However, the Board of Directors may terminate or modify the dividend program at any time without prior notice.
Contractual obligations
As of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations were:
(1) Includes principal and interest.
(2) Represents the fixed or minimum amounts due under purchase obligations for hosting services and sales and marketing programs.
(3) We are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of the cash outflow due to uncertainties in the timing of the effective settlement of tax positions.
A detailed discussion and analysis of the 2020 year-over-year changes can be found in "Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS
Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. and the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for annual financial reporting. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, knowledge of current conditions, and beliefs of what could occur in the future, given the available information.
We believe that, of our significant accounting policies, described in “Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies” in Item 8 of this Annual Report, the following accounting policies are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and require the most subjective judgment. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. If actual results differ significantly from management’s estimates and projections, there could be a material effect on our financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Our client contracts typically contain promises by us to provide multiple products and services. Specifically, contracts associated with Pega Platform sales and other software applications, sold either as licenses to use functional intellectual property or as a cloud-based solution, typically include consulting services. Determining whether such products and services within a client contract are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately requires significant judgment. We review client contracts to identify all separate promises to transfer goods and services that would be considered performance obligations. Judgment is also required in determining whether an option to acquire additional products and services within a client contract represents a material right that the client would not receive without entering into that contract.
A contract modification is a legally binding change to the scope, price, or both of an existing contract. Contract modifications are reviewed to determine whether they should be accounted for as part of the original contract or as a separate contract. This determination requires significant judgment, which could impact the timing of revenue recognition. We typically account for contract modifications prospectively as a separate contract. The additional performance obligation(s) in our contract modifications are generally distinct and priced at their stand-alone selling price.
We allocate the transaction price to the distinct performance obligations, including options in contracts determined to represent a material right, based on each performance obligation's relative stand-alone selling price. Judgment is required in estimating stand-alone selling prices. We maximize the use of observable inputs by maintaining pricing analyses that consider our pricing policies, historical stand-alone sales when they exist, and historical renewal prices charged to clients. We have concluded that the stand-alone selling prices of certain performance obligations, specifically software licenses and Pega Cloud arrangements, are highly variable. In these instances, we estimate the stand-alone selling prices using the residual approach, determined based on total transaction price minus the stand-alone selling price of other performance obligations promised in the contract. We update our stand-alone selling price analysis periodically, including a re-assessment of whether the residual approach used to determine the stand-alone selling prices for software licenses and Pega Cloud arrangements remains appropriate.
Changes in the assumptions or judgments used in determining the performance obligations in client contracts and stand-alone selling prices could significantly impact the timing and amount of revenue we report in a particular period.
Goodwill and intangible assets impairment
Our goodwill and intangible assets result from our previous business acquisitions. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite useful lives are not amortized but are tested for impairment at least annually or as circumstances indicate their value may no longer be recoverable. We do not carry any intangible assets with indefinite useful lives other than goodwill. We perform our annual goodwill impairment test as of November 30th. To assess if goodwill is impaired, we first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary. If based on the qualitative assessment, we consider it more-likely-than-not that our reporting unit's fair value is less than its carrying amount, we perform a quantitative impairment test. An excess of carrying value over fair value would indicate that goodwill may be impaired. We periodically reevaluate our business and have determined that we have one operating segment and one reporting unit. If our assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges to reduce our goodwill's carrying value. Changes in the valuation of goodwill could materially impact our operating results and financial position.
We evaluate our intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that such assets' carrying amount may not be recoverable. In evaluating potential impairment of these assets, we specifically consider whether any indicators of impairment are present, including, but not limited to:
•whether there has been a significant adverse change in the business climate that affects the value of an asset;
•whether there has been a significant change in the extent or way an asset is used; and
•whether it is expected that the asset will be sold or disposed of before the end of its originally estimated useful life.
If indicators of impairment are present, we compare the estimated undiscounted cash flows that the asset is expected to generate to the carrying value. The key assumptions of the cash flow model involve significant subjectivity. If such assets are impaired, an impairment is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $81.9 million of goodwill and $14.1 million of intangible assets. Changes in the valuation of long-lived assets could materially impact our operating results and financial position. To date, there have been no impairments of goodwill or intangible assets.
Accounting for income taxes
Significant judgment is required to determine our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in applying accounting principles and complex tax laws. Changes in tax laws or our interpretation of tax laws and the resolution of any tax audits could significantly impact our financial statements.
We regularly assess the need for a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. Future realization of our deferred tax assets ultimately depends on sufficient taxable income within the available carryback or carryforward periods. Changes in our valuation allowance impact income tax expense in the period of adjustment. Our deferred tax valuation allowance requires significant judgment and uncertainties, including assumptions about future taxable income based on historical and projected information.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available objective and verifiable negative and positive evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, our firm contractual backlog, projected future taxable income (inclusive of the impact of enacted legislation), tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations. Based on our firm contractual backlog and our current projections of taxable income, we determined that it is more likely than not that we will be able to realize our net deferred tax asset as of December 31, 2021.
We assess our income tax positions and record tax benefits based upon management’s evaluation of the facts, circumstances, and information available at the reporting date. For those tax positions where it is more-likely-than-not that a tax benefit will be sustained, we record the largest amount of tax benefit with a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with a taxing authority having full knowledge of all relevant information. For those income tax positions where it is not more-likely-than-not that a tax benefit will be sustained, no tax benefit is recognized in the financial statements.
As a global company, we use significant judgment to calculate and provide for income taxes in each of the tax jurisdictions in which we operate. In the ordinary course of our business, there are transactions and calculations undertaken whose ultimate tax outcome cannot be certain. Some of these uncertainties arise due to transfer pricing for transactions with our subsidiaries, the determination of tax nexus, and tax credit estimates. In addition, the calculation of acquired tax attributes and the associated limitations are complex. We estimate our exposure to unfavorable outcomes related to these uncertainties and estimate the probability of such outcomes.
Although we believe our estimates are reasonable, no guarantee can be given that the final tax outcome will not be different from what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions, returns, and accruals. Such differences, or changes in estimates relating to potential differences, could have a material impact on our income tax provision and operating results in the period in which such a determination is made.
See "Note 17. Income Taxes" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.
Capped call transactions
In February 2020, we issued Convertible Senior Notes (the "Notes") with an aggregate principal amount of $600 million, due March 1, 2025, in a private placement. We also entered into privately negotiated capped call transactions (“Capped Call Transactions”) with certain financial institutions. The Capped Call Transactions cover 4.4 million shares (representing the number of shares for which the Notes are initially convertible) of our common stock and are generally expected to reduce potential dilution of our common stock upon any conversion of the Notes.
The Capped Call Transactions are accounted for as derivative instruments and do not qualify for the Company’s own equity scope exception in ASC 815 since, in some cases of early settlement, the settlement value of the Capped Call Transactions, calculated following the governing documents, may not represent a fair value measurement. Applying the accounting framework for the Capped Call Transactions requires the exercise of judgment and the determination of the fair value of the Capped Call Transactions requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions.
The fair value of the Capped Call Transactions at the end of each reporting period is determined using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The valuation models use various market-based inputs, including stock price, remaining contractual term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate, and expected dividend yield. Management applies judgment when determining expected volatility. We consider both historical and implied volatility levels of the underlying equity security. As of December 31, 2021, a hypothetical 10% increase in our stock price would have increased the fair value of the capped call to $72.4 million, while a hypothetical 10% decrease in our stock price would have decreased the fair value of the capped call to $47.8 million.
See "Note 2. Significant Accounting Policies", "Note 11. Debt", and "Note 13. Fair Value Measurements" in Item 8 of this Annual Report for additional information.