ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and capital resources should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations includes discussion as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. Discussion of our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 can be found in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 26, 2021.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Our Business
With a gaming footprint that includes 44 properties across 20 states as of December 31, 2021, Penn National Gaming, Inc., together with its subsidiaries (“Penn National,” the “Company,” “we,” “our,” or “us”) is a highly innovative omni-channel provider of retail casino gaming, online gaming, live racing, sports betting, and digital sports content. Our wholly-owned interactive division, Penn Interactive Ventures, LLC (“Penn Interactive”), operates retail sports betting in the Company’s retail properties, as well as online sports betting and online social casino, bingo, and iCasino products (collectively, “iGaming”). In October 2021, we acquired Score Media and Gaming, Inc. (“theScore”), a sports betting and digital media company. In addition, in February 2020, we entered a strategic partnership with Barstool Sports, Inc. (“Barstool Sports”), a leading digital sports, entertainment, lifestyle and media company. Combined with the power of theScore and Barstool Sports, Penn National has evolved into a leading North American digital sports content, gaming and technology company. The Company's omni-channel approach is further bolstered by its mychoice customer loyalty program (the “mychoice program”), which rewards and recognizes its over 25 million members for their loyalty to both retail and online gaming and sports betting products with a dynamic set of industry offers, experiences, and service levels.
The majority of the real estate assets (i.e., land and buildings) used in our operations are subject to triple net master leases; the most significant of which are the Penn Master Lease and the Pinnacle Master Lease (as such terms are defined in “Liquidity
and Capital Resources” and collectively referred to as the “Master Leases”), with Gaming and Leisure Properties, Inc. (Nasdaq: GLPI) (“GLPI”), a real estate investment trust (“REIT”).
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Company Response
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the novel coronavirus (known as “COVID-19”) outbreak to be a global pandemic. To help combat the spread of COVID-19 and pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities, operations at all of our properties were temporarily suspended for single or multiple time periods during 2020 and into 2021. Once reopened, properties operated with reduced gaming and hotel capacity and limited food and beverage offerings in order to accommodate social distancing and health and safety protocols. As of December 31, 2021, the majority of our properties are operating at full capacity while adhering to state mandated health and safety protocols.
The COVID-19 pandemic caused significant disruptions to our business and had a material adverse impact on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. As a consequence, between March 13, 2020 and December 31, 2020, we entered into a series of transactions to improve our financial position and liquidity, as described in the relevant notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Additionally, we completed a $400.0 million offering of senior unsecured notes on July 1, 2021, as discussed in Note 11, “Long term debt.” We could experience further adverse impacts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including, but not limited to, temporarily suspending operations at our properties if ordered by such governmental bodies, or capacity restrictions on our operations. Actual results may differ materially from the Company’s current estimates as the scope of the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, depending largely, though not exclusively, on the impact of required capacity reductions, social distancing and health and safety guidelines, and the sustainability of current trends in recovery at our properties.
Recent Acquisitions, Development Projects and Other
In February 2020, we closed on our investment in Barstool Sports pursuant to a stock purchase agreement with Barstool Sports and certain stockholders of Barstool Sports, in which we purchased 36% (inclusive of 1% on a delayed basis) of the common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of Barstool Sports for a purchase price of $161.2 million. Within three years after the closing of the transaction or earlier at our election, we will increase our ownership in Barstool Sports to approximately 50% by purchasing approximately $62.0 million worth of additional shares of Barstool Sports common stock, consistent with the implied valuation at the time of the initial investment, which was $450.0 million. With respect to the remaining Barstool Sports shares, we have immediately exercisable call rights, and the existing Barstool Sports stockholders have put rights exercisable beginning three years after closing, of which the purchase price on the remaining 50% of the shares is defined to be $325.0 million, subject to certain adjustments, which is discussed further within Note 7, “Investments in and Advances to Unconsolidated Affiliates.”
Upon closing, we became Barstool Sports’ exclusive gaming partner for up to 40 years and have the sole right to utilize the Barstool Sports brand for all of our online and retail sports betting and iGaming products. In addition, Penn Interactive has entered into multi-year agreements with leading sports betting operators for online sports betting and iCasino market access across our portfolio of properties.
On April 16, 2020, we sold the real estate assets associated with the operations of Tropicana Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Inc. (“Tropicana”) property to GLPI in exchange for rent credits of $307.5 million, and utilized the rent credits to pay rent under our existing Master Leases and the Meadows Racetrack and Casino Lease, beginning in May 2020. Contemporaneous with the sale, the Company entered into the Tropicana Lease, (as defined and discussed in Note 12, “Leases” to our Consolidated Financial Statements). On January 11, 2022, Penn National entered into a definitive purchase agreement to sell its outstanding equity interest in Tropicana, which has the gaming license and operates the Tropicana, to Bally’s Corporation (“Bally’s”). This transaction is expected to close within the second half of 2022, subject to Penn National, GLPI, and Bally’s entering into definitive agreements and obtaining regulatory approval.
On October 1, 2020, we sold the land underlying our Morgantown development project to GLPI in exchange for rent credits of $30.0 million. Contemporaneous with the sale, the Company entered into a triple net lease with GLPI for the land underlying Morgantown (as defined and discussed in Note 12, “Leases” to our Consolidated Financial Statements).
On May 11, 2021, we acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of HitPoint Inc. and Lucky Point Inc. (collectively, “Hitpoint”). The purchase price totaled $12.7 million, consisting of $6.2 million in cash, $3.5 million of the Company’s common equity, and a $3.0 million contingent liability.
On July 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of the operations of Hollywood Casino Perryville (“Perryville”), from GLPI for a purchase price of $39.4 million, including working capital adjustments. Simultaneous with the closing, we entered into a
lease with GLPI for the real estate assets associated with Hollywood Casino Perryville for initial annual rent of $7.8 million per year subject to escalation.
On August 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of the remaining 50% ownership interest in the Sam Houston Race Park in Houston, Texas, the Valley Race Park in Harlingen, Texas, and a license to operate a racetrack in Austin, Texas (collectively, “Sam Houston”), from PM Texas Holdings, LLC for a purchase price of $57.8 million, comprised of $42.0 million in cash and $15.8 million of the Company’s common equity. In conjunction with the acquisition, we recorded a gain of $29.9 million on our equity method investment.
On October 19, 2021, we acquired 100% of theScore for a purchase price of approximately $2.1 billion. Under the terms of the agreement, 1317774 B.C. Ltd. (the “Purchaser”), an indirectly wholly owned subsidiary of Penn National, acquired each of the issued and outstanding theScore shares (other than those held by Penn National and its subsidiaries) for US$17.00 per share in cash consideration, totaling $0.9 billion, and either 0.2398 of a share of common stock, par value $0.01 of Penn Common Stock or, if validly elected, 0.2398 of an exchangeable share in the capital of the Purchaser (each whole share, an “Exchangeable Share”), totaling 12,319,340 shares of Penn Common Stock and 697,539 Exchangeable Shares for approximately $1.0 billion. Each Exchangeable Share will be exchangeable into one share of Penn Common Stock at the option of the holder, subject to certain adjustments. In addition, Purchaser may redeem all outstanding Exchangeable Shares in exchange for shares of Penn Common Stock at any time following the fifth anniversary of the closing, or earlier under certain circumstances. The acquisition provides us with the technology, resources and audience reach to accelerate our media and sports betting strategy across North America.
We believe that our portfolio of assets provides us with the benefit of geographically-diversified cash flow from operations. We expect to continue to expand our gaming operations through the implementation and execution of a disciplined capital expenditure program at our existing properties, the pursuit of strategic acquisitions and investments, and the development of new gaming properties. In addition, the partnership with Barstool Sports and the acquisition of theScore reflect our strategy to continue evolving from the nation’s largest regional gaming operator to a best-in-class omni-channel provider of retail and online gaming and sports betting entertainment.
Operating and Competitive Environment
Most of our properties operate in mature, competitive markets. We expect that the majority of our future growth will come from new business lines or distribution channels, such as retail and online gaming and sports betting; entrance into new jurisdictions; expansions of gaming in existing jurisdictions; and, to a lesser extent, improvements/expansions of our existing properties and strategic acquisitions of gaming properties. Our portfolio is comprised largely of well-maintained regional gaming facilities, which has allowed us to develop what we believe to be a solid base for future growth opportunities. We have also made investments in joint ventures that we believe will allow us to capitalize on additional gaming opportunities in certain states if legislation or referenda are passed that permit and/or expand gaming in these jurisdictions and we are selected as a licensee.
As the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, we continue to adjust operations and cost structures at our properties to reflect the changing economic and health and safety conditions. We also continue to focus on revenue and cost synergies from recent acquisitions, and offering our customers additional gaming experiences through our omni-channel distribution strategy. We seek to continue to expand our customer database by partnering with third-party operators such as Choice Hotels International, Inc. to expand our loyalty program, as well as through accretive investments or acquisitions, such as Barstool Sports and theScore, capitalize on organic growth opportunities from the development of new properties or the expansion of recently-developed business lines, and develop partnerships that allow us to enter new jurisdictions for iCasino and sports betting.
The gaming industry is characterized by an increasingly high degree of competition among a large number of participants, including riverboat casinos; dockside casinos; land-based casinos; video lottery; iGaming; online and retail sports betting; sports media companies; gaming at taverns; gaming at truck stop establishments; sweepstakes and poker machines not located in casinos; the potential for increased fantasy sports; significant growth of Native American gaming tribes, historic racing or state-sponsored i-lottery products in or adjacent to states we operate in; and other forms of gaming in the U.S. See the “Segment comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020” section below for discussions of the impact of competition on our results of operations by reportable segment.
Key Performance Indicators
In our business, revenue is driven by discretionary consumer spending. We have no certain mechanism for determining why consumers choose to spend more or less money at our properties from period-to-period; therefore, we are unable to quantify a dollar amount for each factor that impacts our customers’ spending behaviors. However, based on our experience, we
can generally offer some insight into the factors that we believe are likely to account for such changes and which factors may have a greater impact than others. For example, decreases in discretionary consumer spending have historically been brought about by weakened general economic conditions, such as lackluster recoveries from recessions, high unemployment levels, higher income taxes, low levels of consumer confidence, weakness in the housing market, high fuel or other transportation costs, and most recently, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, visitation and the volume of play have historically been negatively impacted by significant construction surrounding our properties, adverse regional weather conditions and natural disasters. In all instances, such insights are based solely on our judgment and professional experience, and no assurance can be given as to the accuracy of our judgments.
The vast majority of our revenues is gaming revenue, which is highly dependent upon the volume and spending levels of customers at our properties. Our gaming revenue is derived primarily from slot machines (which represented approximately 84%, 87% and 92% of our gaming revenue in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively) and, to a lesser extent, table games. Aside from gaming revenue, our revenues are primarily derived from our hotel, dining, retail, commissions, program sales, admissions, concessions and certain other ancillary activities, and our racing and sports betting operations.
Key performance indicators related to gaming revenue are slot handle and table game drop, which are volume indicators, and “win” or “hold” percentage. Our typical property slot win percentage is in the range of approximately 7% to 11% of slot handle, and our typical table game hold percentage is in the range of approximately 15% to 27% of table game drop.
Slot handle is the gross amount wagered during a given period. The win or hold percentage is the net amount of gaming wins and losses, with liabilities recognized for accruals related to the anticipated payout of progressive jackpots. Given the stability in our slot hold percentages on a historical basis, we have not experienced significant impacts to net income from changes in these percentages. For table games, customers usually purchase chips at the gaming tables. The cash and markers (extensions of credit granted to certain credit-worthy customers) are deposited in the gaming table’s drop box. Table game hold is the amount of drop that is retained and recorded as gaming revenue, with liabilities recognized for funds deposited by customers before gaming play occurs and for unredeemed gaming chips. As we are primarily focused on regional gaming markets, our table game hold percentages are fairly stable as the majority of these markets do not regularly experience high-end play, which can lead to volatility in hold percentages. Therefore, changes in table game hold percentages do not typically have a material impact to our results of operations and cash flows.
Under normal operating conditions, our properties generate significant operating cash flow since most of our revenue is cash-based from slot machines, table games, and pari-mutuel wagering. Our business is capital intensive, and we rely on cash flow from our properties to generate sufficient cash to satisfy our obligations under the Triple Net Leases (as defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”), repay debt, fund maintenance capital expenditures, fund new capital projects at existing properties and provide excess cash for future development and acquisitions. Additional information regarding our capital projects is discussed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below.
Reportable Segments
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company evaluated its reportable segments and changed them to: Northeast, South, West, Midwest, and Interactive. This change reflects management’s belief that the operating results of our Interactive segment represent a strategic and high growth component of our overall operations. The Interactive segment, which was previously reported within Other, includes the operating results of Penn Interactive, theScore, and the Company’s proportionate share of earnings attributable to its equity method investment in Barstool Sports. Corporate expense will continue to be reported in Other in addition to stand-alone racing operations, other joint ventures, management contracts, and Heartland Poker Tour.
As a result of the change in reportable segments described above, the Company has recast previously reported segment information to conform to the current management view for all prior periods presented. The changes to reportable segments had no impact to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. We view each of our gaming and racing properties as an operating segment with the exception of our two properties in Jackpot, Nevada, which we view as one operating segment. We consider our combined Video Gaming Terminal (“VGT”) operations, by state, to be separate operating segments. For a listing of our gaming properties and VGT operations included in each reportable segment, see Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table highlights our revenues, net income (loss), and Adjusted EBITDA, on a consolidated basis, as well as our revenues and Adjusted EBITDAR by reportable segment. Such segment reporting is on a basis consistent with how we measure our business and allocate resources internally. We consider net income (loss) to be the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”) to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAR, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for the definitions of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, Adjusted EBITDAR, and Adjusted EBITDAR margin; as well as a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDAR and related margins.
(1)The Other category consists of the Company’s stand-alone racing operations, namely Sanford-Orlando Kennel Club, Sam Houston and Valley Race Parks (the remaining 50% was acquired by Penn National on August 1, 2021), the Company’s joint venture interests in Freehold Raceway; our management contract for Retama Park Racetrack and our live and televised poker tournament series that operates under the trade name, Heartland Poker Tour (“HPT”). Expenses incurred for corporate and shared services activities that are directly attributable to a property or are otherwise incurred to support a property are allocated to each property. The Other category also includes corporate overhead costs, which consist of certain expenses, such as: payroll expenses, professional fees, travel expenses and other general and administrative expenses that do not directly relate to or have not otherwise been allocated to a property.
(2)Primarily represents the elimination of intersegment revenues associated with our internally-branded retail sportsbooks, which are operated by Penn Interactive.
(3)The total is a mathematical calculation derived from the sum of reportable segments (as well as the Other category). As noted within “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below, Adjusted EBITDAR, and the related margin, is presented on a consolidated basis outside the financial statements solely as a valuation metric.
(4)Solely comprised of rent expense associated with the operating lease components contained within our triple net master lease dated November 1, 2013 with GLPI and the triple net master lease assumed in connection with our acquisition of Pinnacle Entertainment, Inc. (primarily land), our individual triple net leases with GLPI for the real estate assets used in the operation of Tropicana Las Vegas Hotel and Casino and Hollywood
Casino at Meadows Racetrack, and our individual triple net leases with VICI for the real estate assets used in the operations of Margaritaville Casino Resort and Greektown Casino-Hotel (of which the Tropicana Lease, Meadows Lease, Margaritaville Lease and the Greektown Lease are defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”) and are referred to collectively as our “triple net operating leases.” The finance lease components contained within the Master Leases (primarily buildings), the Perryville Lease determined to be a finance lease (as defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”), and the financing obligation associated with the Morgantown Lease (as defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources”) result in interest expense, or interest expense and depreciation expense, as opposed to rent expense.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our properties’ temporary closure dates pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities to combat the rapid spread of COVID-19 are shown below:
(1)VGT route operations
Consolidated comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
The following table presents our consolidated revenues:
Gaming revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1.9 billion compared to the prior year primarily due to easing of capacity restrictions, strong visitation levels, increased length of play, revenue-enhancing investment in technology, continued growth in our online and sports betting revenues and the inclusion of the operating results of three new properties: Hollywood Casino Perryville, which was acquired on July 1, 2021, Hollywood Casino York, which opened August 12, 2021 and Hollywood Casino Morgantown, which opened December 22, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, gaming revenues were negatively impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, upon reopening occurring mainly in 2020, restrictions on gaming patron capacity were in place across all of our properties.
Food, beverage, hotel and other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $432.1 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to strong visitation levels, lifting of capacity and operational restrictions previously in place in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the inclusion of the operating results from our three new properties discussed above. Additionally, other revenues include a gross-up of gaming tax reimbursement amounts derived from arrangements which allow our third-party partners to operate online casinos and online sportsbooks under our gaming licenses of $180.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, food, beverage, hotel and other revenues were negatively impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, upon reopening occurring mainly in 2020, our properties were subject to the implementation of social distancing and health and safety protocols, reduced hotel capacity and limitations on the number of food and beverage offerings.
See “Segment comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020” below for more detailed explanations of the fluctuations in revenues.
Operating expenses
The following table presents our consolidated operating expenses:
Gaming expenses consist primarily of salaries and wages associated with our gaming operations, gaming taxes, and marketing and promotional costs. Gaming expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $1.0 billion compared to
the prior year primarily due to an increase in gaming taxes resulting from the increase in gaming revenues, as discussed above, as well as increases in payroll and marketing and promotional expenses due to increased volumes. During the year ended December 31, 2020, all of our properties were subject to temporary closures for a portion of the year due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and upon reopening, operated under restricted gaming patron capacity.
Food, beverage, hotel and other expenses consist primarily of payroll expenses and costs of goods sold associated with our food, beverage, hotel, retail, racing, and interactive operations. Also included in other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 are gaming taxes of $180.2 million on revenues derived from arrangements which allow for third-party partners to operate online casinos and online sportsbooks under our gaming licenses for which we collect and remit applicable gaming taxes. Food, beverage, hotel and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $269.6 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to the inclusion of the gaming taxes in the current year periods, discussed above, and increases in cost of sales and payroll expenses due to increased volumes experienced subsequent to reopening. The prior year was impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic and upon reopening occurring mainly in 2020 our properties operated within locally restricted capacity and limited food and beverage and other amenities offerings.
General and administrative expenses include items such as compliance, facility maintenance, utilities, property and liability insurance, surveillance and security, lobbying expenses, and certain housekeeping services, as well as all expenses for administrative departments such as accounting, purchasing, human resources, legal and internal audit. General and administrative expenses also include stock-based compensation expense; pre-opening expenses; acquisition and transaction costs; gains and losses on disposal of assets; changes in the fair value of our contingent purchase price obligations; expense associated with cash-settled stock-based awards (including changes in fair value thereto); restructuring costs (primarily severance) associated with a company-wide initiative triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic; and rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases.
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased primarily due to an increase of $112.0 million in payroll expenses with lower payroll costs incurred as a result of property closures and limited capacity upon reopening during the year ended December 31, 2020, a $24.2 million increase in general facility costs related to increased property volumes, and a $34.6 million increase in rent expenses associated with our triple net operating leases, principally related to the Tropicana Lease. Furthermore, general and administrative expenses include legal and other professional costs of $43.1 million associated with acquisitions, primarily related to theScore, additional costs related to stock compensation of $20.6 million, and a $12.5 million political contribution related to the California sports betting initiative. These increases were offset by a decrease in the Company’s cash-settled stock-based awards expense of $66.0 million, which is primarily driven by the Company’s stock price. Additionally, general and administrative expenses for year ended December 31, 2020, includes a $29.8 million gain from the sale of our Tropicana property in April 2020.
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased year over year primarily due to fixed assets and intangible assets becoming fully depreciated and amortized, and the sale of the real estate assets of Tropicana in April 2020.
Impairment losses for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily relate to impairments taken on our goodwill and other intangible assets of $113.0 million and $498.5 million, respectively, as a result of an interim impairment assessment during the first quarter of 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, we identified an indicator of impairment triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused all of our gaming properties to temporarily close. Additionally, we recorded an impairment charge of $7.3 million resulting from an impairment analysis of the long-lived assets at the Tropicana Las Vegas and an impairment charge of $4.6 million on our investment in the Texas joint venture. There were no impairment losses for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other income (expenses)
The following table presents our consolidated other income (expenses):
N/M - Not meaningful
Interest expense, net increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to interest expenses related to our Other long-term obligations.
Income from unconsolidated affiliates relates principally to Barstool Sports, and our Kansas Entertainment and Freehold Raceway joint ventures. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the prior year, was due to ongoing positive results in the operations at Hollywood Casino at Kansas Speedway, which was closed for a period in the prior year, and upon reopening in 2020, operated under capacity restrictions, and increases in income earned from our Barstool Sports investment, which we completed in February 2020. We record our proportionate share of Barstool Sports’ net income or loss one quarter in arrears.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt for the year December 31, 2020 related to the write-offs of previously unamortized debt issuance costs and debt discounts in connection with the prepayment of Term Loan B-1 Facility, (as defined in Note 11, “Long-term Debt,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements). There were no principal prepayments of our long-term debt during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other includes miscellaneous income and expense items and primarily relates to realized and unrealized gains and losses on equity securities (including warrants), held by Penn Interactive and unrealized gains and losses related to certain Barstool Sports shares. Equity securities were provided to the Company in conjunction with entering into multi-year agreements with sports betting operators for online sports betting and related iCasino market access across our portfolio. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other income primarily consisted of a $29.9 million gain related to the valuation of our joint venture investment in Sam Houston and Valley Race Parks prior to the acquisition of the remaining 50% on August 1, 2021, offset by a net $24.9 million loss related to realized and unrealized losses on equity securities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income was comprised primarily of $106.7 million of unrealized gains on equity securities.
Income tax benefit (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021, was a $118.6 million expense, as compared to a $165.1 million benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our effective tax rate (income taxes as a percentage of income or loss from operations before income taxes) including discrete items was 22.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 19.8% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was higher than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily driven by state taxes, non-deductible expenses, and the increase in the federal valuation allowance (see Note 14, “Income Taxes”, in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements). The Company’s effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 was lower than the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily driven by the change in the valuation allowance.
Our effective income tax rate can vary each reporting period depending on, among other factors, the geographic and business mix of our earnings, changes to our valuation allowance, and the level of our tax credits. Certain of these and other factors, including our history and projections of pre-tax earnings, are considered in assessing our ability to realize our net deferred tax assets.
Segment comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Northeast Segment
The Northeast segment’s revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $913.1 million over the prior year, primarily due to easing of capacity restrictions, strong visitation levels, and increased length of play. In addition, the Northeast segment includes operating results from our three new properties: Hollywood Casino Perryville, which was acquired on July 1, 2021, Hollywood Casino York, which opened on August 12, 2021 and Hollywood Casino Morgantown, which opened on December 22, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our Northeast segment’s operating results were negatively impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, upon reopening, in 2020 (and in the case of our Pennsylvania properties upon a second reopening in January 2021 stemming from a mandated second temporary closure commencing in the fourth quarter of 2020), our properties operated within locally-restricted gaming capacity and limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 the Northeast Adjusted EBITDAR increased by $369.5 million as compared to the prior year, primarily due to temporary property closures for a portion of the prior year period while the current year period benefited from an increase in gaming revenues, as discussed above. Adjusted EBITDAR margin increased 400 basis points to 33.2% primarily due to our revenue-enhancing investments in technology, comparable marketing and promotional costs, and reduced labor costs in the current year yielding a higher overall Adjusted EBITDAR margin.
South Segment
The South segment’s revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $472.6 million over the prior year, primarily due to easing of capacity restrictions, strong visitation levels, and increased length of play. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our South segment’s operating results were negatively impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic and temporary closures due to hurricane season. Additionally, upon reopening our properties operated within locally restricted gaming capacity and limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the South segment’s Adjusted EBITDAR increased by $268.1 million primarily due to temporary property closures for a portion of the prior year period while the current year period benefited from an increase in gaming revenues, as discussed above. Adjusted EBITDAR margin increased 690 basis points to 44.4% primarily due to comparable marketing and promotional costs and reduced labor costs in the current year yielding a higher overall Adjusted EBITDAR margin.
West Segment
The West segment’s revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $218.9 million over the prior year, primarily due to easing of capacity restrictions, strong visitation levels, and increased length of play. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our West segment’s operating results were negatively impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with our Tropicana Las Vegas Hotel and Casino property reopening on September 17, 2020, and Zia Park property remaining temporarily closed, reopening in March 2021. Additionally, upon reopening our properties operated within locally restricted gaming and hotel (if applicable) capacity and limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the West segment’s Adjusted EBITDAR increased by $112.8 million primarily due to temporary property closures for a portion of the prior year period while the current year period benefited from an increase in gaming and non-gaming revenues, as discussed above. Adjusted EBITDAR margin increased 1,020 basis points to 37.4%, primarily due to our comparable marketing and promotional costs, reduced labor costs and a higher proportionate share of gaming activity in the current year, yielding a higher overall Adjusted EBITDAR margin.
Midwest Segment
The Midwest segment’s revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $421.3 million over the prior year, primarily due to easing of capacity restrictions, strong visitation levels, and increased length of play. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our Midwest segment’s operating results were negatively impacted by temporary closures for a portion of the year at all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, upon reopening in 2020 (and in the case of our Illinois properties upon a second reopening in January 2021 stemming from a mandated second temporary closure commencing in the fourth quarter of 2020) our properties operated within locally restricted gaming capacity and limited food and beverage and other amenity offerings.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Midwest segment’s Adjusted EBITDAR increased by $241.8 million primarily due to temporary property closures for a portion of the prior year period while the current year period benefited from an increase in gaming revenues, as discussed above. Adjusted EBITDAR margin increased 750 basis points to 45.4% primarily due to our comparable marketing and promotional costs, reduced labor costs, and a higher proportionate share of gaming activity in the current year, yielding a higher overall Adjusted EBITDAR margin.
Interactive Segment
N/M - Not meaningful
The Interactive segment, which was previously reported within Other, includes the operating results of Penn Interactive, theScore, and the Company’s proportionate share of earnings attributable to its equity method investment in Barstool Sports. Total revenues for the Interactive segment increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to a gross-up of gaming tax reimbursement amounts derived from arrangements which allow for our third-party partners to operate online casinos and online sportsbooks under our gaming licenses of $180.2 million, the expansion of Barstool Sportsbook and Casino app throughout the year, as well as revenues from theScore, which was acquired on October 19, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDAR was a loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $35.4 million as compared to positive Adjusted EBITDAR in the prior year of $37.2 million, primarily due to increased expenses related to ramping and launching the Penn Interactive online sportsbook and casino operations in new states, a $12.5 million political contribution related to the California sports betting initiative, and the inclusion of theScore financial results, as indicated above.
Other
Other consists of the Company’s stand-alone racing operations, as well as corporate overhead costs, which primarily includes certain expenses such as payroll, professional fees, travel expenses and other general and administrative expenses that do not directly relate to or have not otherwise been allocated to a property. Revenues have increased primarily due to the acquisition of Sam Houston, the remaining 50% of which was acquired on August 1, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDAR decreased by $20.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in corporate overhead costs that are reflective of the current operating environment. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, corporate overhead costs were $103.3 million and $78.8 million, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Use and Definitions
In addition to GAAP financial measures, management uses Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDAR, Adjusted EBITDA margin, and Adjusted EBITDAR margin as non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for, nor superior to, financial results and measures determined or calculated in accordance with GAAP. Each of these non-GAAP financial measures is not calculated in the same manner by all companies and, accordingly, may not be an appropriate measure of comparing performance among different companies.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation; debt extinguishment and financing charges; impairment losses; insurance recoveries, net of deductible charges; changes in the estimated fair value of our contingent purchase price obligations; gain or loss on disposal of assets, the difference between budget and actual expense for cash-settled stock-based awards; pre-opening expenses; and other. Adjusted EBITDA is inclusive of income or loss from unconsolidated affiliates, with our share of non-operating items (such as interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; and stock-based compensation expense) added back for Barstool Sports and our Kansas Entertainment, LLC joint venture. Adjusted EBITDA is inclusive of rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases (the operating lease components contained within our triple net master lease dated November 1, 2013 with GLPI and the triple net master lease assumed in connection with our acquisition of Pinnacle Entertainment, Inc. (primarily land), our individual triple net leases GLPI for the real estate assets used in the Operation of Tropicana Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Inc. and Hollywood Casino at Meadows Racetrack, and our individual triple net leases with VICI for the real estate assets used in the operations of Margaritaville Casino Resort and Greektown Casino-Hotel). Although Adjusted EBITDA includes rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases, we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful as a supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our consolidated results of operations. We define Adjusted EBITDA margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by consolidated revenues.
Adjusted EBITDA has economic substance because it is used by management as a performance measure to analyze the performance of our business, and is especially relevant in evaluating large, long-lived casino-hotel projects because it provides a perspective on the current effects of operating decisions separated from the substantial nonoperational depreciation charges and financing costs of such projects. We present Adjusted EBITDA because it is used by some investors and creditors as an indicator of the strength and performance of ongoing business operations, including our ability to service debt, and to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions and operations. These calculations are commonly used as a basis for investors, analysts and credit rating agencies to evaluate and compare operating performance and value companies within our industry. In order to view the operations of their casinos on a more stand-alone basis, gaming companies, including us, have historically excluded from their Adjusted EBITDA calculations certain corporate expenses that do not relate to the management of specific casino properties. However, Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of performance or liquidity calculated in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA information is presented as a supplemental disclosure, as management believes that it is a commonly used measure of performance in the gaming industry and that it is considered by many to be a key indicator of the Company’s operating results.
We define Adjusted EBITDAR as Adjusted EBITDA (as defined above) plus rent expense associated with triple net operating leases (which is a normal, recurring cash operating expense necessary to operate our business). Adjusted EBITDAR is presented on a consolidated basis outside the financial statements solely as a valuation metric. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDAR is an additional metric traditionally used by analysts in valuing gaming companies subject to triple net leases since it eliminates the effects of variability in leasing methods and capital structures. This metric is included as supplemental disclosure because (i) we believe Adjusted EBITDAR is traditionally used by gaming operator analysts and investors to determine the equity value of gaming operators and (ii) Adjusted EBITDAR is one of the metrics used by other financial analysts in valuing our business. We believe Adjusted EBITDAR is useful for equity valuation purposes because (i) its calculation isolates the effects of financing real estate; and (ii) using a multiple of Adjusted EBITDAR to calculate enterprise value allows for an adjustment to the balance sheet to recognize estimated liabilities arising from operating leases related to real estate. However, Adjusted EBITDAR when presented on a consolidated basis is not a financial measure in accordance with GAAP, and should not be viewed as a measure of overall operating performance or considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income because it excludes the rent expense associated with our triple net operating leases and is provided for the limited purposes referenced herein.
Adjusted EBITDAR margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDAR on a consolidated basis divided by revenues on a consolidated basis. Adjusted EBITDAR margin is presented on a consolidated basis outside the financial statements solely as a valuation metric. We further define Adjusted EBITDAR margin by reportable segment as Adjusted EBITDAR for each segment divided by segment revenues.
Reconciliation of GAAP Financial Measures to Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following table includes a reconciliation of net income (loss), which is determined in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDAR, Adjusted EBITDA margin and Adjusted EBITDAR margin, which are non-GAAP financial measures:
(1) These items are included in “General and administrative” within the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations.
(2) Our cash-settled stock-based awards are adjusted to fair value each reporting period based primarily on the price of the Company’s common stock. As such, significant fluctuations in the price of the Company’s common stock during any reporting period could cause significant variances to budget on cash-settled stock-based awards.
(3) During 2019, 2020 and during the first quarter of 2021, acquisition costs were included within pre-opening and acquisition costs. Beginning with the quarter ended June 30, 2021, acquisition costs are presented as part of other expenses.
(4) Consists principally of interest expense, net; income taxes; depreciation and amortization; and stock-based compensation expense associated with Barstool Sports and our Kansas Entertainment joint venture. We record our portion of Barstool Sports, Inc.’s net income or loss, including adjustments to arrive at Adjusted EBITDAR, one quarter in arrears.
(5) Consists of non-recurring acquisition and transaction costs, finance transformation costs associated with the implementation of our new Enterprise Resource Management system and non-recurring restructuring charges (primarily severance) associated with a company-wide initiative, triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic, designed to (i) improve the operational effectiveness across our property portfolio; and (ii) improve the effectiveness and efficiency of our Corporate functional support area.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources have been and will continue to be cash flow from operations, borrowings from banks and proceeds from the issuance of debt and equity securities. Our ongoing liquidity will depend on a number of factors, including available cash resources, cash flow from operations, acquisitions or investments, funding of construction for development projects, and our compliance with covenants contained under our debt agreements.
N/M - Not meaningful
Operating Cash Flow
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $557.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to increased gaming revenues as operations at our properties benefited from easing of capacity restrictions, strong visitation levels, increased length of play, and higher overall Adjusted EBITDAR margins. Operating cash flows in the prior year were negatively impacted by the temporary closures of all of our properties due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which significantly decreased cash receipts from customers, offset by the utilization of rent credits resulting from the sales of our Tropicana property and land associated with our Morgantown development project.
Investing Cash Flow
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $1.2 billion is primarily due to the acquisition of theScore as well as other acquired businesses and interests, and capital expenditures. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities was primarily related to the completion of our investment in Barstool Sports in February of 2020 and capital expenditures.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures are accounted for as either project capital (new facilities or expansions) or maintenance (replacement) capital expenditures. Cash provided by operating activities as well as cash available under our Revolving Credit Facility funded our capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we spent $244.1 million on capital expenditures, primarily related to our two Category 4 development projects, Hollywood Casino York, which is located in the York Galleria Mall in York, Pennsylvania, and Hollywood Casino Morgantown, located in Morgantown, Pennsylvania, both of which opened during the year. For the year ending December 31, 2022, our expected capital expenditures are $312.4 million.
Financing Cash Flow
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities totaled $339.9 million compared to $1.3 billion in net cash provided in the prior year. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net cash proceeds of $400.0 million related to the issuance of our 4.125% Notes due 2029. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net cash proceeds of $331.2 million and $957.6 million related to the issuance of the Company’s common equity in May 2020 and September 2020, respectively, and $322.2 million of net proceeds related to the issuance of our Convertible Notes due 2026, with net repayments under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities of $301.7 million, which primarily resulted in a decrease of $970.2 million as compared to the current year.
Debt Issuances, Redemptions and Other Long-term Obligations
On April 14, 2020, the Company entered into a second amendment to its Credit Agreement with its various lenders (the “Second Amendment”) to provide for certain modifications to required financial covenants and interest rates during, and subsequent to, a covenant relief period, which concluded on May 7, 2021 (the “Covenant Relief Period”).
In May 2020, the Company completed a public offering of $330.5 million aggregate principal amount of 2.75% unsecured convertible notes that mature, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased, on May 15, 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”) at a price of par. After lender fees and discounts, net proceeds received by the Company were $322.2 million. Interest on the Convertible Notes is payable on May 15th and November 15th of each year, beginning on November 15, 2020.
In February 2021, the Company entered into a financing arrangement providing the Company with upfront cash proceeds while permitting us to participate in future proceeds on certain claims. The financing obligation has been classified as a non-current liability, which is expected to be settled in a future period of which the principal is contingent and predicated on other events. Consistent with an obligor’s accounting under a debt instrument, period interest will be accreted using an effective interest rate of 27.0% and until such time that the claims and related obligation is settled. The amount included in interest expense related to this obligation was $17.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
On July 1, 2021, the Company completed an offering of $400.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.125% Senior Unsecured Notes that mature on July 1, 2029 (the “4.125% Notes”). The 4.125% Notes were issued at par and interest is payable semi-annually on January 1st and July 1st of each year. The Company intends to use the proceeds from the 4.125% Notes for general purposes.
At December 31, 2021, we had $2.8 billion in aggregate principal amount of indebtedness, including $1.6 billion outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, $330.5 million outstanding under our Convertible Notes, $400.0 million outstanding under our 5.625% senior unsecured notes, $400.0 million outstanding under our 4.125% Notes, and $146.3 million outstanding in other long-term obligations. No amounts were drawn on our Revolving Credit Facility. We have no debt maturing prior to 2023. As of December 31, 2021 we had conditional obligations under letters of credit issued pursuant to the Senior Secured Credit Facilities with face amounts aggregating to $26.0 million resulting in $674.0 million available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility.
Covenants
Our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, 5.625% Notes and 4.125% Notes require us, among other obligations, to maintain specified financial ratios and to satisfy certain financial tests. In addition, our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, 5.625% Notes and 4.125% Notes, restrict, among other things, our ability to incur additional indebtedness, incur guarantee obligations, amend debt instruments, pay dividends, create liens on assets, make investments, engage in mergers or consolidations, and otherwise restrict corporate activities. Our debt agreements also contain customary events of default, including cross-default provisions that require us to meet certain requirements under the Penn Master Lease and the Pinnacle Master Lease (both of which are defined in Note 12, “Leases” to our Consolidated Financial Statements), each with GLPI. If we are unable to meet our financial covenants or in the event of a cross-default, it could trigger an acceleration of payment terms.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all required financial covenants.
See Note 11, “Long-term Debt,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information of the Company’s debt and other long-term obligations.
Common Stock Offering
On May 14, 2020, the Company completed a public offering of 16,666,667 shares of Penn Common Stock and on May 19, 2020, the underwriters exercised their right to purchase an additional 2,500,000 shares of Penn Common Stock, resulting in an aggregate public offering of 19,166,667 shares of Penn Common Stock. All of the shares were issued at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $345.0 million, and net proceeds of $331.2 million after underwriter fees and discounts of $13.8 million.
On September 24, 2020, the Company completed a public offering of 14,000,000 shares of Penn Common Stock and on September 25, 2020, the underwriters exercised their right to purchase an additional 2,100,000 shares of Penn Common Stock, resulting in an aggregate public offering of 16,100,000 shares of Penn Common Stock. All of the shares were issued at a public offering price of $61.00 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $982.1 million, and net proceeds of $957.6 million after underwriter fees and discounts of $24.5 million.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 1, 2022, the Board of Directors of Penn National approved a $750.0 million share repurchase program. The three year authorization expires on January 31, 2025. Repurchases by the Company will be subject to available liquidity, general market and economic conditions, alternate uses for the capital and other factors. Share repurchases may be made from
time to time through a 10b5-1 trading plan, open market transactions, block trades or in private transactions in accordance with applicable securities laws and regulations and other legal requirements. There is no minimum number of shares that the Company is required to repurchase and the repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice.
During February 2022, the Company repurchased 2,195,290 shares of its common stock in open market transactions for $107.1 million at an average price of $48.78 per share. The cost of all repurchased shares is recorded as “Treasury stock” in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The remaining availability under our $750.0 million share repurchase program was $642.9 million as of February 28, 2022.
Triple Net Leases
The majority of the real estate assets used in the Company’s operations are subject to triple net master leases; the most significant of which are the Penn Master Lease and the Pinnacle Master Lease. The Company’s Master Leases are accounted for as either operating leases, finance leases, or financing obligations. In addition, six of the gaming facilities used in our operations are subject to individual triple net leases. We refer to the Penn Master Lease, the Pinnacle Master Lease, the Perryville Lease, the Meadows Lease, the Margaritaville Lease, the Greektown Lease, the Tropicana Lease and the Morgantown Lease, each of which is defined in Note 12, “Leases” to our Consolidated Financial Statements, collectively, as our “Triple Net Leases.”
Under our Triple Net Leases, in addition to lease payments for the real estate assets, we are required to pay the following, among other things: (i) all facility maintenance; (ii) all insurance required in connection with the leased properties and the business conducted on the leased properties; (iii) taxes levied on or with respect to the leased properties (other than taxes on the income of the lessor); (iv) all tenant capital improvements; and (v) all utilities and other services necessary or appropriate for the leased properties and the business conducted on the leased properties. As of December 31, 2021, we are required to make total annual minimum rent payments of $824.4 million, of which $806.2 million relates to our Triple Net Leases. Additionally, our Triple Net Leases are subject to annual escalators, percentage rent, and rent resets, as applicable. See Note 12, “Leases,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion and disclosure related to the Company’s leases.
On January 14, 2022, the Penn Master Lease, the Pinnacle Master Lease, and the Meadows Lease between the Company and GLPI were amended. Although, we concluded the amendments with respect to the Penn Master Lease and the Pinnacle Master Lease constitute a modification event under ASC 842, we do not expect the amendments to have a material impact on our future cash flows, however, the modification event will result in (i) a non-cash debt extinguishment charge recorded to our Consolidated Statements of Operations and corresponding change in our financing obligations on our Consolidated Balance Sheets; and (ii) a revaluation of our lease right-of-use assets and corresponding lease liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Payments to our REIT Landlords under Triple Net Leases
Total payments made to our REIT Landlords, GLPI and VICI, inclusive of rent credits utilized, were as follows:
(1)During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, we utilized rent credits to pay $190.7 million, $135.5 million, $11.0 million and $0.3 million of rent under the Penn Master Lease, Pinnacle Master Lease, Meadows Lease and Morgantown Lease, respectively.
(2)Cash rent payable under the Tropicana Lease is nominal. Therefore, it has been excluded from the table above.
Other Contractual Cash Obligations
The following table presents our other contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2021:
(1)Excludes the liability for unrecognized tax benefits of $42.3 million, as we cannot reasonably estimate the period of cash settlement with the respective taxing authorities. Additionally, it does not include a total of $100.9 million related to the payments associated with our (i) contingent purchase price obligations; and (ii) financing arrangement in which we received upfront cash proceeds permitting us to participate in future claims, as they are not fixed obligations.
Outlook
Based on our current level of operations, we believe that cash generated from operations and cash on hand, together with amounts available under our Senior Secured Credit Facilities, will be adequate to meet our anticipated obligations under our Triple Net Leases, debt service requirements, capital expenditures and working capital needs for the foreseeable future. However, our ability to generate sufficient cash flow from operations will depend on a range of economic, competitive and business factors, many of which are outside our control, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business operations in future periods will depend on multiple factors that cannot be accurately predicated at this time, such as the duration and scope of the pandemic, future spikes of COVID-19 infections (including the spread of variants or mutant strains, and the degree of transmissibility and severity thereof), the extent and effectiveness of containment actions such as operating restrictions at our properties, the disruption caused by such actions, and the impact of these and other factors on our team members, customers, partners and vendors. If we are not able to respond to and manage the impact of such events effectively, our business will be harmed. In addition, supply chain disruption and resulting inflationary pressures, a global labor shortage, the ebb and flow of COVID-19, including in specific North American geographies, and changes in economic policy could impact our outlook. We caution you that the trends seen at our reopened properties, such as strong visitation and increased length of play, may not continue. In addition, while we anticipated that a significant amount of our future growth would come through the pursuit of opportunities within other distribution channels, such as retail and online sports betting and iGaming; from acquisitions of gaming properties at reasonable valuations; greenfield projects; and jurisdictional expansions and property expansion in under-penetrated markets; there can be no assurance that this will be the case. If we consummate significant acquisitions in the future or undertake any significant property expansions, our cash requirements may increase significantly and we may need to make additional borrowings or complete equity or debt financings to meet these requirements. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Indebtedness and Capital Structure” within “Item 1A. Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of the risks related to our capital structure.
We have historically maintained a capital structure comprised of a mix of equity and debt financing. We vary our leverage to pursue opportunities in the marketplace and in an effort to maximize our enterprise value for our shareholders. We expect to meet our debt obligations as they come due through internally-generated funds from operations and/or refinancing them through the debt or equity markets prior to their maturity.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For information on new accounting pronouncements and the impact of these pronouncements on our Consolidated Financial Statements, see Note 3, “New Accounting Pronouncements,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. The nature of the estimates and assumptions are material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain factors or the susceptibility of such factors to change. The development and selection of critical accounting estimates, and the related disclosures, have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. We believe the current assumptions and other considerations used to estimate amounts reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements are appropriate. However, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used in estimating amounts reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements, the resulting changes could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Goodwill and other intangible assets
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $2.8 billion in goodwill and $1.9 billion in other intangible assets within its Consolidated Balance Sheet, representing 16.7% and 11.1% of total assets, respectively. These intangible assets require significant management estimates and judgment pertaining to: (i) the valuation in connection with initial purchase price allocations and (ii) the ongoing evaluation for impairment. Our annual goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets impairment test is performed on October 1st of each year, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist. As a result of our test completed during the fourth quarter of 2021, we determined the fair value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for all reporting units exceeded the carrying value. Therefore, none of our reporting units incurred any impairment charges as a result of the annual assessment.
For the quantitative goodwill impairment test, an income approach, in which a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model is utilized, and a market-based approach using guideline public company multiples of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization from the Company’s peer group are utilized in order to estimate the fair market value of the Company’s reporting units. In determining the carrying amount of each reporting unit that utilizes real estate assets subject to the Triple Net Leases, if and as applicable, (i) the Company allocates each reporting unit their pro-rata portion of the right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, lease liabilities, and/or financing obligations, and (ii) pushes down the carrying amount of the property and equipment subject to such leases. In general, as it pertains to the Master Leases, such amounts are allocated based on the reporting unit’s projected Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of the aggregate estimated Adjusted EBITDA of all reporting units subject to either of the Master Leases, as applicable. The Company compares the fair value of its reporting units to the carrying amounts. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value, an impairment is recorded equal to the amount of the excess (not to exceed the amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit).
We consider our gaming licenses, trademarks, and certain other intangible assets as indefinite-lived intangible assets that do not require amortization based on our future expectations to operate our gaming properties indefinitely as well as our historical experience in renewing these intangible assets at minimal cost with various state commissions. Rather, these intangible assets are tested annually for impairment, or more frequently if indicators of impairment exist, by comparing the fair value of the recorded assets to their carrying amount. If the carrying amounts of the indefinite-lived intangible assets exceed their fair value, an impairment loss is recognized.
We assess the fair value of our gaming licenses using the Greenfield Method under the income approach, which estimates the fair value of the gaming license using a DCF model assuming we built a new casino with similar utility to that of the existing casino. The method assumes a theoretical start-up company going into business without any assets other than the intangible asset being valued. As such, the value of the gaming license is a function of the following assumptions:
•Projected revenues and operating cash flows (including an allocation of the projected payments under any applicable Triple Net Lease);
•Estimated construction costs and duration;
•Pre-opening expenses; and
•Discounting that reflects the level of risk associated with receiving future cash flows attributable to the license.
We assess the fair value of our trademarks using the relief-from-royalty method under the income approach. The principle behind this method is that the value of the trademark is equal to the present value of the after-tax royalty savings attributable to the owned trademark. As such, the value of the trademark is a function of the following assumptions:
•Projected revenues;
•Selection of an appropriate royalty rate to apply to projected revenues; and
•Discounting that reflects the level of risk associated with the after-tax revenue stream associated with the trademark.
The evaluation of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires the use of estimates about future operating results of each reporting unit to determine the estimated fair value of the reporting unit and the indefinite-lived intangible assets. The Company must make various assumptions and estimates in performing its impairment testing. The implied fair value includes estimates of future cash flows (including an allocation of the projected payments under any applicable Triple Net Lease) that are based on reasonable and supportable assumptions which represent the Company’s best estimates of the cash flows expected to result from the use of the assets including their eventual disposition. Changes in estimates, increases in the Company’s cost of capital, reductions in transaction multiples, changes in operating and capital expenditure assumptions or application of alternative assumptions and definitions could produce significantly different results. Future cash flow estimates are, by their nature, subjective and actual results may differ materially from the Company’s estimates. If our ongoing estimates of future cash flows are not met, we may have to record impairment charges in future periods. Our estimates of cash flows are based on the current regulatory and economic climates (including as a result of COVID-19), recent operating information and budgets of
the various properties where it conducts operations. These estimates could be negatively impacted by changes in federal, state or local regulations, economic downturns, or other events affecting our properties.
Forecasted cash flows (based on our annual operating plan as determined in the fourth quarter) can be significantly impacted by the local economy in which our reporting units operate, as illustrated by the COVID-19 pandemic which caused temporary suspension of our operations pursuant to various orders from state gaming regulatory bodies or governmental authorities. Increases in unemployment rates can also result in decreased customer visitation and/or lower customer spend per visit. In addition, the impact of new legislation which approves gaming in nearby jurisdictions or further expands gaming in jurisdictions where our reporting units currently operate can result in opportunities for us to expand our operations. However, it also has the impact of increasing competition for our established properties which generally will have a negative effect on those locations’ profitability once competitors become established as a certain level of cannibalization occurs absent an overall increase in customer visitation. Additionally, increases in gaming taxes approved by state regulatory bodies can negatively impact forecasted cash flows.
Assumptions and estimates about future cash flow levels and multiples by individual reporting units are complex and subjective. They are sensitive to changes in underlying assumptions and can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors, such as industry, geopolitical and economic trends, and internal factors, such as changes in the Company’s business strategy, which may re-allocate capital and resources to different or new opportunities which management believes will enhance its overall value but may be to the detriment of an individual reporting unit.
Once an impairment of goodwill or other intangible asset has been recorded, it cannot be reversed. Since the Company’s goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not amortized, there may be volatility in reported net income or loss because impairment losses, if any, are likely to occur irregularly and in varying amounts. Intangible assets that have a definite life are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives or related service contract. The Company reviews the carrying amount of its amortizing intangible assets for possible impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying amount of the amortizing intangible assets exceed their fair value, an impairment loss is recognized.
Revenue and earnings streams within our industry can vary significantly based on various circumstances, which in many cases are outside of the Company’s control, and as such are difficult to predict and quantify. We have disclosed several of these circumstances in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Circumstances include, for instance, temporary property closures as a result of COVID-19, changes in legislation that approves gaming in nearby jurisdictions, further expansion of gaming in jurisdictions where we currently operate, new state legislation that requires the implementation of smoking restrictions at our casinos or any other events outside of our control that make the customer experience less desirable.
The Company completed its annual assessment for impairment as of October 1, 2021, which did not result in any impairment charges to goodwill, gaming licenses and trademarks. See Note 9, “Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets,” in the notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Reporting units with goodwill which were identified as having less than a substantial cushion, were subject to a sensitivity analysis to determine the potential impairment losses:
Business Combinations
In connection with the Company’s acquisitions, valuations are completed to determine the allocation of the purchase price. The factors considered in the valuations include data gathered as a result of the Company’s due diligence in connection with the acquisitions, projections for future operations, and data obtained from third-party valuation specialists, as deemed appropriate.
We allocate the business combination purchase price to tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their fair values. The excess of the purchase price over those fair values is recorded as goodwill.
Accounting for business combinations required our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, including our estimate of intangible assets, such as gaming licenses, trade names, customer relationships and developed technology. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates made have been reasonable and appropriate, they are inherently uncertain. For our gaming license valuation, the estimated future cash flows of our properties were the primary assumption in the respective intangible valuations. Cash flow estimates included assumptions regarding factors such as recent and budgeted
operating performance, net win per unit (revenue), patron visits and growth percentages. The growth percentages were developed considering general macroeconomic conditions as well as competitive impacts from current and anticipated competition through a review of customer market data, operating margins, and current regulatory, social and economic climates. The most significant of the assumptions used in the valuations included: (1) revenue growth/decline percentages; (2) discount rates; (3) effective income tax rates; (4) future terminal values; and (5) capital expenditure assumptions. These assumptions were developed for each acquired property based on historical trends in the current competitive markets in which they operate, and projections of future performance and competition. Significant assumptions with respect to our tradenames and customer relationships were selecting the appropriate royalty rates and cost estimates for replacement cost analyses. Acquired developed technology has been valued with either a relief-from-royalty method or a replacement cost approach. Where a relief-from-royalty method was utilized, significant assumptions include projected revenues attributable to the asset, royalty rates, obsolescence factors, estimated synergies, and discount rates. Where a replacement cost method was utilized, significant assumptions include estimated cost and time required to replace, opportunity cost over the replacement period, and estimated mark-up on development costs.
Income taxes
Under ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”), deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of existing assets and liabilities and are measured at the prevailing enacted tax rates that will be in effect when these differences are settled or realized. ASC 740 also requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The realizability of the net deferred tax assets is evaluated each reporting period by assessing the valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of the allowance, if necessary. Pursuant to ASC 740, in evaluating the more-likely-than-not standard, we consider all available positive and negative evidence including projected future taxable income and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets. In the event the Company determines that the deferred income tax assets would be realized in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be recorded, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
ASC 740 suggests that additional scrutiny should be given to deferred tax assets of an entity with cumulative pre-tax losses during the three most recent years and is widely considered significant negative evidence that is objective and verifiable and therefore, difficult to overcome. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we have cumulative pre-tax losses and considered this factor in our analysis of deferred taxes. Additionally, we expect to remain in a three year cumulative loss position in the near future. As a result, the Company has recorded a valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets, excluding the reversal of deferred tax liabilities related to indefinite-lived intangibles. We intend to continue to maintain a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets until there is sufficient positive evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances.