Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We were incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on June 29, 2021. We were incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We have not selected any specific Business Combination target.
On October 19, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 15,000,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000 and incurring offering costs of approximately $16,900,000, (of which $5,300,000 was for deferred underwriting commissions), and approximately $7,987,000 was the excess of fair value over price paid for Founder Shares sold to the Anchor Investors. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 7,500,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, in a Private Placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,500,000.
On October 29, 2021, the underwriter purchased an additional 2,000,000 Units, generating net proceeds to the Company of approximately $20,000,000 in the aggregate, and incurring an additional offering costs of $1,100,000 in connection with the over-allotment (of which $700,000 was for deferred underwriting fees) and substantially concurrently with the closing of the partial exercise of the over-allotment option relating to the IPO, the Company completed the private sale of an aggregate of 600,000 additional Private Placement Warrants to our Sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $600,000.
Upon the closing of the IPO, the over-allotment and the Private Placement, approximately $171.7 million ($10.10 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units and the Private Placement Warrants were placed in the Trust Account and will continue to be invested in United States government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account.
We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from June 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from June 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $463,081, which consists of general and administrative expenses of $464,987, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $1,906.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We consummated our IPO and consummated the exercise of our over-allotment option as set forth above and completed the sale of our Private Placements Warrants. Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placements Warrants, a total of approximately $171.7 million was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $16.9 million in Initial Public Offering related costs, of which $5.3 million was for deferred underwriting commissions, and $7.9 million was the excess of fair value over price paid for Founder Shares sold to certain qualified institutional buyers or institutional accredited investors.
For the period from June 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $990,388. Net loss of $463,081 was affected by general and administrative expenses paid by the Sponsor in exchange for the issuance of Founder Shares in the amount of $25,000, general and administrative expenses paid by related party under the promissory note in the amount of $1,803 and interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $1,906. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $552,204 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $171,701,906 (including approximately $2,000 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,342,403. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $6.0 million in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at redemption value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of ordinary shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of ordinary shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on June 29, 2021 (inception) using a modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.