Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We conduct our business through PetIQ, LLC and its subsidiaries. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This section of this Annual Report generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2021 to 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons of 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 on our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs and involve numerous risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Business Overview
PetIQ is a leading pet medication and wellness company delivering a smarter way for pet parents to help their pets live their best lives through convenient access to affordable veterinary products and services. We engage with customers through more than 60,000 points of distribution across retail and e-commerce channels with our branded and distributed medications as well as health and wellness items, which are further supported by our world-class medications manufacturing facility in Omaha, Nebraska and health and wellness manufacturing facility in Springville, Utah. Our national veterinarian service platform operates in over 2,900 retail partner locations in 42 states providing cost effective and convenient veterinary wellness services. PetIQ believes that pets are an important part of the family and deserve the best products and care we can provide.
We have two reporting segments: (i) Products; and (ii) Services. The Products segment consists of our manufacturing and distribution business. The Services segments consists of veterinary services, and related product sales, provided by the Company directly to consumers.
We are the sole managing member of Holdco, which is the sole member of Opco and, through Holdco, operate and control all of the business and affairs of Opco.
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Considerations
The global COVID-19 pandemic has created significant volatility, disruption and uncertainty. The Company has continued to experience certain negative effects as a result of the pandemic, including employee absenteeism in excess of historical averages, a shortage of skilled veterinarians, and certain supply chain delays.
Nonetheless, COVID-19 has presented new opportunities for our business as it has accelerated pet owner purchases of veterinary-grade pet products from retail and e-commerce channels. In addition, with COVID-19 vaccinations becoming more widespread and various restrictions continuing to ease, consumers have started to resume normal activities, including seeking in person veterinary care for their companion animals, and more businesses have commenced resuming operations. There can be no assurance that such positive trends will continue or that there will not be any increases of new infections or new variants that may impede or reverse recovery and such positive trends.
Since the beginning of the pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, the Company implemented various policies and procedures designed to ensure the safety of our customers and team members. With COVID-19 hospitalizations and deaths declining through the United States, as well as expanded access to vaccines, we have begun to roll back certain policies that created additional costs, such as incremental team members at veterinary services clinics and wellness centers to ensure social distancing and enhanced sanitation. We continue to monitor the progression of the COVID-19 pandemic and state, local and federal government regulatory and public health responses thereto. Additional information regarding risks and uncertainties to our business and results of operations related to the COVID-19 pandemic are set forth in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Components of our Results of Operations
Net Sales
Our Product Segment net sales consist of our total product sales net of product returns, allowances (discounts), trade promotions and incentives. We offer a variety of trade promotions and incentives to our customers, such as cooperative advertising programs and in-store displays. We recognize revenue when control transfers to our customers, in accordance with the terms of our contracts, which generally occurs upon shipment of product. Most contracts contain variable consideration, which is estimated at the time of sale and updated at each period end. Trade promotions are used to increase our aggregate net sales. Our net sales are periodically influenced by the timing, extent and amount of such trade promotions and incentives.
Key factors that may affect our future Product sales growth include: new product introductions; expansion into other customer bases; expansion of items sold to existing customers, addition of new retail customers; aggressive pricing by our competitors; as well as whether maintaining and developing positive relationships with key retail customers. In addition, our products are primarily consumables and, as such, they experience a replenishment cycle.
Our Service Segment revenue consists of providing veterinary services to consumers and selling products to the consumer in conjunction with those services. The customer generally renders payment at the time the service is provided. Services Segment revenue is dependent on the number of clinics and wellness centers we run and the number of pets we see in our clinics and wellness centers.
While many of our products are sold consistently throughout the year, we experience seasonality in the form of increased demand for our flea and tick product offerings in the first half of the year, both leading up to and throughout the spring and summer seasons. Additionally our veterinary services experience seasonality as consumers typically seek more services in the warmer months.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is our net product sales plus service revenue less cost of product sales and services. Our cost of product sales consists primarily of costs of raw goods, finished goods, packaging materials, manufacturing, shipping and handling costs and costs associated with our warehouses and distribution network. Cost of services are comprised of all service and product costs related to providing veterinary services, including but not limited to, salaries or contract costs of veterinarians, technicians and other clinic based personnel, transportation and delivery costs, facilities rent, occupancy costs, supply costs, depreciation and amortization of clinic assets, certain marketing and promotional expenses and costs of goods sold.
Gross margin measures our gross profit as a percentage of net sales. With respect to our proprietary products, we have a manufacturing network that includes leased and owned manufacturing facilities where we manufacture finished goods, as well as third-party contract manufacturing facilities from which we purchase finished products predominately on a dollar-per-unit basis. The gross margin on our proprietary value-branded products is higher than on our distributed products. For distributed products, our costs are driven by the extent of value-added products and services we render with the distributed product. Gross profit in the services segment is driven by the number of pets that seek services in the individual clinics and wellness centers due to the relatively fixed cost nature of operating the clinic or wellness center.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee compensation and benefits expenses, sales and merchandizing expenses, advertising and marketing expenses, rent and lease expenses, information technology (“IT”) and utilities expenses, professional fees, insurance costs, R&D costs, host fees, banking charges, and consulting fees. Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales have increased to 18.3% in 2021 from 17.7% in 2020. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by increased marketing and selling costs as a result of supporting our proprietary brands, notably Capstar, which was purchased in July 2020, incremental amortization expense on the newly acquired intangible assets for the full year, and
general growth in corporate services to correspond with the growth in the Company, partially offset by a decrease in acquisition and integration costs.
Our advertising and marketing expenses primarily consist of digital marketing (e.g. social, display and search, etc.), online video and Streaming TV, e-mail, in-store merchandising and trade shows in an effort to build awareness and drive demand for our products and services. These expenses may vary from quarter to quarter but are typically higher in the second and third quarters. Our Product Segment focuses on promoting PetArmor direct-to-consumer, supported by trade promotions and merchandising. Our Services Segment focuses on promoting our veterinary services direct-to-consumer, geo-targeted around our retail locations, supported by in-store signage. We generally expect our marketing expenses to increase commensurate with increases in revenue and market share for both segments. In 2022 the Company is planning to increase advertising and marketing expenses at a rate in excess of the rate of anticipated sales growth in order to invest in our own manufactured brands.
As noted above, we experience seasonality in the form of increased demand for our flea and tick product offerings in the first half of the year, both leading up to and throughout the spring and summer seasons and, as a result, the sales and merchandizing expenses component of our selling, general and administrative expenses generally increases during this period due to promotional spending relating to our flea and tick product lines.
Net (Loss) Income
Our net (loss) income for future periods will be affected by the various factors described above. In addition, our historical results are impacted by Opco’s status as a pass-through entity for U.S. federal income tax purposes and our ownership percentage of Holdco. During 2020, we recorded a valuation allowance which effectively removed our deferred tax assets based on the likelihood of realization. Improved profitability could reverse that allowance, resulting in significant swings in net (loss) income. Our tax expense is impacted by our structure and, as a result, we expect our tax expense to fluctuate on a quarterly basis depending on the number of Exchanges that occur during each period.
Non-Controlling Interest
We consolidate the financial position and results of operations of HoldCo. Our Continuing LLC Owners hold their equity investment in us primarily through LLC Interests in the Company’s subsidiary, HoldCo, and an equal number of shares of the Company’s Class B common stock. Our Class B Stock has voting, but no economic rights. Each LLC Interest, together with a share of Class B Stock held by the Continuing LLC, is exchangeable for a share of the Company’s Class A common stock (or at the option of the Company, the cash equivalent thereof). The Company is the managing member of HoldCo and owns a majority of the LLC Interests, and consolidates HoldCo in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. The interest of the Continuing LLC Owners in HoldCo is reflected in our Consolidated Financial Statements as a non-controlling interest.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations in dollars and as a percentage of net sales for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared With Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net sales
Consolidated Net Sales
Consolidated net sales increased approximately $152.5 million, or 20%, to $932.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $780.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by growth in distributed and manufactured products. Additionally the Services segment grew revenue significantly on reduced impact from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Products Segment
Product sales increased approximately $99.7 million, or 14%, to $825.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $725.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by accelerated growth in distributed products, as well as growth in manufactured products, particularly Capstar, which was purchased in the middle of 2020.
Services Segment
Service revenue increased approximately $52.8 million, or 97%, from $54.3 million to $107.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Same-store sales increased approximately $36.6 million, or 81%, to $82.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $45.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in same-store sales was driven by reduced impact from COVID-19 related closures in 2021 as compared to 2020. Non same-store sales increased approximately $16.2 million, or 180%, to $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in non same-store sales was a result of opening 98 additional wellness centers in 2021, as well as the maturation of clinics that
have not been open for six quarters, partially offset by wellness centers maturing into the same store sales category. Services revenue has rebounded to nearly the levels seen prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, although the Company is continuing to experience unplanned clinic closures due to absenteeism.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased by approximately $51.2 million, or 38%, to $186.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $135.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is largely due to the increase in sales of manufactured products within our product segment which carry a higher margin than our distributed product sales. Increase in manufactured products was positively impacted by sale of products acquired as part of the Capstar acquisition in 2020. Additionally, our services segment contributed to our gross profit increase due to improvements in operations as COVID-19 related closures lessened during 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) increased approximately $32.1 million, or 23%, to $170.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $138.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of net sales, G&A increased from approximately 17.7% in 2020 to 18.3% in 2021, driven by additional sales and marketing costs to support our brands, incremental amortization expense on the newly acquired intangible assets and general growth in corporate services to correspond with the growth in the Company, partially offset by a decrease in acquisition and integration costs.
Products Segment
Products segment SG&A increased approximately $6.9 million, or 23%, to $37.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $30.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by selling and marketing costs to promote sales growth in our own brands.
Services Segment
Services segment SG&A increased approximately $8.7 million, or 52%, to $25.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by higher variable selling costs such as host fees to partners and credit card fees, which are typically based on a percentage of sales. Additionally the Company has increased marketing spend to support opening new wellness centers. As a percentage of Service Revenue G&A decreased from 31% to 24% as sales growth outpaced the growth in SG&A.
Unallocated Corporate
Unallocated corporate G&A increased $16.5 million, or 18% to $107.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $91.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is the result of the following:
◾ Higher amortization of $8.6 million on the inclusion of the 2020 intangible asset acquisitions for the full year;
◾ Additional corporate compensation of approximately $5.0 million;
◾ Increased research and development expense of approximately $3.7 million;
◾ Increased corporate marketing of approximately $3.0 million;
◾ Increases above were partially offset by lower litigation and settlement costs, professional fees, and other miscellaneous costs.
Other expenses
Interest expense, net, increased $1.9 million, to $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was driven by additional debt including the Convertible Notes entered into during May 2020 that were outstanding for the full year in 2021 which were outstanding for outstanding for only part of the year in 2020, partially, offset by lower interest rates on the Company’s new credit agreements entered into in April 2021. Additionally the loss on debt extinguishment of $5.5 million in 2021 had no comparable event in 2020.
Pre-tax net loss
As a result of the factors described above, pre-tax net loss decreased $12.8 million to a pre-tax net loss of $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a pre-tax net loss of $25.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Tax (expense) benefit
As a result of continued exchanges by Continuing LLC Owners of LLC Interests and Class B common shares, the Company now owns approximately 99.1% of Holdco with the LLC Interests not held by the Company considered non-controlling interest. Holdco is treated as a partnership for income tax reporting. Holdco’s members, including the Company, are liable for federal, state, and local income taxes based on their share of Holdco’s taxable income.
Income tax (expense) benefit totaled (30.9%) and (238.7%) of pretax earnings for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The tax rate is affected primarily by the changes in valuation allowance during the year ended December 31, 2021 and the portion of income and expense allocated to the non-controlling interest. It is also affected by discrete items that may occur in any given year such as stock based compensation, but are not consistent from year to year.
Segment Adjusted EBITDA
Products Segment
Products segment Adjusted EBITDA increased approximately $32.1 million, or 27.4%, to $149.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The significant growth in Products segment Adjusted EBITDA relates to significant sales growth of manufactured products, primarily Capstar branded products, as well as growth of distributed items.
Services Segment
Services segment Adjusted EBITDA increased approximately $8.3 million, or 245%, to $11.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Services segment earnings are impacted by the Company’s growth strategy of opening new wellness centers and the impact of the Company’s same store portfolio, discussed further below under “Consolidated Non-GAAP Financial Measures”. Services segment Adjusted EBITDA was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 closures in 2020.
Unallocated Corporate
Unallocated corporate expenses consist of expenses incurred by centrally-managed departments, including accounting, legal, human resources, information technology, and headquarters expenses, as well as executive and incentive compensation expenses and other miscellaneous costs. Unallocated corporate costs have primarily grown due to the growth in the size of the Company, including adding to administrative headcount through acquisitions, as well as headquarters growth to support the Company’s growth. Adjustments to unallocated corporate expenses include costs related to specific events, such as acquisition expenses, and integration costs. Adjustments also include non-cash expenses, such as depreciation, amortization, and stock based compensation.
The following tables reconcile segment pre-tax net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented.
(1) Acquisition costs include legal, accounting, banking, consulting, diligence, and other costs related to completed and contemplated acquisitions.
(2) Non same-store revenue and costs relate to our Services Segment wellness centers with less than six full quarters of operating results, and also include pre-opening expenses.
(3) Integration costs and costs of discontinued clinics represent costs related to integrating the acquired businesses including personnel costs such as severance and signing bonuses, consulting costs, contract termination, and IT conversion costs. Additionally in 2021 integration costs include a gain on the sale of the Company’s former headquarters building.
(1) Acquisition costs include legal, accounting, banking, consulting, diligence, and other costs related to completed and contemplated acquisitions.
(2) Non same-store revenue and costs relate to our Services Segment wellness centers with less than six full quarters of operating results, and also include pre-opening expenses.
(3) Integration costs and costs of discontinued clinics represent costs related to integrating the acquired businesses including personnel costs such as severance and signing bonuses, consulting costs, contract termination, and IT conversion costs. These costs are primarily in the Products segment and the corporate segment for personnel costs, legal and consulting expenses, and IT costs.
(4) Costs related to maintaining service segment infrastructure, staffing, and overhead related to clinics and wellness centers closed due to COVID-19 related health and safety initiatives. Product segment and unallocated corporate costs related to incremental wages paid to essential workers and sanitation costs due to COVID.
Consolidated Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures. EBITDA represents net income before interest, income taxes and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA plus adjustments for transactions that management does not believe are representative of our core ongoing business. Adjusted EBITDA is utilized by management: (i) as a factor in evaluating management’s performance when determining incentive compensation and (ii) to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies.
The Company presents EBITDA because it is a necessary component for computing Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends. In addition, you should be aware when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA that in the future we may incur expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. Our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these or other unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies do not calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner.
Our management does not, and you should not, consider EBITDA or Adjusted EBITDA in isolation or as an alternative to financial measures determined in accordance with GAAP. The principal limitation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is that they exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our financial statements. Some of these limitations are:
● EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● EBITDA does not reflect the interest expenses, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts;
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing core operations; and
● Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA only supplementally. You should review the reconciliations of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented.
(1) Acquisition costs include legal, accounting, banking, consulting, diligence, and costs related to completed and contemplated acquisitions.
(2) Integration costs and costs of discontinued clinics represent costs related to integrating the acquired businesses including personnel costs such as severance and signing bonuses, consulting costs, contract termination, and IT conversion costs. These costs are primarily in the Products segment and the corporate segment for personnel costs, legal and consulting expenses, and IT costs.
(3) SKU rationalization relates to the disposal of or reserve to estimated net realizable value for inventory that will either no longer be sold, or will be de-emphasized, as the Company aligns brands between Legacy PetIQ brands and brands acquired as part of the Perrigo Animal Health Acquisition. All costs are included in the Products segment gross margin.
(4) Fair value adjustment on the contingent note represents the non cash adjustment to mark the 2019 Contingent Note to fair value.
(5) Non same-store revenue and costs relate to our Services segment and are from wellness centers, host partners, and regions with less than six full quarters of operating results, includes pre-opening expenses.
(6) Costs related to maintaining service segment infrastructure, staffing, and overhead related to clinics and wellness centers closed due to COVID-19 related health and safety initiatives. Product segment and unallocated corporate costs related to incremental wages paid to essential workers and sanitation costs due to COVID.
Financial Condition, Liquidity, and Capital Resources
Historically, our primary sources of liquidity have been cash flow from operations, borrowings, and equity contributions. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our cash and cash equivalents were $79.4 million and $33.5 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an unused revolving credit facility with availability of $125.0 million, $298.5 million outstanding under a term loan, $143.8 million of outstanding 4.0% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “Notes”), and $23.5 million in other debt. The debt agreements bear interest at rates between 2.1% and 4.75%.
Our primary cash needs are for working capital and to support our growth plans, which may include acquisitions. Our maintenance capital expenditures have typically been less than 1.0% of net sales, but we may make additional capital expenditures as necessary to support our growth, such as the investment in additional veterinary clinics that is currently ongoing or the construction of new corporate headquarters, which was completed in 2021. Our primary working capital requirements are to carry inventory and receivable levels necessary to support our increasing Product net sales. Fluctuations in working capital are primarily driven by the timing of new product launches and seasonal retailer demand. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had working capital (current assets less current liabilities) of $200.5 million and $141.2 million, respectively.
We believe that our operating cash flow, cash on hand, and debt proceeds from our borrowings under our credit facility will be adequate to meet our operating, investing, and financing needs for the foreseeable future. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet long-term liquidity needs as we continue to execute our business strategy, we anticipate that they will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds, although we can provide no assurance that these sources of funding will be available on reasonable terms. As in the past, we will continue to explore opportunities to optimize our capital structure.
Cash Flows
Cash provided by or used in Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $23.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.6 million used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in operating cash flows primarily reflects higher pre-tax earnings, lower non-cash items primarily due to the lower deferred tax adjustment, and improvement in cash used in working capital. Working capital changes are driven by lower growth in accounts receivable, lower inventory due to timing and composition of expected sales in 2022, partially offset by reduction in accounts payable changes.
Cash used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $118.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net cash used in investing activities is primarily a result of the acquisition of Capstar® in the prior year with no similar acquisition occurring in 2021, partially offset by increased purchase of property, plant, and equipment, primarily to support the launch of additional wellness centers and the construction of the new corporate headquarters.
Cash provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $48.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $128.8 million in net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash provided by financing activities is primarily driven by the Company’s issuance of Notes and the purchase of capped call options to finance the Capstar Acquisition in the prior year with only the refinance transaction occurring in 2021.
Description of Indebtedness
For a discussion of our “Indebtedness,” refer to Note 5 - “Debt” in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements of this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the revenue and expenses incurred during the reported periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements appearing in this Annual Report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes product sales when product control is transferred to the customer, which is generally upon delivery or shipment of goods, depending on terms with a customer. Many customer contracts include some form of variable consideration such as discounts, rebates, and sales returns and allowance. Variable consideration is treated as a reduction in revenue when product revenue is recognized. Depending on the specific type of variable consideration, we use either the expected value or most likely amount method to determine the variable consideration.
Revenue for services is recognized over time as the service is delivered, typically over a single day. Payment is typically rendered at the time of service.
Trade marketing expense, consisting primarily of customer pricing allowances and merchandising funds are offered through various programs to customers and are designed to promote our products. They include the cost of in-store product displays, feature pricing in retailers' advertisements and other temporary price reductions. These programs are offered to our customers both in fixed and variable (rate per case) amounts. The ultimate cost of these programs depends on retailer performance and is subject to management estimates.
Certain retailers require the payment of product introductory fees in order to obtain space for the Company's products on the retailer's store shelves. This cost is typically a lump sum and is determined using the expected value based on the contract between the two parties.
Both trade marketing expense and product introductory fees are recognized as reductions of revenue at the time the transfer of control of the associated products occurs. Accruals for expected payouts, or amounts paid in advance, under these programs are included as other current assets or accounts payable in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The Company does not grant a general right of return. However, customers may return defective or non-conforming products. Customer remedies may include either a cash refund or an exchange of the product. As a result, the right of return and related refund liability is estimated and recorded as a reduction in revenue. This return estimate is reviewed and updated each period and is based on historical sales and return experience.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined on the first-in first-out (“FIFO”) method and includes estimated rebate amounts. The Company maintains reserves for estimated obsolete or unmarketable inventory based on the difference between the cost of inventory and its estimated net realizable value. In estimating the reserves, management considers factors such as excess or slow-moving inventories, product expiration dating, and market conditions. Changes in these conditions may result in additional reserves.
Accounting for Income Taxes
The Company’s annual income tax rate is based on its income, statutory tax rates, changes in prior tax positions and tax planning opportunities available in the various jurisdictions in which it operates. Significant judgment and estimates are required to determine the Company’s annual tax rate and evaluate its tax positions. Despite the Company’s belief that its tax return positions are fully supportable, these positions are subject to challenge, and the Company may not be successful in defending these challenges.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts in the financial statements, which will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future. In evaluating our ability to recover our deferred tax assets in the jurisdiction from which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. In the event that it is determined that an asset is not more likely than not to be realized, a valuation allowance is recorded against the asset. Valuation allowances related to deferred tax assets can be impacted by changes to tax laws, changes to statutory tax rates and future taxable income levels. In the event the Company were to determine that it would not be able to realize all or a portion of its deferred tax assets in the future, the unrealizable
amount would be charged to earnings in the period in which that determination is made. Conversely, if the Company were to determine that it would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the net carrying amounts, it would decrease the recorded valuation allowance through a favorable adjustment to earnings in the period that the determination was made. The Company has assessed the realizability of the net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and in that analysis has considered the relevant positive and negative evidence available to determine whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred income tax assets will not be realized. The Company believes it is more likely than not that the benefit from the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized and has recorded a valuation allowance. In future periods, if we conclude we have future taxable income sufficient to recognize the deferred tax assets, we may reduce or eliminate the valuation allowance.