Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Pathfinder Acquisition Corporation,” “Pathfinder,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Pathfinder Acquisition Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on December 18, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Pathfinder Acquisition LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on February 16, 2021. On February 19, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 32,500,000 Units, including 2,500,000 additional Units to partially cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $325.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $18.5 million, of which approximately $11.4 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. The underwriters had 45 days from the effective date of the prospectus to exercise the remaining portion of its option to purchase up to 2,000,000 Units at our initial public offering price to cover over-allotments, if any. On April 2, 2021, the over-allotment option on the remaining Units expired unexercised by the underwriters.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 4,250,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor, each exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, at a price of $2.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $8.5 million.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering and the private placement, $325.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was placed in a trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and was invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act, which are invested only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of its Initial Public Offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the trust account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the income earned on the trust account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target business or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target business sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from our initial public offering, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay its income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and its board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Recent Developments
Termination of Proposed Business Combination
On July 15, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Original Business Combination Agreement”), by and among us, ServiceMax, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“ServiceMax”), and Stronghold Merger Sub, Inc., a Cayman Islands exempted company incorporated with limited liability and a wholly owned subsidiary of ServiceMax. On August 11, 2021, we, ServiceMax and Serve Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of us (“Merger Sub”), entered into an Amended and Restated Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”), pursuant to which Merger Sub would be merged with and into ServiceMax, with ServiceMax surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Pathfinder (the “Business Combination”).
On December 6, 2021, we and ServiceMax entered into a Termination Agreement (the “Termination Agreement”), effective as of such date, pursuant to which the parties agreed to mutually terminate the Business Combination Agreement due to unfavorable market conditions. The termination of the Business Combination Agreement is effective as of December 6, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $21,000 in our operating bank account, which is not sufficient working capital to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing.
Our liquidity needs had been satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover for certain of our expenses in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and a loan of approximately $129,000 pursuant to the IPO Note issued to our sponsor (as defined in Note 5 to the financial statements included in Item 1 of this Report). We repaid the IPO Note in full on February 19, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of our initial public offering and the private placement, our needs have been satisfied with the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor will provide us Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5 to the financial statements included in Item 1 of this Report). As of December 31, 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans, and as of December 31, 2021, we had borrowed $250,000 in Working Capital Loans under the Working Capital Note (as defined in Note 5 to the financial statements included in Item 1 of this Report).
In connection with the management’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statement-Going Concern,” management has determined that working capital needs, the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and our initial public offering and since our initial public offering, searching for a business combination target company. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $8.0 million, which consisted of approximately $10.0 million of non-operating gain resulting from the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and approximately $28,000 of income from investments held in trust account, offset by approximately $1.5 million in general and administrative expenses, and approximately $575,000 in offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
For the period from December 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $8,000, which consisted of general and administrative expenses.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the Nasdaq Capital Market (“NASDAQ”) through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and the liquidation, we agreed to pay our sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us.
In addition, our sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. The audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to our sponsor, officers or directors, or us or their affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial Business Combination will be made from funds held outside the trust account.
We incurred approximately $110,000 and $0 in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from December 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had accrued approximately $49,000 and $0, respectively, for services in connection with such agreement on the accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheets.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement entered into on the effective date of our initial public offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $6.5 million in the aggregate, payable upon the closing of our initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $11.4 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The 6,500,000 public warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering and the 4,250,000 private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the carrying value of the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised or expires. The initial fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and the fair value of the private placement warrants have been estimated using a binomial lattice model in a risk-neutral framework. The fair value of the public warrants as of September 30, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. As the transfer of private placement warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the private placement warrants having substantially the same terms as the public warrants, we determined that the fair value of each private placement warrant is equivalent to that of each public warrant. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares is classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, 325,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of our initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in our initial public offering (including the consummation of the Over-allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 10,750,000 Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
We have considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from weighted average number as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the interim period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.