ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW OF OUR PERFORMANCE, OPERATING ENVIRONMENT, STRATEGY AND OUTLOOK
Financial Highlights
The following is a summary of certain financial performance metrics (in billions, except per share data):
2021 Total Revenues--$81.3 billion 2021 Net Cash Flow from Operations--$32.6 billion
An increase of 95% compared to 2020 An increase of 126% compared to 2020
2021 Reported Diluted EPS--$3.85 2021 Adjusted Diluted EPS (Non-GAAP)--$4.42*
An increase of 137% compared to 2020 An increase of 96% compared to 2020
*For additional information regarding Adjusted diluted EPS (which is a non-GAAP financial measure), including reconciliations of certain GAAP reported to non-GAAP adjusted information, see the Non-GAAP Financial Measure: Adjusted Income section within MD&A.
References to operational variances pertain to period-over-period changes that exclude the impact of foreign exchange rates. Although foreign exchange rate changes are part of our business, they are not within our control and since they can mask positive or negative trends in the business, we believe presenting operational variances excluding these foreign exchange changes provides useful information to evaluate our results.
Our Business and Strategy
Most of our revenues come from the manufacture and sale of biopharmaceutical products. With the formation of the Consumer Healthcare JV in 2019 and the spin-off of our former Upjohn Business in the fourth quarter of 2020, Pfizer transformed into a more focused, global leader in science-based innovative medicines and vaccines and beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020 operated as a single operating segment engaged in the discovery, development, manufacturing, marketing, sale and distribution of biopharmaceutical products worldwide. At the beginning of our fiscal fourth quarter of 2021, we reorganized our commercial operations and began to manage our commercial operations through a new global structure consisting of two operating segments: Biopharma and PC1. Biopharma is the only reportable segment. On December 31, 2021, we completed the sale of our Meridian subsidiary, and beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, the financial results of Meridian are reflected as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020, the financial results of the Upjohn Business and the Mylan-Japan collaboration were reflected as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Prior-period information has been restated to reflect our current organizational structure. See Note 1A and Item 1. Business--Commercial Operations of this Form 10-K for additional information. We expect to incur costs of approximately $700 million in connection with separating Upjohn, of which, approximately 75% has been incurred since inception and through December 31, 2021. These charges include costs and expenses related to separation of legal entities and transaction costs.
Transforming to a More Focused Company: We have undertaken efforts to ensure our cost base and support model align appropriately with our new operating structure. While certain direct costs transferred to the Consumer Healthcare JV and to the Upjohn Business in connection with the spin-off, there are indirect costs which did not transfer. We are taking steps to restructure our corporate enabling functions to appropriately support our business, R&D and PGS platform functions. In addition, we are transforming our commercial go-to market model in the way we engage patients and physicians. See the Costs and Expenses--Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives section of this MD&A.
R&D: We believe we have a strong pipeline and are well-positioned for future growth. R&D is at the heart of fulfilling our purpose to deliver breakthroughs that change patients’ lives as we work to translate advanced science and technologies into the therapies that may be the most impactful for patients. Innovation, drug discovery and development are critical to our success. In addition to discovering and developing new
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 26
products, our R&D efforts seek to add value to our existing products by improving their effectiveness and ease of dosing and by discovering potential new indications. See the Item 1. Business-Research and Development section of this Form 10-K for our R&D priorities and strategy.
We seek to leverage a strong pipeline, organize around expected operational growth drivers and capitalize on trends creating long-term growth opportunities, including:
•an aging global population that is generating increased demand for innovative medicines and vaccines that address patients’ unmet needs;
•advances in both biological science and digital technology that are enhancing the delivery of breakthrough new medicines and vaccines; and
•the increasingly significant role of hospitals in healthcare systems.
Our Business Development Initiatives
We are committed to strategically capitalizing on growth opportunities, primarily by advancing our own product pipeline and maximizing the value of our existing products, but also through various business development activities. We view our business development activity as an enabler of our strategies and seek to generate growth by pursuing opportunities and transactions that have the potential to strengthen our business and our capabilities. We assess our business, assets and scientific capabilities/portfolio as part of our regular, ongoing portfolio review process and also continue to consider business development activities that will help advance our business strategy.
Our significant recent business development activities that closed or are targeted to close in 2022 include:
Acquisition of Arena
In December 2021, we and Arena announced that the companies entered into a definitive agreement under which we will acquire Arena, a clinical stage company developing innovative potential therapies for the treatment of several immuno-inflammatory diseases. Under the terms of the agreement, we will acquire all outstanding shares of Arena for $100 per share in an all-cash transaction for a total equity value of approximately $6.7 billion. On February 2, 2022, Arena shareholders voted to approve the proposed acquisition, which is targeted to close in the first half of 2022, subject to review under antitrust laws and other customary closing conditions.
Collaboration with Biohaven
In November 2021, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement and related sublicense agreement with Biohaven Pharmaceutical Holding Company Ltd., Biohaven Pharmaceutical Ireland DAC and BioShin Limited (collectively, Biohaven) pursuant to which we acquired rights to commercialize rimegepant and zavegepant for the treatment and prevention of migraines outside of the U.S., subject to regulatory approval. Rimegepant is currently commercialized in the U.S., Israel, and the U.A.E. under the brand name Nurtec® ODT, with certain additional applications pending outside of the U.S. Biohaven will continue to lead R&D globally and we have the exclusive right to commercialization globally, outside of the U.S. Upon the closing of the transaction, which occurred on January 4, 2022, we paid Biohaven $500 million, including an upfront payment of $150 million and an equity investment of $350 million. Biohaven is also eligible to receive up to $740 million in non-U.S. commercialization milestone payments, in addition to tiered double-digit royalties on net sales outside of the U.S. In addition to the milestone payments and royalties above, we will also reimburse Biohaven for the portion of certain additional milestone payments and royalties due to third parties in accordance with preexisting Biohaven agreements, which are attributed to ex-U.S. sales.
For additional information, including discussion of recent significant business development activities, see Note 2.
Our 2021 Performance
Revenues
Revenues increased $39.6 billion, or 95%, to $81.3 billion in 2021 from $41.7 billion in 2020, reflecting an operational increase of $38.4 billion, or 92%, as well as a favorable impact of foreign exchange of $1.2 billion, or 3%. Excluding direct sales and alliance revenues of Comirnaty and sales of Paxlovid, revenues increased 6% operationally, reflecting strong growth in Eliquis, Biosimilars, PC1, Vyndaqel/Vyndamax, the Hospital therapeutic area, Inlyta and Xtandi, partially offset by declines in the Prevnar family, Chantix/Champix, Enbrel and Sutent.
The following outlines the components of the net change in revenues:
See the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Income--Revenues by Geography and Revenues--Selected Product Discussion sections within MD&A for more information, including a discussion of key drivers of our revenue performance. For information regarding the primary indications or class of certain products, see Note 17C.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 27
Income from Continuing Operations Before Provision/(Benefit) for Taxes on Income
The increase in Income from continuing operations before provision/(benefit) for taxes on income of $17.3 billion in 2021, compared to 2020, was primarily attributable to: (i) higher revenues, (ii) net periodic benefit credits in 2021 versus net periodic benefit costs in 2020, (iii) lower asset impairment charges, and (iv) higher net gains on equity securities, partially offset by (v) increases in: Cost of sales, Research and development expenses and Selling, informational and administrative expenses.
See the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Income within MD&A and Note 4 for additional information.
For information on our tax provision and effective tax rate, see the Provision/(Benefit) for Taxes on Income section within MD&A and Note 5.
Our Operating Environment
We, like other businesses in our industry, are subject to certain industry-specific challenges. These include, among others, the topics listed below. See also the Item 1. Business--Government Regulation and Price Constraints and Item 1A. Risk Factors sections of this Form 10-K.
Regulatory Environment--Pipeline Productivity
Our product lines must be replenished to offset revenue losses when products lose exclusivity or market share or to respond to healthcare and innovation trends, as well as to provide for earnings growth. As a result, we devote considerable resources to our R&D activities which, while essential to our growth, incorporate a high degree of risk and cost, including whether a particular product candidate or new indication for an in-line product will achieve the desired clinical endpoint or safety profile, will be approved by regulators or will be successful commercially. We conduct clinical trials to provide data on safety and efficacy to support the evaluation of a product’s overall benefit-risk profile for a particular patient population. In addition, after a product has been approved or authorized and launched, we continue to monitor its safety as long as it is available to patients. This includes postmarketing trials that may be conducted voluntarily or pursuant to a regulatory request to gain additional medical knowledge. For the entire life of the product, we collect safety data and report safety information to the FDA and other regulatory authorities. Regulatory authorities may evaluate potential safety concerns and take regulatory actions in response, such as updating a product’s labeling, restricting its use, communicating new safety information to the public, or, in rare cases, requiring us to suspend or remove a product from the market. The commercial potential of in-line products may be negatively impacted by post-marketing developments.
Intellectual Property Rights and Collaboration/Licensing Rights
The loss, expiration or invalidation of intellectual property rights, patent litigation settlements with manufacturers and the expiration of co-promotion and licensing rights can have a material adverse effect on our revenues. Certain of our products have experienced patent-based expirations or loss of regulatory exclusivity in certain markets in the last few years, and we expect certain products to face increased generic competition over the next few years. While additional patent expiries will continue, we expect a moderate impact of reduced revenues due to patent expiries from 2022 through 2025. We continue to vigorously defend our patent rights against infringement, and we will continue to support efforts that strengthen worldwide recognition of patent rights while taking necessary steps to help ensure appropriate patient access.
For additional information on patent rights we consider most significant to our business as a whole, see the Item 1. Business--Patents and Other Intellectual Property Rights section in this Form 10-K. For a discussion of recent developments with respect to patent litigation, see Note 16A1.
Regulatory Environment/Pricing and Access--Government and Other Payer Group Pressures
The pricing of medicines by pharmaceutical manufacturers and the cost of healthcare, which includes medicines, medical services and hospital services, continues to be important to payers, governments, patients, and other stakeholders. Federal and state governments and private third-party payers in the U.S. continue to take action to manage the utilization of drugs and cost of drugs, including increasingly employing formularies to control costs by taking into account discounts in connection with decisions about formulary inclusion or favorable formulary placement. We consider a number of factors impacting the pricing of our medicines and vaccines. Within the U.S., we often engage with patients, doctors and healthcare plans. We also often provide significant discounts from the list price to insurers, including PBMs and MCOs. The price that patients pay in the U.S. for prescribed medicines and vaccines is ultimately set by healthcare providers and insurers. Governments globally may use a variety of measures to control costs, including proposing pricing reform or legislation, cross country collaboration and procurement, price cuts, mandatory rebates, health technology assessments, forced localization as a condition of market access, “international reference pricing” (i.e., the practice of a country linking its regulated medicine prices to those of other countries), QCE processes and VBP. In the U.S., we expect to see continued focus by Congress and the Biden Administration on regulating pricing which could result in legislative and regulatory changes designed to control costs. For example, there is proposed legislation that, if enacted, would allow Medicare to negotiate prices for certain prescription drugs, as well as require that penalties be paid by manufacturers who raise drug prices faster than inflation. Also, certain changes proposed by the CMS in December 2020 to the Medicaid program and 340B drug pricing program, which imposes ceilings on prices that drug manufacturers can charge for medications sold to certain health care facilities, could increase our Medicaid rebate obligations and increase the discounts we extend to 340B covered entities if they go into effect. Additional changes to the 340B program are undergoing review and their status is unclear. We anticipate that these and similar initiatives will continue to increase pricing pressures globally. For additional information, see the Item 1. Business--Pricing Pressures and Managed Care Organizations and --Government Regulation and Price Constraints sections in this Form 10-K.
Product Supply
We periodically encounter supply delays, disruptions or shortages, including due to voluntary product recalls such as our recent Chantix recall. For information on our recent Chantix recall and risks related to product manufacturing, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors--Product Manufacturing, Sales and Marketing Risks section in this Form 10-K.
The Global Economic Environment
In addition to the industry-specific factors discussed above, we, like other businesses of our size and global extent of activities, are exposed to economic cycles. Certain factors in the global economic environment that may impact our global operations include, among other things, currency fluctuations, capital and exchange controls, global economic conditions including inflation, restrictive government actions, changes in intellectual property, legal protections and remedies, trade regulations, tax laws and regulations and procedures and actions affecting approval,
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 28
production, pricing, and marketing of, reimbursement for and access to our products, as well as impacts of political or civil unrest or military action, including the current conflict between Russia and Ukraine, terrorist activity, unstable governments and legal systems, inter-governmental disputes, public health outbreaks, epidemics, pandemics, natural disasters or disruptions related to climate change. Government pressures can lead to negative pricing pressure in various markets where governments take an active role in setting prices, access criteria or other means of cost control.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business, operations and financial condition and results.
Our Response to COVID-19
Pfizer has helped lead the global effort to confront the COVID-19 pandemic by advancing a vision for industry-wide collaboration while making significant investments in breakthrough science and global manufacturing.
•Comirnaty/BNT162b2:
◦We have collaborated with BioNTech to jointly develop Comirnaty/BNT162b2, a mRNA-based coronavirus vaccine to help prevent COVID-19. The FDA has approved Comirnaty in the U.S. to prevent COVID-19 in individuals 16 years of age and older as a two-dose primary series (30 µg per dose). Comirnaty is the first COVID-19 vaccine to be granted approval by the FDA and had previously been available to this patient population in the U.S. under an EUA since December 2020. The vaccine is also available to individuals 5 to 15 years old under an EUA granted by the FDA in 2021 (10 µg per dose for children 5 through 11 years of age (October 2021) and 30 µg per dose for individuals 12 years of age and older (May 2021)). The FDA has also authorized for emergency use: (i) a third dose of Comirnaty/BNT162b2 in certain immunocompromised individuals 5 years of age and older and (ii) Comirnaty/BNT162b2 as a booster dose in individuals 12 years of age and older. Comirnaty/BNT162b2 has also been granted an approval or an authorization in many other countries around the world in populations varying by country. We continue to evaluate our vaccine, including for additional pediatric indications, and the short- and long-term efficacy of Comirnaty. We are also studying vaccine candidates to potentially prevent COVID-19 caused by new and emerging variants, such as the Omicron variant, or an updated vaccine as needed.
◦In 2021, we manufactured more than three billion doses and, in fiscal 2021, delivered 2.2 billion doses around the world. Pfizer and BioNTech expect we can manufacture up to four billion doses in total by the end of 2022. The companies have entered into agreements to supply pre-specified doses of Comirnaty in 2022 with multiple developed and emerging countries around the world and are continuing to deliver doses of Comirnaty to governments under such agreements. We also signed agreements with multiple countries to supply Comirnaty doses in 2023 and are currently negotiating similar potential agreements with multiple other countries. We anticipate delivering at least two billion doses to low- and middle-income countries by the end of 2022-one billion that was delivered in 2021 and one billion expected to be delivered in 2022, with the possibility to increase those deliveries if more orders are placed by these countries for 2022. One billion of the aforementioned doses to low- and middle-income countries are being supplied to the U.S. government at a not-for-profit price to be donated to the world’s poorest nations at no charge to those countries.
◦As of February 8, 2022, we forecasted approximately $32 billion in revenues for Comirnaty in 2022, with gross profit to be split evenly with BioNTech, which includes doses expected to be delivered in fiscal 2022 under contracts signed as of late-January 2022.
•Paxlovid:
◦In December 2021, the FDA authorized the emergency use of Paxlovid, a novel oral COVID-19 treatment, which is a SARS-CoV2-3CL protease inhibitor and is co-administered with a low dose of ritonavir, for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in adults and pediatric patients (12 years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg [88 lbs]) with positive results of direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing, and who are at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death. The FDA based its decision on clinical data from the Phase 2/3 EPIC-HR (Evaluation of Protease Inhibition for COVID-19 in High-Risk Patients), which enrolled non-hospitalized adults aged 18 and older with confirmed COVID-19 who are at increased risk of progressing to severe illness. Paxlovid has been granted an authorization or approval in many other countries.
◦We continue to evaluate Paxlovid in other populations, including in patients with a confirmed diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 infection who are at standard risk (i.e., low risk of hospitalization or death) (Phase 2/3 EPIC-SR (Evaluation of Protease Inhibition for COVID-19 in Standard Risk Patients)) and in adults living in the same household as someone with a confirmed COVID-19 infection (Phase 2/3 EPIC-PEP (Evaluation of Protease Inhibition for COVID-19 in Post-Exposure Prophylaxis)).
◦We have entered into agreements with multiple countries to supply pre-specified courses of Paxlovid, such as the U.S. and U.K., and have initiated bilateral outreach to approximately 100 countries around the world. Additionally, we have signed a voluntary non-exclusive license agreement with the Medicines Patent Pool (MPP) for Paxlovid. Under the terms of the agreement, MPP can grant sublicenses to qualified generic medicine manufacturers worldwide to manufacture and supply Paxlovid to 95 low- and middle-income countries, covering up to approximately 53% of the world’s population.
◦Pfizer plans to manufacture up to 120 million treatment courses by the end of 2022, depending on the global need, which will be driven by advance purchase agreements, with 30 million courses expected to be produced in the first half of 2022 and the remaining 90 million courses expected to be produced in the second half of 2022.
◦As of February 8, 2022, we forecasted approximately $22 billion of revenues for Paxlovid in 2022, which includes treatment courses expected to be delivered in fiscal 2022, primarily relating to supply contracts signed or committed as of late-January 2022.
•IV Protease Inhibitor:
◦In February 2022, we discontinued the global clinical development program for PF-07304814, an intravenously administered SARS-CoV-2 main protease inhibitor being evaluated in adults hospitalized with severe COVID-19. This decision was made based on a totality of information, including a careful review of early data and a thorough assessment of the candidate’s potential to successfully fulfill patient needs. Dosing of PF-07304814 in the National Institutes of Health’s ongoing Accelerating COVID-19 Therapeutic Interventions and Vaccines (ACTIV)-3 study has ceased.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business and Operations
As part of our on-going monitoring and assessment, we have made certain assumptions regarding the pandemic for purposes of our operational planning and financial projections, including assumptions regarding the duration, severity and the global macroeconomic impact of the pandemic,
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 29
as well as COVID-19 vaccine and oral COVID-19 treatment supply and contracts, which remain dynamic. Despite careful tracking and planning, we are unable to accurately predict the extent of the impact of the pandemic on our business, operations and financial condition and results due to the uncertainty of future developments. We are focused on all aspects of our business and are implementing measures aimed at mitigating issues where possible, including by using digital technology to assist in operations for our commercial, manufacturing, R&D and corporate enabling functions globally.
Apart from our introduction of Comirnaty/BNT162b2 and Paxlovid, our business and operations have been impacted by the pandemic in various ways. Our portfolio of products experienced varying impacts from the pandemic in 2021. For example, certain of our vaccines such as the Prevnar family were impacted by disruptions to healthcare activity related to COVID-19, including the prioritization of primary and booster vaccination campaigns for COVID-19. For some products such as Vyndaqel/Vyndamax, we continued to see postponement of elective and diagnostic procedures in 2021 due to COVID-19, which may subside in 2022 as COVID-19 vaccination and booster rates continue to increase and/or if COVID-19 cases subside. On the other hand, some products such as Ibrance saw accelerating demand in 2021 as the delays in diagnosis and treatment initiations caused by the COVID-19 pandemic show signs of recovery across several international markets. For detail on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on certain of our products, see the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Income-Revenues by Geography and Revenues-Selected Product Discussion sections within this MD&A.
In 2021, engagement with healthcare professionals started to return to pre-pandemic levels and we continue to review and assess epidemiological data to inform in-person engagements with healthcare professionals and to help ensure the safety of our colleagues, customers and communities. As part of our commitment to engaging our customers in the manner they prefer, we are also taking a hybrid approach of virtual and in person engagements and saw customer response to both approaches. During the pandemic, we adapted our promotional platform by amplifying our digital capabilities to reach healthcare professionals and customers to provide critical education and information, including increasing the scale of our remote engagement. Most of our colleagues who are able to perform their job functions outside of our facilities continue to temporarily work remotely, while certain colleagues in the PGS and WRDM organizations continue to work onsite and are subject to strict protocols intended to reduce the risk of transmission. As of December 31, 2021, more than 96% of our U.S. employee population had been fully vaccinated or received an approved exception. Also, in 2021 and to date, we have not seen a significant disruption to our supply chain, and all of our manufacturing sites globally have continued to operate at or near normal levels. However, we are seeing an increase in overall demand in the industry for certain components and raw materials potentially constraining available supply, which could have a future impact on our business. We are continuing to monitor and implement mitigation strategies in an effort to reduce any potential risk or impact including active supplier management, qualification of additional suppliers and advanced purchasing to the extent possible. Certain of our clinical trials were impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, which included, in some cases, challenges related to recruiting clinical trial participants and accruing cases in certain studies. Our clinical trials also progressed in this challenging environment through innovation, such as decentralized visits (e.g., telemedicine and home visits) to accommodate participants’ ability to maintain scheduled visits, as well as working with suppliers to manage the shortage of certain clinical supplies.
We will continue to pursue efforts to maintain the continuity of our operations while monitoring for new developments related to the pandemic. Future developments could result in additional favorable or unfavorable impacts on our business, operations or financial condition and results. If we experience significant disruption in our manufacturing or supply chains or significant disruptions in clinical trials or other operations, or if demand for our products is significantly reduced as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we could experience a material adverse impact on our business, operations and financial condition and results.
For additional information, please see the Item 1A. Risk Factors-COVID-19 Pandemic section of this Form 10-K.
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS
Following is a discussion about the critical accounting estimates and assumptions impacting our consolidated financial statements. Also, see Note 1D.
For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1. Of these policies, the following are considered critical to an understanding of our consolidated financial statements as they require the application of the most subjective and the most complex judgments: Acquisitions (Note 1E); Fair Value (Note 1F); Revenues (Note 1H); Asset Impairments (Note 1M); Tax Assets and Liabilities and Income Tax Contingencies (Note 1Q); Pension and Postretirement Benefit Plans (Note 1R); and Legal and Environmental Contingencies (Note 1S).
For a discussion of a recently adopted accounting standard and a change in accounting principle related to our pension and postretirement plans, see Notes 1B and 1C.
Acquisitions
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, that most assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their estimated fair value as of the acquisition date. For further detail on acquisition accounting, see Note 1E. Historically, intangible assets have been the most significant fair values within our business combinations. For further information on our process to estimate the fair value of intangible assets, see Asset Impairments below.
Revenues
Our gross product revenues are subject to a variety of deductions, which generally are estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenues are recognized. Such variable consideration represents chargebacks, rebates, sales allowances and sales returns. These deductions represent estimates of the related obligations and, as such, knowledge and judgment are required when estimating the impact of these revenue deductions on gross sales for a reporting period. Historically, adjustments to these estimates to reflect actual results or updated expectations, have not been material to our overall business and generally have been less than 1% of revenues. Product-specific rebates, however, can have a significant impact on year-over-year individual product revenue growth trends. If any of our ratios, factors, assessments, experiences or judgments are not indicative or accurate estimates of our future experience, our results could be materially affected. The potential of our estimates to vary (sensitivity) differs by program, product, type of customer and geographic location. However, estimates associated with U.S. Medicare, Medicaid and performance-based contract rebates are most at risk for material adjustment because of the extensive time delay
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 30
between the recording of the accrual and its ultimate settlement, an interval that can generally range up to one year. Because of this lag, our recording of adjustments to reflect actual amounts can incorporate revisions of several prior quarters. Rebate accruals are product specific and, therefore for any period, are impacted by the mix of products sold as well as the forecasted channel mix for each individual product. For further information, see the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Income--Revenue Deductions section within MD&A and Note 1H.
Asset Impairments
We review all of our long-lived assets for impairment indicators throughout the year. We perform impairment testing for indefinite-lived intangible assets and goodwill at least annually and for all other long-lived assets whenever impairment indicators are present. When necessary, we record charges for impairments of long-lived assets for the amount by which the fair value is less than the carrying value of these assets. Our impairment review processes are described in Note 1M.
Examples of events or circumstances that may be indicative of impairment include:
•A significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate that could affect the value of the asset. For example, a successful challenge of our patent rights would likely result in generic competition earlier than expected.
•A significant adverse change in the extent or manner in which an asset is used such as a restriction imposed by the FDA or other regulatory authorities that could affect our ability to manufacture or sell a product.
•An expectation of losses or reduced profits associated with an asset. This could result, for example, from a change in a government reimbursement program that results in an inability to sustain projected product revenues and profitability. This also could result from the introduction of a competitor’s product that impacts projected revenue growth, as well as the lack of acceptance of a product by patients, physicians and payers. For IPR&D projects, this could result from, among other things, a change in outlook based on clinical trial data, a delay in the projected launch date or additional expenditures to commercialize the product.
Identifiable Intangible Assets
We use an income approach, specifically the discounted cash flow method to determine the fair value of intangible assets, other than goodwill. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows associated with the asset, which incorporates the consideration of a terminal value for indefinite-lived assets, and then we apply an asset-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value amount. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions that impact our fair value estimates include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections and the impact of technological advancements and risk associated with IPR&D assets, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic origin of the projected cash flows.
While all intangible assets other than goodwill can face events and circumstances that can lead to impairment, those that are most at risk of impairment include IPR&D assets (approximately $3.1 billion as of December 31, 2021) and newly acquired or recently impaired indefinite-lived brand assets. IPR&D assets are high-risk assets, given the uncertain nature of R&D. Newly acquired and recently impaired indefinite-lived assets are more vulnerable to impairment as the assets are recorded at fair value and are then subsequently measured at the lower of fair value or carrying value at the end of each reporting period. As such, immediately after acquisition or impairment, even small declines in the outlook for these assets can negatively impact our ability to recover the carrying value and can result in an impairment charge.
Goodwill
Our goodwill impairment review work as of December 31, 2021 concluded that none of our goodwill was impaired and we do not believe the risk of impairment is significant at this time.
In our review, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Qualitative factors that we consider include, for example, macroeconomic and industry conditions, overall financial performance and other relevant entity-specific events. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we then perform a quantitative fair value test.
When we are required to determine the fair value of a reporting unit, we typically use the income approach. The income approach is a forward-looking approach to estimating fair value and relies primarily on internal forecasts. Within the income approach, we use the discounted cash flow method. We start with a forecast of all the expected net cash flows for the reporting unit, which includes the application of a terminal value, and then we apply a reporting unit-specific discount rate to arrive at a net present value amount. Some of the more significant estimates and assumptions inherent in this approach include: the amount and timing of the projected net cash flows, which includes the expected impact of technological risk and competitive, legal and/or regulatory forces on the projections, as well as the selection of a long-term growth rate; the discount rate, which seeks to reflect the various risks inherent in the projected cash flows; and the tax rate, which seeks to incorporate the geographic diversity of the projected cash flows.
For all of our reporting units, there are a number of future events and factors that may impact future results and that could potentially have an impact on the outcome of subsequent goodwill impairment testing. For a list of these factors, see the Forward-Looking Information and Factors That May Affect Future Results and the Item 1A. Risk Factors sections in this Form 10-K.
Benefit Plans
For a description of our different benefit plans, see Note 11.
Our assumptions reflect our historical experiences and our judgment regarding future expectations that have been deemed reasonable by management. The judgments made in determining the costs of our benefit plans can materially impact our results of operations.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 31
(a)For detailed assumptions associated with our benefit plans, see Note 11B.
Expected Annual Rate of Return on Plan Assets
The assumptions for the expected annual rate of return on all of our plan assets reflect our actual historical return experience and our long-term assessment of forward-looking return expectations by asset classes, which is used to develop a weighted-average expected return based on the implementation of our targeted asset allocation in our respective plans.
The expected annual rate of return on plan assets for our U.S. plans and the majority of our international plans is applied to the fair value of plan assets at each year-end and the resulting amount is reflected in our net periodic benefit costs in the following year.
The actual return on plan assets was approximately $2.6 billion during 2021.
Discount Rate Used to Measure Plan Obligations
The weighted-average discount rate used to measure the plan obligations for our U.S. defined benefit plans is determined at least annually and evaluated and modified, as required, to reflect the prevailing market rate of a portfolio of high-quality fixed income investments, rated AA/Aa or better, that reflect the rates at which the pension benefits could be effectively settled. The discount rate used to measure the plan obligations for our international plans is determined at least annually by reference to investment grade corporate bonds, rated AA/Aa or better, including, when there is sufficient data, a yield-curve approach. These discount rate determinations are made in consideration of local requirements. The measurement of the plan obligations at the end of the year will affect the amount of service cost, interest cost and amortization expense reflected in our net periodic benefit costs in the following year.
The change in the discount rates used in measuring our plan obligations as of December 31, 2021 resulted in a decrease in the measurement of our aggregate plan obligations by approximately $786 million.
Income Tax Assets and Liabilities
Income tax assets and liabilities include income tax valuation allowances and accruals for uncertain tax positions. For additional information, see Notes 1Q and 5, as well as the Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity, Capital Resources and Market Risk section within MD&A.
Contingencies
We and certain of our subsidiaries are subject to numerous contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business, including tax, legal contingencies and guarantees and indemnifications. For additional information, see Notes 1Q, 1S, 5D and 16.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 32
ANALYSIS OF THE CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF INCOME
Revenues by Geography
2021 v. 2020
Emerging markets revenues increased $12.3 billion, or 147%, in 2021 to $20.7 billion from $8.4 billion in 2020, reflecting an operational increase of $12.2 billion, or 145%, and a favorable impact from foreign exchange of approximately 2%. The operational increase in emerging markets was primarily driven by revenues from Comirnaty and growth from certain products in the Hospital therapeutic area, Eliquis and PC1, partially offset by a decline from the Prevnar family.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 33
2020 v. 2019
The following provides an analysis of the change in worldwide revenues by geographic areas in 2020:
(MILLIONS) Worldwide U.S. International
Operational growth/(decline):
Growth from Vyndaqel/Vyndamax, Eliquis, Biosimilars, Ibrance, Inlyta, Xeljanz, Xtandi, the Hospital therapeutic area and the Prevnar family $ 3,560 $ 2,132 $ 1,428
Growth from PC1 in international markets driven by growth of certain key accounts as well new contract manufacturing activities
114 (36) 151
Impact of completion of the Consumer Healthcare JV transaction. Revenues in 2019 reflect seven months of Consumer Healthcare business domestic operations and eight months of international operations, and none in 2020 (2,082) (988) (1,094)
Lower revenues for Enbrel internationally, primarily reflecting continued biosimilar competition in most developed Europe markets, as well as in Japan and Brazil, all of which is expected to continue (320) - (320)
Decline from Chantix/Champix reflecting the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in a decline in patient visits to doctors for preventive health purposes as well as the loss of patent protection in the U.S. in November 2020 (185) (183) (2)
Other operational factors, net (9) 205 (214)
Operational growth/(decline), net 1,078 1,129 (50)
Unfavorable impact of foreign exchange (331) - (331)
Revenues increase/(decrease)
$ 746 $ 1,129 $ (383)
Revenues for 2020 included an estimated unfavorable impact of approximately $700 million, or 2%, due to COVID-19, primarily reflecting lower demand for certain products in China and unfavorable disruptions to wellness visits for patients in the U.S., which negatively impacted prescribing patterns for certain products, partially offset by increased U.S. demand for certain sterile injectable products and increased adult uptake for the Prevnar family in certain international markets, resulting from greater vaccine awareness for respiratory illnesses, and U.S. revenues for Comirnaty.
Emerging markets revenues decreased $456 million, or 5%, in 2020 to $8.4 billion, from $8.8 billion in 2019, and were relatively flat operationally, reflecting an unfavorable impact of foreign exchange of 5% on emerging markets revenues. The relatively flat operational performance was primarily driven by growth from Eliquis, the Prevnar family, Ibrance and Zavicefta, offset by lower revenues for Consumer Healthcare, reflecting the July 31, 2019 completion of the Consumer Healthcare JV transaction.
Revenue Deductions
Our gross product revenues are subject to a variety of deductions, which generally are estimated and recorded in the same period that the revenues are recognized. These deductions represent estimates of related obligations and, as such, knowledge and judgment are required when estimating the impact of these revenue deductions on gross sales for a reporting period. Historically, adjustments to these estimates to reflect actual results or updated expectations, have not been material to our overall business and generally have been less than 1% of revenues. Product-specific rebates, however, can have a significant impact on year-over-year individual product revenue growth trends.
Revenue deductions are primarily a function of product sales volume, mix of products sold, contractual or legislative discounts and rebates.
For information on our accruals for revenue deductions, including the balance sheet classification of these accruals, see Note 1H.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 34
Revenues-Selected Product Discussion
Biopharma
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 35
Pfizer CentreOne
(a)Comirnaty includes direct sales and alliance revenues related to sales of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine, which are recorded within our Vaccines therapeutic area. It does not include revenues for certain Comirnaty-related manufacturing activities performed on behalf of BioNTech, which are included in the PC1 contract development and manufacturing organization. Revenues related to these manufacturing activities totaled $320 million for 2021 and $0 million in 2020.
*Calculation is not meaningful or results are equal to or greater than 100%.
See the Item 1. Business-Patents and Other Intellectual Property Rights section in this Form 10-K for information regarding the expiration of various patent rights, Note 16 for a discussion of recent developments concerning patent and product litigation relating to certain of the products discussed above and Note 17C for additional information regarding the primary indications or class of the selected products discussed above.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Sales
2021 v. 2020
Cost of sales increased $22.3 billion, primarily due to:
•the impact of Comirnaty, which includes a charge for the 50% gross profit split with BioNTech and applicable royalty expenses;
•increased sales volumes of other products, driven mostly by PC1; and
•the unfavorable impact of foreign exchange and hedging activity on intercompany inventory.
The increase in Cost of sales as a percentage of revenues was primarily due to all of the factors discussed above, partially offset by an increase in alliance revenues, which have no associated cost of sales.
2020 v. 2019
Cost of sales increased $431 million, primarily due to:
•increased sales volumes;
•an increase in royalty expenses, due to an increase in sales of related products;
•an unfavorable impact of incremental costs incurred in response to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 36
•an unfavorable impact of foreign exchange and hedging activity on intercompany inventory,
partially offset by:
•the favorable impact of the July 31, 2019 completion of the Consumer Healthcare JV transaction.
The increase in Cost of sales as a percentage of revenues was primarily due to all of the factors discussed above, partially offset by an increase in alliance revenues, which have no associated cost of sales.
Selling, Informational and Administrative (SI&A) Expenses
2021 v. 2020
SI&A expenses increased $1.1 billion, mostly due to:
•increased product-related spending across multiple therapeutic areas;
•costs related to Comirnaty, driven by a higher provision for healthcare reform fees based on sales; and
•an increase in costs related to implementing our cost-reduction/productivity initiatives,
partially offset by:
•lower spending on Chantix following the loss of patent protection in the U.S. in November 2020.
2020 v. 2019
SI&A expenses decreased $1.1 billion, mostly due to:
•the favorable impact of the July 31, 2019 completion of the Consumer Healthcare JV transaction;
•lower spending for corporate enabling functions;
•lower spending on sales and marketing activities due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•lower investments across the Internal Medicine and Inflammation & Immunology portfolios,
partially offset by:
•an increase in costs related to implementing our cost-reduction/productivity initiatives; and
•an increase in business and legal entity alignment costs.
Research and Development (R&D) Expenses
2021 v. 2020
R&D expenses increased $4.4 billion, primarily due to:
•a charge for acquired IPR&D related to our acquisition of Trillium;
•a net increase in charges for upfront and milestone payments on collaboration and licensing arrangements, driven by payments to Arvinas and Beam; and
•increased investments across multiple therapeutic areas, including additional spending related to the development of the oral COVID-19 treatment program.
2020 v. 2019
R&D expenses increased $1.0 billion, mainly due to:
•costs related to our collaboration agreement with BioNTech to co-develop a COVID-19 vaccine, including an upfront payment to BioNTech and a premium paid on our equity investment in BioNTech;
•a net increase in upfront payments, mainly related to Myovant and Valneva; and
•increased investments towards building new capabilities and driving automation,
partially offset by:
•a net reduction of upfront and milestone payments associated with the acquisition of Therachon and Akcea in 2019.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
2021 v. 2020
Amortization of intangible assets increased $353 million, primarily due to amortization of capitalized Comirnaty sales milestones to BioNTech.
2020 v. 2019
Amortization of intangible assets decreased $1.1 billion, mainly due the non-recurrence of amortization of fully amortized assets and the impairment of Eucrisa in the fourth quarter of 2019, partially offset by the increase in amortization of intangible assets from our acquisition of Array.
For additional information, see Notes 2A and 10A.
Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives
Transforming to a More Focused Company Program
For a description of our program, as well as the anticipated and actual costs, see Note 3. The program savings discussed below may be rounded and represent approximations. In connection with restructuring our corporate enabling functions, we expect gross cost savings of $1.0 billion, or net cost savings, excluding merit and inflation growth and certain real estate cost increases, of $700 million, to be achieved primarily from 2021 through 2022. In connection with transforming our marketing strategy, we expect net cost savings of $1.3 billion, to be achieved primarily from
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 37
2022 through 2024. In connection with manufacturing network optimization, we expect net cost savings of $550 million to be achieved primarily from 2020 through 2023.
Certain qualifying costs for this program were recorded in 2021 and 2020, and in the fourth quarter of 2019, and are reflected as Certain Significant Items and excluded from our non-GAAP measure of Adjusted Income. See the Non-GAAP Financial Measure: Adjusted Income section of this MD&A.
In addition to this program, we continuously monitor our operations for cost reduction and/or productivity opportunities, especially in light of the losses of exclusivity and the expiration of collaborative arrangements for various products.
Other (Income)/Deductions--Net
2021 v. 2020
Other income-net increased $6.1 billion, mainly due to:
•net periodic benefit credits recorded in 2021 versus net periodic benefit costs recorded in 2020;
•lower asset impairment charges;
•higher net gains on equity securities; and
•net gains on asset disposals in 2021 versus net losses in 2020.
2020 v. 2019
Other deductions-net decreased $2.3 billion, mainly due to:
•lower asset impairment charges;
•lower business and legal entity alignment costs;
•higher Consumer Healthcare JV equity method income;
•lower charges for certain legal matters; and
•higher income from collaborations, out-licensing arrangements and sales of compound/product rights,
partially offset by:
•higher net losses on asset disposals.
See Note 4 for additional information.
Provision/(Benefit) for Taxes on Income
*Indicates calculation not meaningful or result is equal to or greater than 100%.
For information about our effective tax rate and the events and circumstances contributing to the changes between periods, as well as details about discrete elements that impacted our tax provisions, see Note 5.
Discontinued Operations
For information about our discontinued operations, see Note 2B.
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENTS
A comprehensive update of Pfizer’s development pipeline was published as of February 8, 2022 and is available at www.pfizer.com/science/drug-product-pipeline. It includes an overview of our research and a list of compounds in development with targeted indication and phase of development, as well as mechanism of action for some candidates in Phase 1 and all candidates from Phase 2 through registration.
The following provides information about significant marketing application-related regulatory actions by, and filings pending with, the FDA and regulatory authorities in the EU and Japan.
The table below includes only approvals for products that have occurred in the last twelve months and does not include approvals that may have occurred prior to that time. The table includes filings with regulatory decisions pending (even if the filing occurred outside of the last twelve-month period).
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 38
*For the U.S., the filing date is the date on which the FDA accepted our submission. For the EU, the filing date is the date on which the EMA validated our submission.
(a)Being developed in collaboration with BioNTech. Prior to BLA, Comirnaty/BNT162b2 for ages 16 and up was available in the U.S. pursuant to an EUA from the FDA on December 11, 2020. In December 2021, a supplemental BLA was submitted to the FDA requesting to expand the approval of Comirnaty to include individuals ages 12 through 15 years. In February 2022, following a request from the FDA, a rolling submission seeking to amend the EUA to include children 6 months through 4 years of age (6 months to <5 years of age) was initiated as we wait for data evaluating a third 3 µg dose given at least two months after the second dose of the two-dose series in this age group. A booster dose received EUA from the FDA on September 22, 2021 for individuals 65 years of age and older, individuals 18 through 64 years of age at high risk of severe COVID-19, and individuals 18 through 64 years of age with frequent institutional or occupational exposure to SARS-CoV-2. In addition, in October 2021, the FDA authorized for emergency use a booster dose to eligible individuals who have completed primary vaccination with a different authorized COVID-19 vaccine. Subsequently, the FDA expanded the booster EUA: (i) in November 2021 to include individuals 18 years of age and older, (ii) in December 2021 to include individuals 16 years of age and older and (iii) in January 2022 to include individuals 12 years of age and older as well as individuals 5 through 11 years of age who have been determined to have certain kinds of immunocompromise. A booster dose received conditional marketing authorization from the EMA in October 2021 for individuals 18 years of age and older and may be given to individuals 5 years and older with a severely weakened immune system, at least 28 days after their second dose. A booster dose received approval in Japan in November 2021 for 18 years of age and older.
(b)Being developed in collaboration with Merck KGaA, Germany.
(c)Being developed in collaboration with Astellas.
(d)Being developed in collaboration with Myovant.
(e)Being developed in collaboration with OPKO. In January 2022, Pfizer and OPKO received a Complete Response Letter (CRL) from the FDA for the BLA for somatrogon. Pfizer is evaluating the CRL and will work with the FDA to determine an appropriate path forward in the U.S.
(f)In October 2021, the CDC’s ACIP voted to recommend Prevnar 20 for routine use in adults. Specifically, the ACIP voted to recommend the following: (i) adults 65 years of age or older who have not previously received a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine or whose previous vaccination history is unknown should receive a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (either pneumococcal 20-valent conjugate vaccine (PCV20) or pneumococcal 15-valent conjugate vaccine (PCV15)). If PCV15 is used, this should be followed by a dose of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23); and (ii) adults aged 19 years of age or older with certain underlying medical conditions or other risk factors who have not previously received a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine or whose previous vaccination history is unknown should receive a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (either PCV20 or PCV15). If PCV15 is used, this should be followed by a dose of PPSV23. The
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 39
recommendations were published in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report on January 28, 2022. The publication also notes “for adults who have received pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) but have not completed their recommended pneumococcal vaccine series with PPSV23, one dose of Prevnar 20 may be used if PPSV23 is not available.”
(g)In December 2021, the FDA authorized the emergency use of Paxlovid for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in adults and pediatric patients (12 years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg [88 lbs]) with positive results of direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing, and who are at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death. In January 2022, the EMA approved the CMA of Paxlovid for treating COVID-19 in adults who do not require supplemental oxygen and who are at increased risk of the disease becoming severe.
(h)Under a commercialization arrangement with Biohaven.
In September 2021, the FDA issued a Drug Safety Communication (DSC) related to Xeljanz/Xeljanz XR and two competitors’ arthritis medicines in the same drug class, based on its completed review of the ORAL Surveillance trial. The DSC stated that the FDA will require revisions to the Boxed Warnings for each of these medicines to include information about the risks of serious heart-related events, cancer, blood clots, and death. In addition, the DSC indicated the FDA’s intention to limit approved uses of these products to certain patients who have not responded or cannot tolerate one or more tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blockers. In December 2021, in light of the results from the completed required postmarketing safety study of Xeljanz, ORAL Surveillance (A3921133), the U.S. label for Xeljanz was revised. In addition, at the request of the EC, the PRAC of the EMA has adopted a referral procedure under Article 20 of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 to assess safety information relating to oral JAK inhibitors authorized for inflammatory diseases, including Xeljanz and Cibinqo, which is ongoing. For additional information, see Item 1A. Risk Factors-Post-Authorization/Approval Data.
In China, the following products received regulatory approvals in the last twelve months: Cresemba for fungal infection and Besponsa for second line acute lymphoblastic leukemia, both in December 2021.
The following provides information about additional indications and new drug candidates in late-stage development:
(a)Being developed in collaboration with The Alliance Foundation Trials, LLC.
(b)Being developed in collaboration with Astellas.
(c)Being developed in collaboration with OPKO.
(d)Erbitux® is a registered trademark of ImClone LLC. In the EU, we are developing in collaboration with the Pierre Fabre Group. In Japan, we are developing in collaboration with Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.
(e)Being developed in collaboration with Myovant.
(f)Keytruda® is a registered trademark of Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp.
(g)Being developed in collaboration with BioNTech.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 40
(h)Being developed in collaboration with Spark Therapeutics, Inc.
(i)Being developed in collaboration with Sangamo Therapeutics, Inc.
In February 2022, Pfizer and Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany (Merck KGaA) provided an update on the Phase 3 JAVELIN Lung 100 trial, which assessed the safety and efficacy of two dosing regimens of avelumab monotherapy compared with platinum-based doublet chemotherapy as first-line treatment in patients with metastatic NSCLC whose tumors express PD-L1. While avelumab showed clinical activity in this population, the study did not meet the primary endpoints of overall survival and progression-free survival in the high PD-L1+population for either of the avelumab dosing regimens evaluated. The safety profile for avelumab in this trial was consistent with that observed in the overall JAVELIN clinical development program. Avelumab is not approved for the treatment of any patients with NSCLC. The outcome of the JAVELIN Lung 100 trial has no bearing on any of avelumab’s currently-approved indications. Full results of the study will be shared at a future date.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, enrollment was stopped in C4591015 Study (a Phase 2/3 placebo controlled randomized observer-blind study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of BNT162b2 against COVID-19 in healthy pregnant women 18 years of age and older). This study was developed prior to availability or recommendation for COVID-19 vaccination in pregnant women. The environment changed during 2021 and by September 2021, COVID-19 vaccines were recommended by applicable recommending bodies (e.g., ACIP in the U.S.) for pregnant women in all participating/planned countries, and as a result the enrollment rate declined significantly. With the declining enrollment, the study had insufficient sample size to assess the primary immunogenicity objective and continuation of this placebo controlled study could no longer be justified due to global recommendations. This proposal was shared with and agreed to by FDA and EMA.
For additional information about our R&D organization, see the Item 1. Business-Research and Development section of this Form 10-K.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE: ADJUSTED INCOME
Adjusted income is an alternative measure of performance used by management to evaluate our overall performance in conjunction with other performance measures. As such, we believe that investors’ understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this measure. We use Adjusted income, certain components of Adjusted income and Adjusted diluted EPS to present the results of our major operations--the discovery, development, manufacture, marketing, sale and distribution of biopharmaceutical products worldwide--prior to considering certain income statement elements as follows:
Measure Definition Relevance of Metrics to Our Business Performance
Adjusted income Net income attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders(a)
before the impact of purchase accounting for acquisitions, acquisition-related items, discontinued operations and certain significant items
•Provides investors useful information to:
◦evaluate the normal recurring operational activities, and their components, on a comparable year-over-year basis
◦assist in modeling expected future performance on a normalized basis
•Provides investors insight into the way we manage our budgeting and forecasting, how we evaluate and manage our recurring operations and how we reward and compensate our senior management(b)
Adjusted cost of sales, Adjusted selling, informational and administrative expenses, Adjusted research and development expenses, Adjusted amortization of intangible assets and Adjusted other (income)/deductions--net
Cost of sales, Selling, informational and administrative expenses, Research and development expenses, Amortization of intangible assets and Other (income)/deductions--net (a), each before the impact of purchase accounting for acquisitions, acquisition-related items, discontinued operations and certain significant items, which are components of the Adjusted income measure
Adjusted diluted EPS EPS attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders--diluted (a) before the impact of purchase accounting for acquisitions, acquisition-related items, discontinued operations and certain significant items
(a)Most directly comparable GAAP measure.
(b)The short-term incentive plans for substantially all non-sales-force employees worldwide are funded from a pool based on our performance, measured in significant part by three metrics, one of which is Adjusted diluted EPS, which is derived from Adjusted income and accounts for 40% of the bonus pool funding tied to financial performance. Additionally, the payout for performance share awards is determined in part by Adjusted net income, which is derived from Adjusted income. The bonus pool funding, which is largely based on financial performance, may be modified by our R&D performance as measured by four metrics relating to our pipeline and may be further modified by our Compensation Committee’s assessment of other factors.
Adjusted income and its components and Adjusted diluted EPS are non-GAAP financial measures that have no standardized meaning prescribed by GAAP and, therefore, are limited in their usefulness to investors. Because of their non-standardized definitions, they may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies and are presented to permit investors to more fully understand how management assesses performance. A limitation of these measures is that they provide a view of our operations without including all events during a period, and do not provide a comparable view of our performance to peers. These measures are not, and should not be viewed as, substitutes for their directly comparable GAAP measures of Net income attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders, components of Net income attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders and EPS attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders-diluted, respectively. See the accompanying reconciliations of certain GAAP reported to non-GAAP adjusted information-certain line items for 2021, 2020 and 2019 below.
We also recognize that, as internal measures of performance, these measures have limitations, and we do not restrict our performance-management process solely to these measures. We also use other tools designed to achieve the highest levels of performance. For example, our R&D organization has productivity targets, upon which its effectiveness is measured. In addition, total shareholder return, both on an absolute basis and relative to a publicly traded pharmaceutical index, plays a significant role in determining payouts under certain of our incentive compensation plans.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 41
Purchase Accounting Adjustments
Adjusted income excludes certain significant purchase accounting impacts resulting from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. These impacts can include the incremental charge to cost of sales from the sale of acquired inventory that was written up to fair value, amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets, and to a much lesser extent, depreciation related to the increase/decrease in fair value of the acquired fixed assets, amortization related to the increase in fair value of acquired debt, and the fair value changes for contingent consideration. Therefore, the Adjusted income measure includes the revenues earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the acquisition cost of those products.
The exclusion of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which R&D costs have been expensed. However, we have not factored in the impacts of any other differences that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, such as different R&D costs, timelines or resulting sales; accordingly, this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred if we had discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets internally.
Acquisition-Related Items
Adjusted income excludes acquisition-related items, which are comprised of transaction, integration, restructuring charges and additional depreciation costs for business combinations because these costs are unique to each transaction and represent costs that were incurred to restructure and integrate businesses as a result of an acquisition. We have made no adjustments for resulting synergies.
The significant costs incurred in connection with a business combination result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees--a natural result of acquiring a fully integrated set of activities. For this reason, we believe that such costs incurred can be viewed differently in the context of an acquisition from those costs incurred in other, more normal, business contexts. The integration and restructuring costs for a business combination may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts typically ending within three years of the relevant transaction. Because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration activities can be lengthy.
Discontinued Operations
Adjusted income excludes the results of discontinued operations, as well as any related gains or losses on the disposal of such operations. We believe that this presentation is meaningful to investors because, while we review our therapeutic areas and product lines for strategic fit with our operations, we do not build or run our business with the intent to discontinue parts of our business. Restatements due to discontinued operations do not impact compensation or change the Adjusted income measure for the compensation in respect of the restated periods, but are presented for consistency across all periods.
Certain Significant Items
Adjusted income excludes certain significant items representing substantive and/or unusual items that are evaluated individually on a quantitative and qualitative basis. Certain significant items may be highly variable and difficult to predict. Furthermore, in some cases it is reasonably possible that they could reoccur in future periods. For example, although major non-acquisition-related cost-reduction programs are specific to an event or goal with a defined term, we may have subsequent programs based on reorganizations of the business, cost productivity or in response to LOE or economic conditions. Legal charges to resolve litigation are also related to specific cases, which are facts and circumstances specific and, in some cases, may also be the result of litigation matters at acquired companies that were inestimable, not probable or unresolved at the date of acquisition. Gains and losses on equity securities have a very high degree of inherent market volatility, which we do not control and cannot predict with any level of certainty and because we do not believe including these gains and losses assists investors in understanding our business or is reflective of our core operations and business. Unusual items represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be non-recurring; or items that relate to products we no longer sell. See the Reconciliations of GAAP Reported to Non-GAAP Adjusted Information--Certain Line Items below for a non-inclusive list of certain significant items.
Beginning in 2021, we exclude pension and postretirement actuarial remeasurement gains and losses from our measure of Adjusted income because of their inherent market volatility, which we do not control and cannot predict with any level of certainty and because we do not believe including these gains and losses assists investors in understanding our business or is reflective of our core operations and business.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 42
Reconciliations of GAAP Reported to Non-GAAP Adjusted Information--Certain Line Items
Data presented will not (in all cases) aggregate to totals.
IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER COMMON SHARE DATA
Cost of sales Selling, informational and administrative expenses Research and development expenses Amortization of intangible assets Other (income)/deductions--net Net income attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders(a)
Earnings per common share attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders--diluted
GAAP reported $ 8,484 $ 11,597 $ 9,393 $ 3,348 $ 1,219 $ 9,159 $ 1.63
Purchase accounting adjustments(b)
18 (2) 5 (3,064) (75) 3,117
Acquisition-related items - - - - - 44
Discontinued operations(c)
- - - - - (2,879)
Certain significant items:
Restructuring charges/(credits) and implementation costs and additional depreciation-asset restructuring(d)
(61) (197) 2 - - 791
Certain asset impairments(e)
- - - - (1,691) 1,691
Upfront and milestone payments on collaborative and licensing arrangements(f)
- - (454) - - 454
(Gains)/losses on equity securities(g)
- - - - 557 (557)
Actuarial valuation and other pension and postretirement plan (gains)/losses(g)
- - - - (1,092) 1,092
Asset acquisitions of IPR&D(h)
- - (50) - - 50
Other (56) (292) (j)
(24) - (697) (i)
1,063
Income tax provision-Non-GAAP items (1,299)
Non-GAAP adjusted $ 8,386 $ 11,106 $ 8,872 $ 284 $ (1,779) $ 12,727 $ 2.26
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 43
Data presented will not (in all cases) aggregate to totals.
IN MILLIONS, EXCEPT PER COMMON SHARE DATA
Cost of sales Selling, informational and administrative expenses Research and development expenses Amortization of intangible assets Other (income)/deductions--net Net income attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders(a)
Earnings per common share attributable to Pfizer Inc. common shareholders--diluted
GAAP reported $ 8,054 $ 12,726 $ 8,385 $ 4,429 $ 3,497 $ 16,026 $ 2.82
Purchase accounting adjustments(b)
19 2 4 (4,158) (21) 4,153
Acquisition-related items - (2) - - - 185
Discontinued operations(c)
- - - - - (6,056)
Certain significant items:
Restructuring charges/(credits) and implementation costs and additional depreciation-asset restructuring(d)
(89) (73) (30) - - 611
Certain asset impairments(e)
- - - - (2,757) 2,757
Upfront and milestone payments on collaborative and licensing arrangements(f)
- - (279) - - 279
(Gains)/losses on equity securities(g)
- - - - 415 (415)
Actuarial valuation and other pension and postretirement plan (gains)/losses(g)
- - - - (750) 750
(Gain) on completion of Consumer Healthcare JV transaction - - - - - (8,107)
Asset acquisitions of IPR&D(h)
- - (337) - - 337
Other (118) (190) (18) - (1,007) (i)
1,333
Income tax provision-Non-GAAP items (797)
Non-GAAP adjusted $ 7,865 $ 12,463 $ 7,726 $ 271 $ (623) $ 11,056 $ 1.95
(a)Items that reconcile GAAP Reported to Non-GAAP Adjusted balances are shown pre-tax and include discontinued operations. Our effective tax rates for GAAP reported income from continuing operations were: 7.6% in 2021, 5.3% in 2020 and 5.2% in 2019. See Note 5. Our effective tax rates on Non-GAAP adjusted income were: 15.3% in 2021, 13.7% in 2020 and 16.0% in 2019.
(b)Purchase accounting adjustments include items such as the incremental charge to cost of sales from the sale of acquired inventory that was written up to fair value, amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets, depreciation related to the increase/decrease in fair value of the acquired fixed assets, amortization related to the increase in fair value of acquired debt, and the fair value changes for contingent consideration. For all years presented, primarily consists of amortization of intangible assets.
(c)Relates primarily to the spin-off of our Upjohn Business, and our sale of Meridian. See Note 2B.
(d)Includes employee termination costs, asset impairments and other exit costs related to our cost-reduction and productivity initiatives not associated with acquisitions. See Note 3.
(e)Primarily includes intangible asset impairment charges. For 2020, $900 million is related to IPR&D assets acquired from Array and $528 million is related to Eucrisa. For 2019, $2.6 billion is related to Eucrisa. See Note 4.
(f)Primarily includes the following charges: (i) for 2021, an upfront payment to Arvinas and a premium paid on our equity investment in Arvinas totaling $706 million, a $300 million upfront payment to Beam and a $50 million net upfront payment to BioNTech; (ii) for 2020, a payment of $151 million representing the expense portion of an upfront payment to Myovant, an upfront payment to Valneva of $130 million, an upfront payment to BioNTech and a premium paid on our equity investment in BioNTech totaling $98 million, as well as a $75 million milestone payment to Akcea; and (iii) for 2019, an upfront license fee payment of $250 million to Akcea.
(g)(Gains)/losses on equity securities, and actuarial valuation and other pension and postretirement plan (gains)/losses are removed from adjusted earnings due to their inherent market volatility.
(h)Primarily includes payments for acquired IPR&D. For 2021, includes a $2.1 billion charge related to our acquisition of Trillium, which was accounted for as an asset acquisition, and a $177 million charge related to an asset acquisition completed in the second quarter of 2021. For 2019, included a $337 million charge related to our acquisition of Therachon, which was accounted for as an asset acquisition.
(i)For 2021, the total of $334 million primarily includes: (i) charges representing our equity-method accounting pro rata share of restructuring charges and costs of preparing for separation from GSK of $185 million recorded by the Consumer Healthcare JV and (ii) charges for certain legal matters of $162 million. For 2020, the total of $697 million primarily included: (i) charges of $367 million, which represent our equity-method accounting pro rata share of transaction-specific restructuring and business combination accounting charges recorded by the Consumer Healthcare JV, and (ii) losses on asset disposals of $238 million. For 2019, the total of $1.0 billion primarily included: (i) $300 million of business and legal entity alignment costs for consulting, legal, tax and advisory services associated with the design, planning and implementation of our then new business structure, effective in the beginning of 2019, (ii) charges for certain legal matters of $291 million, (iii) charges of $152 million for external incremental costs, such as transaction costs and costs to separate our Consumer Healthcare business into a separate legal entity associated with the formation of the Consumer Healthcare JV, (iv) net losses on early retirement of debt of $138 million and (v) charges of $112 million representing our equity-method accounting pro rata share of restructuring and business combination accounting charges recorded by the Consumer Healthcare JV.
(j)For 2020, amounts in Selling, informational and administrative expenses of $292 million primarily include costs for consulting, legal, tax and advisory services associated with a non-recurring internal reorganization of legal entities.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 44
ANALYSIS OF THE CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
Cash Flows from Continuing Operations
Cash Flows from Discontinued Operations
Cash flows from discontinued operations primarily relate to our former Meridian subsidiary, Upjohn Business and the Mylan-Japan collaboration (see Note 2B). In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities from discontinued operations primarily reflects issuances of long-term debt.
ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY, CAPITAL RESOURCES AND MARKET RISK
Due to our significant operating cash flows, which is a key strength of our liquidity and capital resources and our primary funding source, as well as our financial assets, access to capital markets, revolving credit agreements, and available lines of credit, we believe that we have, and will maintain, the ability to meet our liquidity needs to support ongoing operations, our capital allocation objectives, and our contractual and other obligations for the foreseeable future.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 45
We focus efforts to optimize operating cash flows through achieving working capital efficiencies that target accounts receivable, inventories, accounts payable, and other working capital. Excess cash from operating cash flows is invested in money market funds and available-for-sale debt securities which consist of primarily high-quality, highly liquid, well-diversified debt securities. We have taken, and will continue to take, a conservative approach to our financial investments and monitoring of our liquidity position in response to market changes. We typically maintain cash and cash equivalent balances and short-term investments which, together with our available revolving credit facilities, are in excess of our commercial paper and other short-term borrowings.
Additionally, we may obtain funding through short-term or long-term sources from our access to the capital markets, banking relationships and relationships with other financial intermediaries to meet our liquidity needs.
Diverse sources of funds: Related disclosure presented in this Form 10-K
Internal sources:
•Operating cash flows
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows - Operating Activities and the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows within MD&A
•Cash and cash equivalents
Consolidated Balance Sheets
•Money market funds
Note 7A
•Available-for-sale debt securities
Note 7A, 7B
External sources:
Short-term funding:
•Commercial paper
Note 7C
•Revolving credit facilities
Note 7C
•Lines of credit
Note 7C
Long-term funding:
•Long-term debt
Note 7D
•Equity
Consolidated Statements of Equity and Note 12
For additional information about the sources and uses of our funds and capital resources for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, see the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in this MD&A.
In August 2021, we completed a public offering of $1 billion aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured sustainability notes. We are using the net proceeds to finance or refinance, in whole or in part as follows: R&D expenses related to our COVID-19 vaccines, capital expenditures in connection with the manufacture and distribution of COVID-19 vaccines and our other projects that have environmental and/or social benefits. For additional information, see Note 7D.
Credit Ratings
The cost and availability of financing are influenced by credit ratings, and increases or decreases in our credit rating could have a beneficial or adverse effect on financing. Our long-term debt is rated high-quality by both S&P and Moody’s. In November 2020, upon the completion of the Upjohn separation, both Moody’s and S&P lowered our long-term debt rating one notch to ‘A2’ and ‘A+’, respectively, and our short-term rating remained unchanged. S&P continues to rate our long-term debt rating outlook as Stable since November 2020, while Moody’s recently upgraded our long-term debt rating outlook to Positive in December 2021.
The current ratings assigned to our commercial paper and senior unsecured long-term debt:
NAME OF RATING AGENCY Pfizer Short-Term Rating Pfizer Long-Term Rating Outlook/Watch
Moody’s P-1 A2 Positive
S&P A-1+ A+ Stable
A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and the rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
Capital Allocation Framework
Our capital allocation framework is devised to facilitate (i) the achievement of medical breakthroughs through R&D investments and business development activities and (ii) returning capital to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. See the Overview of Our Performance, Operating Environment, Strategy and Outlook-Our Business and Strategy section of this MD&A.
Our current and projected dividends provide a return to shareholders while maintaining sufficient capital to invest in growing our business. Our dividends are not restricted by debt covenants. While the dividend level remains a decision of Pfizer’s BOD and will continue to be evaluated in the context of future business performance, we currently believe that we can support future annual dividend increases, barring significant unforeseen events. In December 2021, our BOD declared a first-quarter dividend of $0.40 per share, payable on March 4, 2022, to shareholders of record at the close of business on January 28, 2022. The first-quarter 2022 cash dividend will be our 333rd consecutive quarterly dividend.
See Note 12 for information on the shares of our common stock purchased and the cost of purchases under our publicly announced share-purchase plans, including our accelerated share repurchase agreements. At December 31, 2021, our remaining share-purchase authorization was approximately $5.3 billion.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Contractual, and Other Obligations
In the ordinary course of business, (i) we enter into off-balance sheet arrangements that may result in contractual and other obligations and (ii) in connection with the sale of assets and businesses and other transactions, we often indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 46
may arise in connection with the transaction or that are related to events and activities. For more information on guarantees and indemnifications, see Note 16B.
Additionally, certain of our co-promotion or license agreements give our licensors or partners the rights to negotiate for, or in some cases to obtain under certain financial conditions, co-promotion or other rights in specified countries with respect to certain of our products. Furthermore, collaboration, licensing or other R&D arrangements may give rise to potential milestone payments. Payments under these agreements generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and/or commercialization milestones, which may span several years and which may never occur.
Our significant contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021 consisted of:
•Long-term debt, including current portion (see Note 7) and related interest payments;
•Estimated cash payments related to the TCJA repatriation estimated tax liability (see Note 5). Estimated future payments related to the TCJA repatriation tax liability that will occur after December 31, 2021 total $8.3 billion, of which an estimated $750 million is to be paid in the next twelve months and an estimated $7.6 billion is to be paid in periods thereafter;
•Certain commitments totaling $5.2 billion, of which an estimated $1.5 billion is to be paid in the next twelve months, and $3.7 billion in periods thereafter (see Note 16C);
•Purchases of property plant and equipment (see Note 9). In 2022, we expect to spend approximately $3.3 billion on property, plant and equipment; and
•Future minimum rental commitments under non-cancelable operating leases (see Note 15).
Global Economic Conditions
Our Venezuela and Argentina operations function in hyperinflationary economies. The impact to Pfizer is not considered material. For additional information on the global economic environment, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors--Global Operations section in this Form 10-K.
Market Risk
We are subject to foreign exchange risk, interest rate risk, and equity price risk. The objective of our financial risk management program is to minimize the impact of foreign exchange rate and interest rate movements on our earnings. We address such exposures through a combination of operational means and financial instruments. For more information on how we manage our foreign exchange and interest rate risks, see Notes 1G and 7E, as well as the Item 1A. Risk Factors-Global Operations section in this Form 10-K for key currencies in which we operate. Our sensitivity analyses of such risks are discussed below.
Foreign Exchange Risk-The fair values of our financial instrument holdings are analyzed at year-end to determine their sensitivity to foreign exchange rate changes. In this analysis, holding all other assumptions constant and assuming that a change in one currency’s rate relative to the U.S. dollar would not have any effect on another currency’s rates relative to the U.S. dollar, if the dollar were to appreciate against all other currencies by 10%, as of December 31, 2021, the expected adverse impact on our net income would not be significant.
Interest Rate Risk-The fair values of our financial instrument holdings are analyzed at year-end to determine their sensitivity to interest rate changes. In this analysis, holding all other assumptions constant and assuming a parallel shift in the interest rate curve for all maturities and for all instruments, if there were a one hundred basis point decrease in interest rates as of December 31, 2021, the expected adverse impact on our net income would not be significant.
Equity Price Risk--We hold equity securities with readily determinable fair values in life science companies as a result of certain business development transactions. While we are holding such securities, we are subject to equity price risk, and this may increase the volatility of our income in future periods due to changes in the fair value of equity investments. From time to time, we will sell such equity securities based on our business considerations, which may include limiting our price risk. Our equity securities with readily determinable fair values are analyzed at year-end to determine their sensitivity to equity price rate changes. In this sensitivity analysis, the expected adverse impact on our net income would not be significant.
LIBOR
For information on interest rate risk and LIBOR, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors--Global Operations section in this Form 10-K. We do not expect the transition to an alternative rate to have a material impact on our liquidity or financial resources.
Pfizer Inc. 2021 Form 10-K 47
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
Recently Adopted Accounting Standard
See Note 1B.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards, Not Adopted as of December 31, 2021
Standard/Description Effective Date Effect on the Financial Statements
Reference rate reform provides temporary optional expedients and exceptions to the guidance for contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued after 2021 because of reference rate reform.
The new guidance provides the following optional expedients:
1.Simplify accounting analyses under current U.S. GAAP for contract modifications.
2.Simplify the assessment of hedge effectiveness and allow hedging relationships affected by reference rate reform to continue.
3.Allow a one-time election to sell or transfer debt securities classified as held to maturity that reference a rate affected by reference rate reform.
Elections can be adopted prospectively at any time through December 31, 2022. We are assessing the impact, but currently, we do not expect this new guidance to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Accounting for contract assets and contract liabilities from contracts with customers requires contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination to be recognized and measured by the acquirer on the acquisition date in accordance with ASC 606. This new guidance will generally result in the acquirer recognizing contract assets and contract liabilities at the same amounts that were recorded by the acquiree. Previously, these amounts were recognized by the acquirer at fair value as of the acquisition date.
January 1, 2023. Early adoption is permitted. We do not expect this new guidance to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.