Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following analysis discusses our financial condition as of December 31, 2021, compared with December 31, 2020, our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and, where appropriate, factors that may affect our future financial performance. The discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes to the financial statements and the other financial information included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
For information and analysis relating to our financial condition and consolidated results of operations as of and for the year ended December 31, 2019, as well as for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared with the year ended December 31, 2019, see Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Forward-Looking Information
Our narrative analysis below contains forward-looking statements intended to enhance the reader’s ability to assess our future financial performance. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements that represent our beliefs concerning future operations, strategies, financial results or other developments, and contain words and phrases such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “plan,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions. Forward-looking statements are made based upon management’s current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance.
Actual results may differ materially from those included in the forward-looking statements as a result of risks and uncertainties. Those risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the risk factors listed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We provide financial products and services through the following reportable segments:
● Retirement and Income Solutions;
● Principal Global Investors;
● Principal International and
● U.S. Insurance Solutions.
We also have a Corporate segment, which consists of the assets and activities that have not been allocated to any other segment. See Item 1. “Business” for a description of our reportable segments.
Recent Event
Reinsurance Transaction
See Item 1. “Business,” for information about the Reinsurance Transaction and Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” for information on risks associated with the Reinsurance Transaction.
Economic Factors and Trends
Positive market performance led to an increase in account values in our Retirement and Income Solutions segment in 2021. Since account values is the base by which this business generates revenues, market performance volatility may impact our revenues in future quarters.
Positive market performance led to an increase in AUM managed by our Principal Global Investors segment in 2021. Since AUM is the base by which this business generates revenues, market performance volatility may impact our revenues in future quarters. Also included in revenues are borrower fees, transaction fees and performance fees, which can fluctuate between years.
In our Principal International segment, local currency AUM is a key indicator of earnings growth. While local currency AUM increased due to favorable market performance and positive net cash flow, the impacts were negatively impacted by foreign currency fluctuations.
In our U.S. Insurance Solutions segment, premium and fee growth is a key indicator of earnings growth. Higher levels of unemployment may impact new sales in our businesses and reduce in-group growth in our Specialty Benefits insurance business in the short-term.
See Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” for information on risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting financial market impacts.
Profitability
Our profitability depends in large part upon our:
● amount of AUM;
● ability to manage the difference between the investment income we earn and the interest we credit to policyholders;
● ability to generate fee revenues by providing trust and custody,administrative and investment management services;
● ability to price our insurance products at a level that enables us to earn a margin over the cost of providing benefits and the related expenses;
● ability to manage our investment portfolio to maximize investment returns and minimize risks such as interest rate changes or defaults or impairments of invested assets;
● ability to effectively hedge fluctuations in foreign currency to U.S. dollar exchange rates on certain transactions and
● ability to manage our operating expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The increasing complexity of the business environment and applicable authoritative accounting guidance requires us to closely monitor our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1, Nature of Operations and Significant Accounting Policies.” We have identified critical accounting policies that are complex and require significant judgment and estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. A summary of our critical accounting policies is intended to enhance the reader’s ability to assess our financial condition and results of operations and the potential volatility due to changes in estimates and changes in guidance. The identification, selection and disclosure of critical accounting estimates and policies have been discussed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Valuation and Allowance for Credit Loss of Fixed Income Investments
Fixed Maturities. Fixed maturities include bonds, asset-backed securities (“ABS”), redeemable preferred stock and certain non-redeemable preferred securities. We classify our fixed maturities as either AFS or trading and, accordingly, carry them at fair value in the consolidated statements of financial position. Volatility in net income can result from changes in fair value of fixed maturities classified as trading. Volatility in other comprehensive income can result from changes in fair value of fixed maturities classified as AFS.
We measure the fair value of our financial assets and liabilities based on assumptions used by market participants in pricing the asset or liability, which may include inherent risk, restrictions on the sale or use of an asset, or nonperformance risk, including our own credit risk. For additional details concerning the methodologies, assumptions and inputs utilized see Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 14, Fair Value Measurements” under the caption, “Determination of Fair Value.”
The fair values of our public fixed maturities are primarily based on market prices from third party pricing vendors. We have regular interactions with these vendors to ensure we understand their pricing methodologies and to confirm they are utilizing observable market information. In addition, 9% of our invested asset portfolio as of December 31, 2021, was invested in privately placed fixed maturities with no readily available market quotes to determine the fair market value. The majority of these assets are valued using a matrix pricing valuation approach that utilizes observable market inputs. In the matrix approach, securities are grouped into pricing categories that vary by sector, rating and average life. Each pricing category is assigned a risk spread based on observable public market data. The expected cash flows of the security are then discounted back at the current Treasury curve plus the appropriate risk spread. Although the matrix valuation approach provides a fair valuation of each pricing category, the valuation of an individual security within each pricing category may be impacted by company specific factors. This excludes privately placed securities subject to Rule 144A of the Securities Act of 1933 that are primarily based on market prices from third party pricing vendors, similar to public fixed maturities.
If we are unable to price a fixed maturity security using prices from third party pricing vendors or other sources specific to the asset class, we may obtain a broker quote or utilize an internal pricing model specific to the asset utilizing relevant market information, to the extent available and where at least one significant unobservable input is utilized. These are reflected in Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy and can include fixed maturities across all asset classes. As of December 31, 2021, approximately 1% of our total fixed maturities were Level 3 securities valued using internal pricing models. See Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 14, Fair Value Measurements” for further discussion.
The $2,299.2 million decrease in net unrealized gains from U.S. investment operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, can be attributed to an approximate 51 basis point increase in interest rates, partially offset by tightening of credit spreads. For additional information about interest rate risk see