Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is Management’s Discussion and Analysis of the Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) of Professional Holding Corp. (“the Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related footnotes of our Company presented in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. In addition to historical information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that could cause actual results to differ materially from management’s expectations. Factors that could cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those described in the section titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Information.”
Executive Overview
Net income for Professional Holding Corp. and subsidiaries (the “Company”) for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $21.4 million ($1.61 per common share) compared to $8.3 million ($0.69 per common share) for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a 157.2% increase in net income and a 133.3% increase in earnings per common share.
Highlights of our performance and financial condition as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, and other key events that occurred during 2020 are provided below.
Results of Operations for the Three Months Ended December 31, 2021
•Net income decreased $2.3 million, or 37.0%, to $4.0 million compared to the prior quarter. The decrease was comprised of lower net interest income of $1.0 million, a decrease in noninterest income of $0.2 million, an increase in noninterest expense of $1.3 million, and a higher provision expense of $0.8 million.
•Net interest income decreased $1.0 million, or 5.1%, to $18.1 million compared to the prior quarter primarily due to a decrease in loan yield in our commercial real estate loan portfolio. The loan yield decrease was due to prior quarter’s acceleration of the Bank’s Payroll Protection Program (“Professional Bank PPP”) loan fees and acceleration of purchase accounting loan marks from the Marquis Bancorp, Inc. (“MBI”) acquisition. The Company remains asset sensitive and net interest income is expected to increase in a rising interest rate environment. Net interest income, excluding Professional Bank PPP income and purchase accounting marks from the MBI acquisition, increased $0.4 million, or 2.9%, to $15.4 million, compared to the prior quarter, see Reconciliation of non-GAAP Financial Measures.
•Provision expense increased $0.8 million, or 77.4%, to $1.9 million compared to the prior quarter primarily due to loan growth during the quarter, and, to a lesser extent, a specific reserve on a nonperforming impaired loan.
•Noninterest income decreased $0.2 million, or 12.6%, to $1.3 million compared to the prior quarter primarily due to a decrease in service charges associated with deposit correspondent fees from service charges on deposit accounts associated with acting as a correspondent bank for a Payroll Protection Program lender (the “Correspondent Banking Relationship”) Correspondent Banking Relationship, lower swap fee income due to a lower volume of swap transactions, and a decrease in fees generated from loans held for sale, partially offset by higher Small Business Administration (“SBA”) loan origination fees.
•Noninterest expense increased $1.3 million, or 11.0%, to $12.9 million compared to the prior quarter primarily due to increases in salary and benefits of $0.7 million to support scalable growth, $0.5 million loss attributable to a wire erroneously sent by the Bank in reliance on instructions that appear to have originated from a client's compromised computer system, and an increase of $0.2 million in the provision for unfunded off-balance sheet items, partially offset by a $0.3 million charitable contribution expense in prior quarter.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021
•The variance in the Results of Operations for 2021 compared to 2020 occurred in part due to the March 26, 2020, closing date of the MBI acquisition as there were 281 days of MBI integration in 2020 compared to a full year in 2021 (the “MBI Variance”).
•Net income increased $13.1 million, or 157.2%, to $21.4 million compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily due to an increase in net interest income resulting from the MBI Variance, the acceleration of Professional Bank PPP loan fees, deposit fees associated with the Correspondent Banking Relationship, as well as lower provision
for loan losses primarily due to the macro environment stabilization following the increased reserves at the early stages of COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and having addressed the impairment of a previously disclosed loan in the third quarter of 2020.
•Net interest income increased $12.3 million, or 20.4%, to $72.3 million compared to the prior year primarily due to loan growth and an increase in forgiveness of Professional Bank PPP loans resulting in a higher amount of loan fees recognized in addition to a reduction in interest expense on deposit accounts. Net interest income, excluding Professional Bank PPP income and purchase accounting marks from the MBI acquisition increased $9.0 million, or 18.4%, to $58.0 million, compared to the prior year, see Reconciliation of non-GAAP Financial Measures.
•Noninterest income increased $1.9 million, or 43.7%, to $6.2 million, compared to the prior year primarily due to an increase of $0.9 million in service charges associated with the Correspondent Banking Relationship, $0.6 million in service charges on other deposit accounts, a $0.6 million increase in Bank Owned Life Insurance income, and a $0.1 million increase in SBA loan origination fees, partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in fees generated from loans held for sale, and a $0.1 million decrease in swap fee income.
•Noninterest expense increased $3.6 million, or 8.4%, to $47.3 million compared to the prior year. The year-over-year increase was due to increased salaries and employee benefits resulting from our opening of LPOs in St. Pete, FL and Jacksonville, investments in digital infrastructure, and higher regulatory and professional fees related to accounting and regulatory compliance, partially offset by prior year MBI acquisition expenses. The Bank’s number of employees increased from 182 as of December 31, 2020, to 208 as of December 31, 2021.
Financial Condition:
On December 31, 2021:
•Total assets remained relatively unchanged at $2.7 billion compared to the prior quarter. Total assets increased 29.5%, or $0.6 billion, compared to December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of increases in cash and cash equivalents, net loans, and taxable securities available for sale.
•Total loans increased $89.9 million, or 5.3%, to $1.8 billion compared to the prior quarter. The increase was driven by loan originations of approximately $304.3 million, of which $226.6 million funded, partially offset by loan paydowns and prepayments. The Professional Bank PPP loan balance decreased $26.5 million, or 31.1%, to $58.6 million from the prior quarter.
•Total deposits remained relatively unchanged at $2.4 billion compared to the prior quarter. An increase in money market deposit accounts were mostly offset by a decrease in noninterest bearing demand deposit accounts due to SBA loan forgiveness payments related to the Correspondent Banking Relationship.
•Nonperforming assets decreased $0.7 million to $2.1 million compared to the prior quarter due to a charge-off of a previously disclosed impaired loan. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had nonperforming assets of $10.4 million. There were no charge-offs during the three months ended December 31, 2020.
Other Highlights for the Year Ended December 31, 2021
•First quarter 2021, we won our fourth consecutive South Florida Business Journal's Best Places to Work award.
•Third quarter 2021, we added two new loan production offices across the state of Florida.
•Third quarter 2021, we released our new Online Account Opening and our Premium Contactless Debit Card.
•Full year 2021, we recorded strong loan originations of $804 million, representing almost 50% of today's portfolio (excluding PPP originations).
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021, and 2020
Net Income
The following table sets forth the principal components of net income for the periods indicated.
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $21.4 million, an increase of $13.1 million, or 157.2%, from net income for the year ended December 31, 2020, of $8.3 million. Interest income increased $10.5 million while interest expense decreased $1.7 million, resulting in a net interest income increase of $12.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in our net interest income was primarily due to the MBI Variance, increased loan portfolio growth, and decreased cost of funds to the Company. Provision for loan losses decreased by $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. The decrease in provision expense was primarily due to the macro environment stabilization following the increased reserves at the early stages of COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and a prior year specific reserve recorded on a previously disclosed impaired loan. Noninterest income increased $1.9 million and noninterest expense increased $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year. The increase in noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year was primarily due to an increase in service charges on deposit accounts, an increase in bank owned life insurance income and an increase in SBA loan origination fees, partially offset by a decrease in swap fee income. The increase in noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in the prior year was primarily due to increased salaries and benefits, investments in digital infrastructure, and higher regulatory and professional fees, partially offset by prior year MBI business combination expenses. The Bank’s number of employees increased from 182 as of December 31, 2020, to 208 as of December 31, 2021.
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin Analysis
We analyze our ability to maximize income generated from interest earning assets and control the interest expenses of our liabilities, measured as net interest income, through our net interest margin and net interest spread. Net interest income is the difference between the interest and fees earned on interest earning assets, such as loans and securities, and the interest expense paid on interest bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, which are used to fund those assets. Net interest margin is a ratio calculated as annualized net interest income divided by average interest earning assets for the same period. Net interest spread is the difference between average interest rates earned on interest earning assets and average interest rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
Changes in market interest rates and the interest rates we earn on interest earning assets or pay on interest-bearing liabilities, as well as in the volume and types of interest earning assets, interest bearing and noninterest-bearing liabilities and shareholders’ equity, are usually the largest drivers of periodic changes in net interest income, net interest margin and net interest spread. Fluctuations in market interest rates are driven by many factors, including governmental monetary policies, inflation, deflation, macroeconomic developments, changes in unemployment rates, the money supply, political and international conditions and conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets. Periodic changes in the volume and types of loans in our loan portfolio are affected by, among other factors, the economic and competitive conditions in the Miami-Dade MSA, as well as developments affecting the real estate, technology, government services, hospitality and tourism and financial services sectors within the Miami-Dade MSA. Our ability to respond to changes in these factors by using effective asset-liability management techniques is critical to maintaining the stability of our net interest income and net interest margin as our primary sources of earnings.
The following table shows the average outstanding balance of each principal category of our assets, liabilities and shareholders’ equity, together with the average yields on our assets and the average costs of our liabilities for the periods indicated. Such yields and costs are calculated by dividing the annualized income or expense by the average daily balances of the corresponding assets or liabilities for the same period.
______________
(1)Includes nonaccrual loans.
(2)Net interest spread is the difference between interest rates earned on interest earning assets and interest rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities.
(3)Net interest margin is a ratio of net interest income to average interest earning assets for the same period.
(4)Interest income on loans includes loan fees of $8.6 million and $4.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
The following table presents information regarding the dollar amount of changes in interest income and interest expense for the periods indicated for each major component of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities and distinguishes between the changes attributable to changes in volume and changes attributable to changes in interest rates. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been proportionately allocated to both volume and rate.
Net interest income increased by $12.3 million to $72.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Our total net interest income was impacted primarily due to an increase in average interest earning assets, particularly loan growth as well as decreased cost of funds to the Company, partially offset by decreased annualized average interest rates due to increased balances in our low yielding cash assets as well as increases in our loan portfolio of lower yielding loans. Average total interest earning assets were $2.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The annualized yield on those interest earning assets decreased 66 basis points from 4.03% for the year ended December 31, 2020, to 3.37% for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to loans repricing downward, coupled with higher yielding loan payoffs. The increase in the average balance of interest earning assets was driven primarily by the 2020 MBI Variance and growth in our loan portfolio of $0.3 billion, or 22.8%, to $1.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Average interest-bearing liabilities increased by $0.3 billion, or 24.8%, from $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to a $0.4 billion, or 43.3%, increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits. The increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits was primarily due to increases in negotiable order of withdrawal accounts ("NOW") accounts and money market accounts for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to for the year ended December 31, 2020, and, to a lesser extent, increases in certificates of deposits. The annualized average interest rate paid on average interest-bearing liabilities decreased to 0.49% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 0.76% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The annualized average interest rate paid on interest-bearing deposits decreased 27 basis points to 0.41% and the annualized average interest rate paid on borrowed funds increased by 93 basis points to 2.04%. For year ended December 31, 2021, our average other noninterest-bearing liabilities increased $0.3 million, or 1.6%, to $18.0 million from $17.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Average noninterest-bearing deposits also increased $0.4 billion, or 85.4%, from $0.4 billion to $0.8 billion for the same periods. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our annual net interest margin was 3.06% and net interest spread was 2.88%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, annual net interest margin was 3.51% and net interest spread was 3.27%. Our net interest margin was adversely affected by 0.45% during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020, as a result of a reduction in average rates earned on interest earning assets during the year ended December 31, 2021. Correspondingly, clients used excess liquidity to payoff higher yielding loans, while new loans were priced at lower yields during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Provision for Loan Losses
The provision for loan losses is a charge to income in order to bring our allowance for loan losses to a level deemed appropriate by management. For a description of the factors taken into account by our management in determining the allowance for loan
losses see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Allowance for Loan Losses.”
Our provision for loan losses amounted to $4.7 million for 2021 and $10.0 million for 2020. The decrease from 2020 to 2021 was primarily due to the decline of COVID-19 related risk in the portfolio taken in the prior year and a specific reserve of $7.6 million recorded in prior year to address the impairment of a previously disclosed loan, partially offset by the growth of our loan portfolio. We recorded two charge-offs totaling $8.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to three charge-offs for $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, outstanding loan marks were $13.0 million, compared to $18.8 million on December 31, 2020. Our allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans, excluding PPP loans was 0.74% and 1.10% for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively (non-GAAP, see Explanation of Certain Unaudited Non-GAAP Financial Measures).
Noninterest Income
Our primary sources of recurring noninterest income are service charges on deposit accounts, income from Bank owned life insurance, origination fees for Small Business Administration, or SBA loans, swap fee income, and other fees and charges. Noninterest income does not include loan origination fees to the extent they exceed the direct loan origination costs, which are generally recognized over the life of the related loan as an adjustment to yield using the interest method. The following table presents the major categories of noninterest income for the periods indicated.
Noninterest income for 2021 was $6.2 million, a $1.9 million or 43.7% increase compared to noninterest income of $4.3 million for 2020. The increase was primarily due an increase of $0.9 million in deposit accounts service charges associated with the Correspondent Banking Relationship, $0.6 million in service charges on other deposit accounts, a $0.6 million increase in Bank Owned Life Insurance income, and a $0.1 million increase in SBA loan origination fees, partially offset by a $0.3 million decrease in fees generated from loans held for sale, and a $0.1 million decrease in swap fee income.
Noninterest Expense
Generally, noninterest expense is composed of all employee expenses and costs associated with operating our facilities, obtaining and retaining client relationships and providing banking services. The largest component of noninterest expense is salaries and employee benefits. Noninterest expense also includes operational expenses, such as occupancy and equipment expenses, professional fees, acquisition expenses, data processing expenses, advertising expenses, loan processing expenses and other general and administrative expenses, including FDIC assessments, communications, travel, meals, training, supplies and postage.
The following table presents the major categories of noninterest expense for the periods indicated.
Noninterest expense amounted to $47.3 million in 2021, an increase of $3.6 million, or 8.4%, compared to $43.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to increased salaries and employee benefits resulting from our opening of LPOs in St. Pete, FL and Jacksonville, investments in digital infrastructure, and higher regulatory and professional fees related to accounting and regulatory compliance, partially offset by prior year MBI acquisition expenses and lower occupancy costs due to the closure of Marquis headquarters. The Bank’s number of employees increased from 182 as of December 31, 2020, to 208 as of December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Expense
The amount of income tax expense we incur is influenced by the level of pre-tax income, the mix of income between various tax jurisdictions with differing tax rates, bank-owned life insurance income, tax-exempt interest and nondeductible expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are reflected at current income tax rates in effect for the period in which the deferred tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. As changes in tax laws or rates are enacted, such as the Tax Act, deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted through the provision for income taxes. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
Income tax expense was $5.1 million for 2021 and $2.4 million for 2020. Our effective tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 19.3% and 22.5%, respectively.
Financial Condition
Our total assets grew to $2.7 billion on December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.6 billion, or 29.5%, compared to December 31, 2020, as a result of increased balances in interest earning deposits, purchases of high quality mortgage-backed securities ("MBS"), United States Agency collateralized mortgage obligations ("CMO"), Small Business Administration loan pools ("SBA"), and community development district bonds ("CDD") in our available for sale portfolio, and a third round of PPP coupled with new organic loan originations, partially offset by loan payoffs. Interest-bearing deposits at other financial institutions increased due to our desire to maintain our excess liquidity in more liquid assets due to our continued robust demand for loans and cash associated with Correspondent Banking Relationship. Shareholders’ equity increased $16.0 million, or 7.4%, to $231.5 million on December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to net income of $21.4 million, partially offset by repurchases of the Company's Class A voting common stock.
Interest Earning Deposits at Other Financial Institutions
Cash that is not immediately needed to fund loans by the Bank is invested in liquid assets that also earn interest, including deposits with other financial institutions. Due to our desire to maintain excess liquidity in more liquid assets to fund our loan growth and excess due to the Correspondent Banking Relationship, cash and cash equivalents increased $380.5 million, or 175.4%, compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in interest-bearing deposits. As we continue to grow, so do our liquidity needs.
In certain situations, banks are required to maintain cash reserves in the form of vault cash or in an account with the Federal Reserve Bank or in noninterest-earning accounts with other qualified banks. This requirement is based on the Bank’s amount of transaction deposit accounts. The Bank’s cash reserve requirements was $0 on December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Investment Securities
We use our securities portfolio to provide a secondary source of liquidity, achieve additional interest income through higher yields on funds invested (compared to other options, such as interest earning deposits at other banks or fed funds sold), manage interest rate risk, and meet both collateral and regulatory capital requirements.
Securities may be classified as either trading, held to maturity or available for sale. Trading securities (if any) are held principally for resale and recorded at their fair value with changes in fair value included in income. Held to maturity securities are those which the Company has the positive intent and ability to hold to maturity and are reported at amortized cost. Equity securities are carried at fair value, with changes in fair value reported in net income. Equity securities without readily determinable fair values are carried at cost, minus impairment, if any, plus or minus changes resulting from observable price changes in orderly transactions for the identical or a similar investment. Available for sale securities consist of securities not classified as trading securities nor as held to maturity securities. Unrealized holding gains and losses on available for sale securities are excluded from income and reported in comprehensive income or loss. Gains and losses on the sale of available for sale securities are recorded on the trade date and are determined using the specific-identification method. Premiums and discounts on securities available for sale are recognized in interest income using the interest method over the period to maturity.
Our investment portfolio increased by $106.1 million, or 111.6%, to $201.2 million on December 31, 2021, from $95.1 million on December 31, 2020, primarily due to purchases of $142.6 million in high quality MBS/CMO, SBA, and CDD bonds in our available for sale portfolio, partially offset by paydowns and maturities. To supplement interest income earned on the Company’s loan portfolio, the Company invests in high quality mortgage-backed securities, government agency bonds, corporate bonds, community development district bonds, and equity securities (including mutual funds).
The following tables summarize the contractual maturities and weighted-average yields of investment securities as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, and the amortized cost and carrying value of those securities as of the indicated dates.
Loan Portfolio
Our primary source of income is derived from interest earned on loans. Our loan portfolio consists of loans secured by real estate as well as commercial business loans, construction and development and other consumer loans. Our loan clients primarily consist of small to medium sized businesses, the owners and operators of these businesses as well as other professionals and entrepreneurs. Our owner-occupied and investment commercial real estate loans, residential construction loans and commercial business loans provide us with higher risk-adjusted returns, shorter maturities and more sensitivity to interest rate fluctuations, and are complemented by our relatively lower risk residential real estate loans to individuals. Our lending activities are principally directed to our market area consisting of the Miami-Dade MSA.
The following table summarizes and provides additional information about certain segments of our loan portfolio as of the dates indicated.
Commercial Real Estate Loans. We originate both owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied commercial real estate loans. These loans may be more adversely affected by conditions in the real estate markets or in the general economy. Commercial real estate loans that are secured by owner-occupied commercial real estate and primarily collateralized by operating cash flows are also included in this category of loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had $342.1 million of owner-occupied commercial real estate loans and $560.6 million of investment commercial real estate loans, representing 37.9% and 62.1%, respectively, of our commercial real estate portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, the average loan balance of loans in our commercial real estate loan portfolio was approximately $1.3 million for owner-occupied and $2.4 million for non-owner-occupied. Commercial real estate loan terms are generally extended for 10 years or less and amortize generally over 25 years or less. Terms of 15 years are permitted where the loan is fully amortized over the term of the loan. The maximum loan to value is generally, 80% of the market value or purchase price, but may be as high as 90% for SBA 504 owner-occupied loans. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any commercial real estate loans with a loan to value over 100%. Our credit policy also usually requires a minimum debt service coverage ratio of 1.20x. As of December 31, 2021, our weighted-average loan-to-value ratios for owner-occupied and non-owner-occupied commercial real estate were 49.4% and 48.9%, respectively and debt service coverage ratios were 2.75x and 2.01x, respectively. The interest rates on our commercial real estate loans have initial fixed rate terms that adjust typically at five years and we routinely charge an origination fee for our services. We generally require personal guarantees from the principal owners of the business, supported by a review of the principal owners’ personal financial statements and global debt service obligations. All commercial real estate loans with an outstanding balance of $1.0 million or more are reviewed at least annually. The properties securing the portfolio are located primarily throughout our market and are generally diverse in terms of type. This diversity helps reduce the exposure to adverse economic events that affect any single industry.
As of December 31, 2021, non-owner occupied commercial real estate loans of $560.6 million represented 32.4% of total risk-weighted assets.
Construction and Development Loans. The majority of our construction loans are offered within the Miami-Dade MSA to builders primarily for the construction of single-family homes and condominium and townhouse conversions or renovations and, to a lesser extent, to individuals. Our construction loans typically have terms of 12 to 18 months with the goal of transitioning the borrowers to permanent financing or re-underwriting and selling into the secondary market. According to our credit policy, the loan to value ratio may not exceed the lesser of 80% of the appraised value, as established by an independent appraisal, or 85% of costs for residential construction and 90% of costs for SBA 504 loans. As of December 31, 2021, our weighted average loan-to-value ratio on our construction, vacant land, and land development loans were 53.1%, 50.1% and 53.4%, respectively. All construction and development loans require an interest reserve account, which is sufficient to pay the loan through completion of the project. We conduct annual stress testing of our construction loan portfolio and closely monitor underlying real estate conditions as well as our borrowers’ trends of sales valuations as compared to underwriting valuations as part of our ongoing risk management efforts. We also closely monitor our borrowers’ progress in construction build-out and strictly enforce our original underwriting guidelines for construction milestones and completion timelines.
As of December 31, 2021, total construction and land development loans of $91.5 million represented 5.3% of total risk-weighted assets.
Residential Real Estate Loans. We offer one-to-four family mortgage loans primarily on owner-occupied primary residences which make up approximately 72% of our residential loan portfolio and, to a lesser extent, investor-owned residences, which make up approximately 15% of our residential loan portfolio. Our residential loans also include home equity lines of credit, which totaled approximately $50.0 million, or approximately 13% of our residential loan portfolio as of December 31, 2021. The average loan balance of closed-end residential loans in our residential portfolio was approximately $0.8 million as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any residential real estate loans with a loan to value over 100%. Our one-to-four family residential loans have a relatively small balance spread between many individual borrowers compared to our other loan categories. Our owner-occupied residential real estate loans usually have fixed rates for five or seven years and adjust on an annual basis after the initial term based on a typical maturity of 30 years. Upon the implementation of rules under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the origination, closing and servicing of the traditional residential loan products became much more complex, which led to increased costs of compliance and training. As a result, many banks exited the business, which created an opportunity for the banks that remained in the space. While the use of technology, and other related origination strategies have allowed non-bank originators to gain significant market share over the last several years, traditional banks that made investments in personnel and technology to comply with the new requirements have typically experienced loan growth. Unlike many of our competitors, we have been able to effectively compete in the residential loan market, while simultaneously doing the same in the commercial loan market which has enabled us to establish a broader and deeper relationship with our borrowers. Additionally, by offering a full line of residential loan products, the owners of the many small to medium sized businesses that we lend to use us, instead of a competitor, for financing a personal residence. This greater bandwidth to the same market has been a significant contributor to our growth and market share in South Florida. The following chart shows our residential real estate portfolio by loan type and the weighted average loan-to-value ratio for each loan type.
Commercial Loans (non-PPP). In addition to our other loan products, we provide general commercial loans, including commercial lines of credit, working capital loans, term loans, equipment financing, letters of credit and other loan products, primarily in our market, and underwritten based on each borrower’s ability to service debt from income. These loans are primarily made based on the identified cash flows of the borrower, as determined based on a review of the client’s financial statements, and secondarily, on the underlying collateral provided by the borrower. The average loan balance of the non-PPP loans in our commercial loan portfolio was $0.7 million as of December 31, 2021. For commercial loans over $0.5 million, a global cash flow analysis is generally required, which forms the basis for the credit approval, “Global cash flow” is defined as a cash flow calculation which includes all income sources of all principals in the transaction as well as all debt payments, including the debt service associated with the proposed transaction. In general, a minimum 1.20x debt service coverage is preferred, but in no event should the debt service coverage ratio be less than 1.00x. As of December 31, 2021, the debt service
coverage ratio for our Bank commercial loan portfolio was approximately 2.33x for non-PPP loans, excluding approximately 3.3% of the commercial loan portfolio that is cash secured. Most commercial business loans are secured by a lien on general business assets including, among other things, available real estate, accounts receivable, promissory notes, inventory and equipment, and we generally obtain a personal guaranty from the borrower or other principal. The following chart shows our commercial loan portfolio by industry segment as of December 31, 2021.
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The Company has participated in the PPP offered through the United States Small Business Administration (SBA) by way of the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act that was passed at the end of the first quarter 2020. As a qualified SBA lender, the Company was automatically authorized to originate PPP loans. To help clients, the Company added an online PPP application form and automated the PPP loan closing documentation process. The Company participated in all three rounds of the PPP and funded 2,287 loans representing $340.5 million in relief proceeds throughout 2020 and 2021, of which 1,931 loans totaling $280.6 million were forgiven by the SBA. The majority of these loans were initially pledged to the Federal Reserve as part of the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF). The PPPLF pledged loans are non-recourse to the Bank. These loans are guaranteed by the government and as such no loan loss reserves have been recorded for these loans. The Company paid off all of the PPPLF advances during the first and second quarter of 2021, and the balance of PPPLF advances made by the Company was $0 on December 31, 2021. The PPP net loan balance was $58.6 million on December 31, 2021, compared to $185.7 million on December 31, 2020. Interest income on loans include PPP loan fees. PPP loan fees recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, were $6.9 million compared to $2.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Consumer and Other Loans. We offer consumer, or retail credit, to individuals for household, family, or other personal expenditures. Generally, these are either in the form of closed-end/installment credit loans or open-end/revolving credit loans. Occasionally, we will make unsecured consumer loans to highly qualified clients in amounts up to $250,000 with up to three-year repayment terms.
The following chart illustrates our gross loans net of unearned income and weighted average loan-to-value ratio for our collateralized loan portfolio as of the end of the months indicated.
Fourth quarter loans totaled $1.8 billion, an increase of $89.9 million, or 5.3%, from the prior quarter driven by loan originations of approximately $304.3 million, of which $226.6 million funded, partially offset by loan payoffs of $131.6 million ($103.9 million of conventional loans and $27.6 million of PPP loans forgiven). The Professional Bank PPP loan balance decreased $26.5 million, or 31.1%, to $58.6 million from the prior quarter.
The repayment of loans is a source of additional liquidity for us. The following table details maturities and sensitivity to interest rate changes for our loan portfolio on December 31, 2021.
*Includes Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans.
Nonperforming Assets
Loans are considered past due if the required principal and interest payments have not been received as of the date such payments were due. Loans are placed on nonaccrual status when, in management’s opinion, the borrower may be unable to meet payment obligations as they become due, as well as when required by regulatory provisions. Loans may be placed on nonaccrual status regardless of whether or not such loans are considered past due. In general, we place loans on nonaccrual status when they become 90 days past due. We also place loans on nonaccrual status if they are less than 90 days past due if the collection of principal or interest is in doubt. When interest accrual is discontinued, all unpaid accrued interest is reversed from income. Interest income is subsequently recognized only to the extent cash payments are received in excess of principal due. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are, in management’s opinion, reasonably assured. Any loan which the Bank deems to be uncollectible, in whole or in part, is charged off to the extent of the anticipated loss. Loans that are past due for 180 days or more are charged off unless the loan is well secured and in the process of collection. We currently have no loans that are 90 days or greater past due and accruing as of December 31, 2021.
We believe our disciplined lending approach and focused management of nonperforming assets has resulted in sound asset quality and timely resolution of problem assets. We have several procedures in place to assist us in maintaining the overall quality of our loan portfolio, such as annual reviews of the underlying financial performance of all commercial loans in excess
of $1.0 million. We also engage in annual stress testing of the loan portfolio, and proactive collection and timely disposition of past due loans. Our bankers follow established underwriting guidelines, and we also monitor our delinquency levels for any negative trends. As a result, we have, in recent years, experienced a relatively low level of nonperforming assets. We had nonperforming assets of $2.1 million and $10.4 million as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, or 0.08% and 0.51% of total assets, respectively. The decrease in nonperforming assets was driven by charge-offs of $8.3 million of impaired loans during the year ended December 31, 2021. Occasionally, loans that we make will be impacted due to the occurrence of unforeseen events, such as COVID-19, which was a primary factor in the prior year increase in our nonperforming assets relative to our historically low, near-zero levels. However, we believe that our low loan-to-value loan portfolio is well positioned to withstand these types of discrete events as they occur from time. There can be no assurance, however, that our loan portfolio will not become subject to increasing pressures from deteriorating borrower credit due to general economic conditions.
Credit Quality Indicators
We strive to manage and control credit risk in our loan portfolio by adhering to well-defined underwriting criteria and account administration standards established by our management team and approved by our Board. We employ a dedicated Chief Credit Officer and have established a Risk Committee at the Bank level which oversees, among other things, risks associated with our lending activities and enterprise risk management. Our written loan policies document underwriting standards, approval levels, exposure limits and other limits or standards that our management team and Board deem appropriate for an institution of our size and character. Loan portfolio diversification at the obligor, product and geographic levels are actively managed to mitigate concentration risk, to the extent possible. In addition, credit risk management includes an independent credit review process that assesses compliance with policies, risk rating standards and other critical credit information. In addition, we adhere to sound credit principles and evaluate our clients’ borrowing needs and capacity to repay, in conjunction with their character and financial history. Our management team and Board place significant emphasis on balancing a healthy risk profile and sustainable growth. Specifically, our approach to lending seeks to balance the risks necessary to achieve our strategic goals while ensuring that our risks are appropriately managed and remain within our defined limits. We believe that our credit culture is a key factor in our relatively low levels of nonperforming loans and nonperforming assets compared to other institutions within our market.
We categorize loans into risk categories based on relevant information about the ability of borrowers to service their debt including: current financial information, historical payment experience, credit documentation, public information, and current economic trends, among other factors. Generally, all credits greater than $1.0 million, other than residential real estate loans, are reviewed no less than annually to monitor and adjust, if necessary, the credit risk profile. Loans classified as “substandard” or “special mention” are reviewed quarterly for further evaluation to determine if they are appropriately classified and whether there is any impairment. Beyond the annual review, all loans are graded at initial issuance. In addition, during the renewal process of any loan, as well as if a loan becomes past due, we will determine the appropriate loan grade. Loans excluded from the review process above are generally classified as “pass” credits until: (a) they become past due; (b) management becomes aware of deterioration in the credit worthiness of the borrower; or (c) the client contacts us for a modification. In these circumstances, the loan is specifically evaluated for potential reclassification to special mention, substandard, doubtful, or even a charged-off status. We use the following definitions for risk ratings:
Pass. A Pass loan’s primary source of loan repayment is satisfactory, with secondary sources very likely to be realized if necessary. The pass category includes the following:
•Riskless: Loans that are fully secured by liquid, properly margined collateral (listed stock, bonds, or other securities; savings accounts; certificates of deposit; loans or that portion thereof which are guaranteed by the United States Government or agencies backed by the “full faith and credit” thereof; loans secured by properly executed letters of credit from prime financial institutions).
•High Quality Risk: Loans to recognized national companies and well-seasoned companies that enjoy ready access to capital markets or to a range of financing alternatives. Borrower’s public debt offerings are accorded highest ratings by recognized rating agencies, e.g., Moody’s or Standard & Poor’s. Companies display sound financial conditions and consistent superior income performance. The borrower’s trends and those of the industry to which it belongs are positive.
•Satisfactory Risk: Loans to borrowers, reasonably well established, that display satisfactory financial conditions, operating results and excellent future potential. Capacity to service debt is amply demonstrated. Current financial strength, while financially adequate, may be deficient in a number of respects. Normal comfort levels are achieved through a closely monitored collateral position and/or the strength of outside guarantors.
•Moderate Risk: Loans to borrowers who are in non-compliance with periodic reporting requirements of the loan agreement, and any other credit file documentation deficiencies, which do not otherwise affect the borrower’s credit risk profile. This may include borrowers who fail to supply updated financial information that supports the adequacy of the primary source of repayment to service the Bank’s debt and prevents bank management to evaluate the borrower’s current debt service capacity. Existing loans will include those with consistent track records of timely loan payments, no material adverse changes to underlying collateral, and no material adverse changes to guarantor(s) financial capacity, evidenced by public record searches.
Special mention. A Special Mention loan has potential weaknesses that deserve management’s close attention. If left uncorrected, these potential weaknesses may result in the deterioration of the repayment prospects for the asset or our credit position at some future date. Special Mention loans are not adversely classified and do not expose an institution to sufficient risk to warrant adverse classification.
Substandard. A Substandard loan is inadequately protected by the current sound worth and paying capacity of the obligor or of the collateral pledged, if any. Loans so classified must have a well-defined weakness or weaknesses that jeopardizes the liquidation of the debt. They are characterized by the distinct possibility that we will sustain some loss if the deficiencies are not corrected.
Doubtful. A loan classified Doubtful has all the weaknesses inherent in one classified Substandard with the added characteristics that the weaknesses make collection or liquidation in full, on the basis of currently existing facts, conditions, and values, highly questionable and improbable.
Loss. A loan classified Loss is considered uncollectible and of such little value that continuance as a bankable asset is not warranted. This classification does not mean that the asset has absolutely no recovery or salvage value, but rather it is not practical or desirable to defer writing off this basically worthless asset even though partial recovery may be affected in the future.
Based on the most recent analysis performed, the risk category of loans by class of loans is as follows:
Allowance for Loan Losses
We believe that we maintain our allowance for loan losses at a level sufficient to provide for probable incurred credit losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the balance sheet date. Credit losses arise from the borrowers’ inability or unwillingness to repay, and from other risks inherent in the lending process including collateral risk, operations risk, concentration risk, and economic risk. We consider all of these risks of lending when assessing the adequacy of our allowance. The allowance for loan losses is established through a provision charged to expense. Loans are charged-off against the allowance when losses are probable and reasonably quantifiable. Our allowance for loan losses is based on management’s judgment of overall credit quality, which is a significant estimate based on a detailed analysis of the loan portfolio. Our allowance can and will change based on revisions to our assessment of our loan portfolio’s overall credit quality and other risk factors both internal and external to us.
We evaluate the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis. The allowance consists of two components. The first component consists of those amounts reserved for impaired loans. A loan is deemed impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Bank will not be able to collect all amounts due (principal and interest), according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Loans are monitored for potential impairment through our ongoing loan review procedures and portfolio analysis. Classified loans and past due loans over a specific dollar amount, and all troubled debt restructurings are individually evaluated for impairment.
The approach for assigning reserves for the impaired loans is determined by the dollar amount of the loan and loan type. Impairment measurement for loans over a specific dollar are determined on an individual loan basis with the amount reserved dependent on whether repayment of the loan is dependent on the liquidation of collateral or from some other source of repayment. If repayment is dependent on the sale of collateral, the reserve is equivalent to the recorded investment in the loan less the fair value of the collateral after estimated sales expenses. If repayment is not dependent on the sale of collateral, the reserve is equivalent to the recorded investment in the loan less the estimated cash flows discounted using the loan’s effective interest rate. The discounted value of the cash flows is based on the anticipated timing of the receipt of cash payments from the borrower. The reserve allocations for individually measured impaired loans are sensitive to the extent market conditions or the actual timing of cash receipts change. Impairment reserves for smaller-balance loans under a specific dollar amount are assigned on a pooled basis utilizing loss factors for impaired loans of a similar nature.
The second component is a general reserve on all loans other than those identified as impaired. General reserves are assigned to various homogenous loan pools, including commercial, commercial real estate, construction and development, residential real estate, and consumer. General reserves are assigned based on historical loan loss ratios determined by loan pool and internal
risk ratings that are adjusted for various internal and external risk factors unique to each loan pool. The following table analyzes the activity in the allowance over the past two years.
Our allowance for loan losses was $12.7 million on December 31, 2021, compared to $16.3 million on December 31, 2020, a decrease in the allowance of 21.9%. The decrease was primarily due to a $7.6 million charge-off of a previously disclosed impaired loan and macro environment stabilization, partially offset by growth in our loan portfolio. On December 31, 2021, our allowance for loan losses was 0.74% of total loans, excluding PPP loans (non-GAAP, see Explanation of Certain Unaudited Non-GAAP Financial Measures) and provided coverage of 598.7% of our nonperforming loans, compared to an allowance for loan losses of ratio of 1.10% of total loans, excluding PPP loans as of December 31, 2020. We believe our allowance on December 31, 2021, was adequate to absorb potential losses inherent in our loan portfolio.
The following table provides an allocation of the allowance for loan losses to specific loan types as of the end of the fiscal year for each of the past two years.
On December 31, 2021, the recorded investment in impaired loans (consisting of nonaccrual loans, troubled debt restructured loans, loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest and other loans based on management’ judgment) was $2.2 million, of which there were three impaired loans with a recorded investment of $2.1 million, on nonaccrual with a specific reserve of $1.3 million. Also, there was one substandard accruing loan with a recorded investment of $2.3 million, with no allowance. On December 31, 2020, the recorded investment in impaired loans was $13.1 million, of which $10.4 million required a specific reserve of $8.3 million.
Impaired loans also include certain loans that were modified as troubled debt restructurings, or TDRs. On December 31, 2021, we had one loan for $0.1 million that was considered to be a TDR, compared to two loans for $0.3 million on December 31, 2020. We did not allocate any specific reserves to loans that have been modified as TDRs as of December 31, 2021, or 2020.
Deposits
Deposits are our primary source of funding. We offer a variety of deposit products including checking, NOW, savings, money market and time accounts all of which we actively market at competitive pricing. We generate deposits from our consumer and commercial clients through the efforts of our private bankers. We supplement our deposits with wholesale funding sources such as Quickrate and brokered deposits. However, we do not significantly rely on wholesale funding sources, which are generally viewed as less stable compared to core deposits due to the relatively higher price elasticity of demand for deposits from wholesale sources. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, these wholesale deposits represented 3.9% and 4.3%, respectively, of our total deposits.
Interest-bearing deposits increased $513.4 million, or 43.4%, from December 31, 2020, to December 31, 2021, primarily due to a $375.3 million increase in money market account balances and a $78.0 million increase in NOW account balances. In order to fund our loan growth, all of our bankers are actively involved with our strategic efforts and are incentivized to grow core deposits. The average rate paid on interest-bearing deposits decreased 27 basis points from 0.68% for the year ended December 31, 2020, to 0.41% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in average rates paid on interest-bearing deposits was a result of a continued decrease in market rates of interest during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $58.4 million in brokered deposits, or 2.5% of total deposits, an increase of approximately $28.2 million from December 31, 2020. We did not obtain these brokered deposits through a deposit listing agency, but rather through an existing relationship with the Bank. However, these deposits meet the regulatory definition of brokered deposits and are reported accordingly.
The following table presents the ending balances and percentage of total deposits for the periods indicated.
________________
(1)Balance Sheet does not illustrate brokered deposits as presented above.
The following table presents the maturities of our time deposits that meet or exceed the $250,000 FDIC insurance limit, including the portion of time deposits in excess of the FDIC insurance limit as of December 31, 2021.
The following tables present the maturities of our time deposits including time deposits that meet or exceed the $250,000 FDIC insurance limit as of December 31, 2020.
Debt
See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements dated December 31, 2021, titled "Debt" for additional information regarding our Subordinated Debt and Valley National Line of Credit.
Borrowings
We primarily use short-term and long-term borrowings to supplement deposits to fund our lending and investment activities.
FHLB Advances. The FHLB allows us to borrow up to 25% of our assets on a blanket floating lien status collateralized by certain securities and loans. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $235.3 million in loans were pledged as collateral for our FHLB borrowings. We utilize these borrowings to meet liquidity needs and to fund certain fixed rate loans in our portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, we had $35.0 million in outstanding advances, $28.7 million in outstanding letters of credit and $113.0 million in additional available borrowing capacity from the FHLB based on the collateral that we have currently pledged.
The following table sets forth certain information on our FHLB borrowings during the periods presented.
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has an available borrower in custody arrangement which allows us to borrow on a collateralized basis. No advances were outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2021.
PPPLF Advances. The Company initially funded Professional Bank PPP loans with the PPPLF. Most of the Professional Bank PPP loans were initially pledged to the Federal Reserve as part of the PPPLF. The PPPLF pledged loans are non-recourse to the Company. In addition, we paid off all PPPLF advances for a balance of $0 on December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
Shareholders’ equity increased $16.0 million, or 7.4%, to $231.5 million on December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to net income of $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by repurchases of the Company's Class A voting common stock.
We are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can initiate certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a material effect on our financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, we must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require us to maintain minimum ratios of common equity Tier 1, Tier 2, and total capital as a percentage of assets and off-balance sheet exposures, adjusted for risk weights ranging from 0% to 1,250%. We are also required to maintain capital at a minimum level based on quarterly average assets, which is known as the leverage ratio.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all applicable regulatory capital requirements to which we were subject, and the Bank was classified as “well capitalized” for purposes of the prompt corrective action regulations. As we deploy our capital and continue to grow our operations, our regulatory capital levels may decrease depending on our level of earnings. However, we intend to monitor and control our growth in order to remain in compliance with all regulatory capital standards applicable to us.
The following table presents our regulatory capital ratios as of the dates indicated. The amounts presented exclude the capital conservation buffer.
Liquidity
In general terms, liquidity is a measurement of our ability to meet our cash needs. Our objective in managing our liquidity is to maintain our ability to fund loan commitments, purchase securities, accommodate deposit withdrawals or repay other liabilities in accordance with their terms, without an adverse impact on our current or future earnings. Our liquidity strategy is guided by policies that are formulated and monitored by our Asset Liability Management Committee, or ALCO, and senior management, including our Liquidity Contingency Policy, and which take into account the marketability of assets, the sources and stability of funding and the level of unfunded commitments. We regularly evaluate all of our various funding sources with an emphasis on accessibility, stability, reliability and cost-effectiveness. Our principal source of funding has been our clients’ deposits, supplemented by our short-term borrowings, primarily from FHLB borrowings. We believe that the cash generated from operations, our borrowing capacity and our access to capital resources are sufficient to meet our future operating capital and funding requirements.
On December 31, 2021, we had the ability to generate approximately $449.9 million in additional liquidity through available resources. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company redeemed in full, the amount of its subordinated notes payable of $10.0 million, in accordance with its contractual terms. On December 31, 2021, the Company had $10.0 million of outstanding
borrowings at Valley National Bank, N.A. (“Valley”). As previously disclosed, during the first quarter of 2022, the Company completed both a private placement transaction, pursuant to which the Company issued and sold a subordinated note due 2032 in the principal amount of $25.0 million, and increased the availability under its revolving line of credit at Valley from $10.0 million to $25.0 million. See Note 24 to the Consolidated Financial Statements dated December 31, 2021, titled "Subsequent Events" for additional information regarding the first quarter transactions of Subordinated Debt and Valley National Line of Credit.
In addition to the primary borrowing outlets mentioned above, we also have the ability to generate liquidity by borrowing from the Federal Reserve Discount Window and through brokered deposits. We recognize the importance of maintaining liquidity and have developed a Contingent Liquidity Plan, which addresses various liquidity stress levels and our response and action based on the level of severity. We periodically test our credit facilities for access to the funds, but also understand that as the severity of the liquidity level increases, certain credit facilities may no longer be available. We conduct quarterly liquidity stress tests and the results are reported to our Asset-Liability Management Committee and our Board. We believe the liquidity available to us is sufficient to meet our ongoing needs.
We also view our investment portfolio as a liquidity source and have the option to pledge securities in our portfolio as collateral for borrowings or deposits, and/or sell selected securities. Our portfolio primarily consists of debt issued by the federal government and governmental agencies. The weighted-average maturity of our portfolio was 4.41 years and 3.50 years on December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, and had a net unrealized pre-tax loss of $1.0 million and a pre-tax gain of $1.2 million, respectively, in our available for sale securities portfolio as of those dates.
As we deploy our capital and continue to grow our operations, we maintain cash in our Holding Company for added liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, cash held at the Holding Company was approximately $5.8 million. Our average net overnight funds sold position (defined as funds sold plus interest-bearing deposits with other banks less funds purchased) was $42.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an average net overnight funds sold position of $39.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, cash held at the Federal Reserve was approximately $544.0 million compared to $128.2 million as of December 31, 2020.
We expect our capital expenditures over the next 12 months to be approximately $2.0 million, which will consist primarily of investments in digital capabilities, technology purchases for our new banking offices, business applications and information technology security needs. We expect that these capital expenditures will be funded with existing resources mentioned above, without impairing our ability to meet our ongoing obligations.
Inflation
We are experiencing and may continue to experience labor cost inflation and constraints in hiring qualified employees. We aim to offset the potential unfavorable impact of these items with automation, productivity improvements, and other initiatives. In general, the impact of inflation on the banking industry differs significantly from that of other industries in which a large portion of total resources are invested in fixed assets such as property, plant and equipment. Assets and liabilities of financial institutions are primarily all monetary in nature, and therefore are principally impacted by interest rates rather than changing prices. While the general level of inflation underlies most interest rates, interest rates react more to changes in the expected rate of inflation and to changes in monetary and fiscal policy. At December 31, 2021, inflation was rising at a higher and more sustained level than anticipated by the Federal Reserve. As a result, the current market expects a change in monetary policy which would include interest rate increases in 2022 which could lead to market volatility.
Contractual Obligations
We have contractual obligations to make future payments on debt and lease agreements. While our liquidity monitoring and management consider both present and future demands for and sources of liquidity, the following table of contractual commitments focuses only on future obligations and summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
Off-Balance Sheet Items
In the normal course of business, we enter into various transactions that, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. We enter into these transactions to meet the financing needs of our clients. These transactions include commitments to extend credit and issue letters of credit, which involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit risk and interest rate risk in excess of the amounts recognized in our consolidated balance sheets. Our exposure to credit loss is represented by the contractual amounts of these commitments. The same credit policies and procedures are used in making these commitments as for on-balance sheet instruments. We are not aware of any accounting loss to be incurred by funding these commitments, however we maintain an allowance for off-balance sheet credit risk which is recorded in other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
Our commitments associated with outstanding letters of credit and commitments to extend credit expiring by period as of the date indicated are summarized below. Since commitments associated with letters of credit and commitments to extend credit may expire unused, the amounts shown do not necessarily reflect the actual future cash funding requirements.
Unfunded lines of credit represent unused portions of credit facilities to our current borrowers that represent no change in credit risk in our portfolio. Lines of credit generally have variable interest rates. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make is represented by the contractual amount of the commitment, less the amount of any advances made.
Letters of credit are conditional commitments issued by us to guarantee the performance of a client to a third party. In the event of nonperformance by the client in accordance with the terms of the agreement with the third party, we would be required to fund the commitment. If the commitment is funded, we would be entitled to seek recovery from the client from the underlying collateral, which can include commercial real estate, physical plant and property, inventory, receivables, cash or marketable securities.
Our policies generally require that letter of credit arrangements contain security and debt covenants similar to those contained in loan agreements and our credit risk associated with issuing letters of credit is similar to the credit risk involved in extending loan facilities to our clients. The effect on our revenue, expenses, cash flows, and liquidity of the unused portions of these letters of credit commitments and letters of credit cannot be precisely predicted because there is no guarantee that the lines of credit will be used.
Commitments to extend credit are agreements to lend funds to a client, as long as there is no violation of any condition established in the contract, for a specific purpose. Commitments generally have variable interest rates, fixed expiration dates or other termination clauses and may require payment of a fee. Since many of the commitments are expected to expire without being fully drawn, the total commitment amounts disclosed above do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. We
evaluate each client’s creditworthiness on a case-by-case basis. The amount of collateral obtained, if considered necessary by us, upon extension of credit is based on management’s credit evaluation of the client.
We enter into forward commitments for the delivery of mortgage loans in our current pipeline. Interest rate lock commitments are entered into in order to economically hedge the effect of changes in interest rates resulting from our commitments to fund the loans. These commitments to fund mortgage loans, to be sold into the secondary market, (interest rate lock commitments) and forward commitments for the future delivery of mortgage loans to third party investors are considered derivatives. We attempt to minimize our exposure to loss under credit commitments by subjecting them to the same credit approval and monitoring procedures as we do for on-balance sheet instruments.
Certain Performance Metrics
The following table shows the return on average assets (computed as net income divided by average total assets), return on average equity (computed as net income divided by average equity) and average equity to average assets ratios for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Market Risk and Interest Rate Sensitivity
Overview
Market risk arises from changes in interest rates, exchange rates, commodity prices, and equity prices. We have risk management policies designed to monitor and limit exposure to market risk and we do not participate in activities that give rise to significant market risk involving exchange rates, commodity prices, or equity prices. In asset and liability management activities, our policies are designed to minimize structural interest rate risk.
Interest Rate Risk Management
Our net income is largely dependent on net interest income. Net interest income is susceptible to interest rate risk to the degree that interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice on a different basis than interest earning assets. When interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than interest earning assets in a given period, a significant increase in market rates of interest could adversely affect net interest income. Similarly, when interest earning assets mature or reprice more quickly than interest-bearing liabilities, falling market interest rates could result in a decrease in net interest income. Net interest income is also affected by changes in the portion of interest earning assets that are funded by interest-bearing liabilities rather than by other sources of funds, such as noninterest-bearing deposits and shareholders’ equity.
We have established what we believe to be a comprehensive interest rate risk management policy, which is administered by ALCO. The policy establishes limits of risk, which are quantitative measures of the percentage change in net interest income (a measure of net interest income at risk) and the fair value of equity capital (a measure of economic value of equity, or EVE, at risk) resulting from a hypothetical change in interest rates for maturities from one day to 30 years. We measure the potential adverse impacts that changing interest rates may have on our short-term earnings, long-term value, and liquidity by employing simulation analysis through the use of computer modeling. The simulation model captures optionality factors such as call features and interest rate caps and floors embedded in investment and loan portfolio contracts. As with any method of gauging interest rate risk, there are certain shortcomings inherent in the interest rate modeling methodology used by us. When interest rates change, actual movements in different categories of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, loan prepayments, and withdrawals of time and other deposits, may deviate significantly from assumptions used in the model. Finally, the methodology does not measure or reflect the impact that higher rates may have on adjustable-rate loan clients’ ability to service their debts, or the impact of rate changes on demand for loan and deposit products.
The balance sheet is subject to testing for interest rate shock possibilities to indicate the inherent interest rate risk. We prepare a current base case and several alternative interest rate simulations (-400, -300, -200, -100,+100, +200, +300 and +400 basis points (bps)), at least once per quarter, and report the analysis to ALCO and our Board. We augment our interest rate shock analysis with alternative interest rate scenarios on a quarterly basis that may include ramps, parallel shifts, and a flattening or
steepening of the yield curve (non-parallel shift). In addition, more frequent forecasts may be produced when interest rates are particularly uncertain or when other business conditions so dictate.
Our goal is to structure the balance sheet so that net interest earnings at risk over a 12-month period and the economic value of equity at risk do not exceed policy guidelines at the various interest rate shock levels. We attempt to achieve this goal by balancing, within policy limits, the volume of floating-rate liabilities with a similar volume of floating-rate assets, by keeping the average maturity of fixed-rate asset and liability contracts reasonably matched, by managing the mix of our core deposits, and by adjusting our rates to market conditions on a continuing basis.
Analysis
The following table indicates that, for periods less than one year, rate-sensitive assets exceeded rate-sensitive liabilities, resulting in a slightly asset-sensitive position. For a bank with an asset-sensitive position, otherwise referred to as a positive gap, rising interest rates would generally be expected to have a positive effect on net interest income, and falling interest rates would generally be expected to have the opposite effect.
REPRICING GAP
__________________
(1)Includes FRB and FHLB stock, which has been historically redeemable at par.
CASH FLOW GAP
__________________
(1)Includes FRB and FHLB stock, which has been historically redeemable at par.
Measures of net interest income at risk produced by simulation analysis are indicators of an institution’s short-term performance in alternative rate environments. These measures are typically based upon a relatively brief period, and do not necessarily indicate the long-term prospects or economic value of the institution.
The following table summarizes the results of our net interest income at risk analysis in simulating the change in net interest income and fair value of equity over a 12-month and 24-month horizon as of December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Using an EVE, we analyze the risk to capital from the effects of various interest rate scenarios through a long-term discounted cash flow model. This measures the difference between the economic value of our assets and the economic value of our liabilities, which is an estimate of liquidation value. While this provides some value as a risk measurement tool, management believes net interest income at risk is more appropriate in accordance with the going concern principle.
The following table illustrates the results of our EVE analysis as of December 31, 2021, and 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with United States GAAP and with general practices within the financial services industry. Application of these principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under current circumstances. These assumptions form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from independent, objective sources. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Use of alternative assumptions may have resulted in significantly different estimates. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
We have identified the following accounting policies and estimates that, due to the difficult, subjective, or complex judgments and assumptions inherent in those policies and estimates and the potential sensitivity of the financial statements to those judgments and assumptions, are critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe that the judgments, estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are appropriate.
Allowance for Loan Losses
The allowance for loan losses provides for probable incurred losses in the loan portfolio based upon management’s best assessment of the loan portfolio at each balance sheet date. It is maintained at a level estimated to be adequate to absorb potential losses through periodic charges to the provision for loan losses.
The allowance for loan losses consists of specific and general reserves. Specific reserves relate to loans classified as impaired. Loans are considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect all amounts due in accordance with the contractual terms of the loan. Impaired loans include troubled debt restructurings, and performing and nonperforming loans. Impaired loans are reviewed individually and a specific allowance is allocated, if necessary, based on evaluation of either the fair value of the collateral underlying the loan or the present value of future cash flows calculated using the loan’s existing interest rate. General reserves relate to the remainder of the loan portfolio, including overdrawn deposit accounts, and are based on evaluation of a number of factors, such as current economic conditions, the quality and composition of the loan portfolio, loss history, and other relevant factors.
Our loans are generally secured by specific items of collateral including real property, consumer assets, and business assets. However, the ability of borrowers to honor their contractual repayment obligations is substantially dependent on changing economic conditions. Because of the uncertainties associated with economic conditions, collateral values, and future cash flows on impaired loans, it is reasonably possible that management’s estimate of loan losses in the loan portfolio and the amount of the allowance needed may change in the future. The determination of the allowance for loan losses is, in large part, based on estimates that are particularly susceptible to significant changes in the economic environment and market conditions. In situations where the repayment of a loan is dependent on the value of the underlying collateral, an independent appraisal of the collateral’s current market value is customarily obtained and used in the determination of the allowance for loan loss.
While management uses available information to recognize losses on loans, further reductions in the carrying amounts of loans may be necessary based on changes in economic conditions. Also regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review management’s assessments of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. Such agencies may require us to recognize additional losses based on their judgments about information available to them at the time of their examination.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in the principal or most advantageous market for an asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. The degree of management judgment involved in determining the fair value of a financial instrument is dependent upon the availability of quoted market prices or observable market inputs. For financial instruments that are traded actively and have quoted market prices or observable market inputs, there is minimal subjectivity involved in measuring fair value. However, when quoted market prices or observable market inputs are not fully available, significant management judgment may be necessary to estimate fair value. In developing our fair value estimates, we maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs.
The fair value hierarchy defines Level 1 valuations as those based on quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical assets or liabilities in active markets. Level 2 valuations include inputs based on quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, and inputs that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly, for substantially the full term of the financial instrument. Level 3 valuations are based on at least one significant assumption not observable in the market, or significant management judgment or estimation, some of which may be internally developed.
Financial assets that are recorded at fair value on a recurring basis include investment securities available for sale, and loans held for sale. Determining the fair values of assets and liabilities, especially the loan portfolio, core deposit intangibles and goodwill, is a complicated process involving significant judgement regarding methods and assumptions used to calculate the estimated fair values. As of December 31, 2021, MBI purchase accounting loan marks were $13.0 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The following provides a brief description of accounting standards that have been issued but are not yet adopted that could have a material effect on our financial statements. Please also refer to the Notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective expected dates of adoption and anticipated effects on our results of operations and financial condition.
ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326)
In June 2016, FASB issued guidance to replace the incurred loss model with an expected loss model, which is referred to as the current expected credit loss, or CECL, model. The CECL model is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost, including loan receivables and held to maturity debt securities. It also applies to off-balance sheet credit exposures not accounted for as insurance (i.e. loan commitments, standby letters of credit, financial guarantees and other similar instruments). We anticipated that this accounting standard ("ASU") would be effective for us on January 1, 2021, but the FASB announced on October 16, 2019, a delay of the effective date of ASU 2016-13 for smaller reporting companies until January 1, 2023. We are in the process of evaluating and implementing changes to credit loss estimation models and related processes. Updates to business processes and the documentation of accounting policy decisions are ongoing. We may recognize an increase in the allowance for credit losses upon adoption, recorded as a one-time cumulative adjustment to retained earnings. However, the magnitude of the impact on our consolidated financial statements has not yet been determined. The Company will adopt this accounting standard effective January 1, 2023.
Pro Opp Fund LLC
On April 8, 2021, the Company formed a separately capitalized subsidiary, Pro Opp Fund LLC. Subsequent to December 31, 2021, Pro Opp Fund LLC committed to investments of approximately $0.8 million in businesses directly and indirectly related to the Company’s core business as permitted under the U.S. Bank Holding Company Act. Additionally, Pro Opp Fund LLC has an additional $0.9 million of unfunded investments outstanding.
COVID-19 Operational Response and Bank Preparedness
The Company continues to work within the COVID-19 pandemic response plans which were originally established in the spring of 2020. In the summer of 2021, we returned to a normalized office schedule. However, there are no comparable events that provide guidance as to the effect of the spread of COVID-19 and the situation remains volatile. Thus we are required to monitor differing levels of infection across the globe; various, and often conflicting, governmental strategies to address COVID-19 , including for the variants of COVID-19; and vaccination programs and requirements. We will adjust our response plans where necessary.
Explanation of Certain unaudited non-GAAP Financial Measures
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains financial information determined by methods other than United States GAAP, including adjusted net income and adjusted net income per share, which we refer to “non-GAAP financial measures.” The table below provides a reconciliation between these non-GAAP measures and net income and net income per share, which are the most comparable GAAP measures.
Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in its analysis of the Company’s performance and believes these measures are useful supplemental information that can enhance investors’ understanding of the Company’s business and performance without considering taxes or provisions for loan losses and can be useful when comparing performance with other financial institutions. However, these non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP measures.
Reconciliation of non-GAAP Financial Measures