ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following is a discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and other factors that are expected to affect our prospective financial condition. The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this annual report.
Some of the statements set forth in this section are forward-looking statements relating to our future results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources. Our actual results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources may vary from the results anticipated by these statements. We disclaim any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements based on the occurrence of future events, the receipt of new information, or otherwise. Actual future results may differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements as a result of risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Please see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A Risk Factors of this annual report.
Overview
We are workers’ compensation cost containment specialists. Our business objective is to deliver value to our customers that reduces their workers’ compensation related medical claims expense in a manner that will assure injured employees receive high quality healthcare that allows them to recover from injury and return to gainful employment without undue delay. Our customers include self-administered employers, insurers, third party administrators, municipalities and others. While we process medical bill reviews in several states, our customers are based principally in California where the high cost of workers’ compensation insurance is a critical problem.
Our core services focus on reducing medical treatment costs by enabling our customers to share control over the medical treatment process of their injured workers. This control is obtained by participation in one of our medical treatment networks. We realize revenues from enrollment of the employees of our customers into our various networks. We also provide claims-related services including utilization review, medical case management, medical bill review, lien representation, workers’ compensation carve-outs, legal support and Medicare set-aside services that bring efficiencies to claims processing and management that reduce the overall burden of workers’ compensation claims resolution.
Our business generally has a long sales cycle, typically eight months or more. Once we have established a customer relationship and enrolled employees of our customers, our revenue adjusts with the growth or retraction of our customers’ managed headcount. Throughout the year, new employees and customers are added while others terminate for a variety of reasons.
As discussed in this annual report, COVID-19 has had and will likely continue to have an impact on our business. Even after work restrictions and social distancing mandates were lifted some of our customers have not fully returned to pre-pandemic work force levels or have transitioned some of their workforce to be remote. We have noticed that while customers have a reduced workforce, there was an increase in COVID-19 related claims during the fourth quarter of 2021 through the beginning of 2022. We anticipate that we will continue to see seasonal fluctuations in COVID-19 related claims, but fewer severe claims. The reduction in our customers’ workforce and remote working, could lead to lower incidences of workplace injuries. Notwithstanding such reductions, this does not eliminate an employer’s obligation to provide workers compensation coverage to employees working remotely.
We expect businesses will continue to seek ways to control their workers’ compensation program costs. While our HCO and MPN programs have been shown to create a favorable return on investment for our customers, (as our services are a significant component of our customers’ loss prevention programs), from time to time we experience customer volatility in the form of existing customers terminating or seeking to renegotiate the scope and terms of existing services, switching to a third party administrator or insurance company that provides the same services as ours, or seeking to reduce costs by managing their workers’ compensation care services in-house.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
We have been able to adapt our business operations to a primarily remote workforce, with no material interruptions in service, data breaches, technology failures, or inability to complete mission-critical functions. We have been able to effectively maintain contact with employees, partners, customers, and other related parties using technological solutions such as virtual meetings and enhanced collaboration programs and have developed policies and protocols to ensure department and employee performance quality is maintained despite the change in work setting. This has resulted in a shift from in-person office related costs to costs associated with maintaining a remote workforce, including reimbursing employees for internet, phone, and office supply expenses; additional computer hardware costs; and some administrative burdens in complying with California laws and regulations related to COVID-19. With fewer employees coming to the office, we have fewer costs related to sanitizing, cleaning, and providing PPE supplies to the office to prevent potential COVID-19 exposure.
Revenue for our services is derived from our customers’ employee headcount and workers’ workplace injuries. During the periods covered by this report, several of our customers, including some of our largest customers, had to suspend or significantly modify their operations during much or all of the pandemic. Since California lifted its COVID-19 restrictions, some of our customers continue to experience lower than normal business volume and employee counts due to the pandemic. Until the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers’ businesses lessen, employees return to more normal workloads and the occurrence of workplace injuries returns to more traditional levels, we anticipate our revenues will continue to be negatively affected.
California has passed legislation to address employer liability in Workers’ Compensation for COVID-19 cases. The law creates two rebuttable presumptions that COVID-19 illnesses contracted by specific categories of employees are work related and therefore eligible for workers’ compensation. The first presumption applies to COVID-19 workers’ compensation claims filed by peace officers, firefighters, first responders, and health care workers, and does not apply to our employees, though it may apply to our customers’ claims. The second presumption, for employers with five or more employees, applies to employees who test positive for COVID-19 during an outbreak at the employee’s specific place of employment. An outbreak occurs when a set number of employees - depending on the number of employees at the workplace - test positive for COVID-19 during a continuous 14-day period. This presumption applies to the Company. However, no Workers’ Compensation cases related to COVID-19 and/or via this California law have been filed against the Company to date.
In April 2020, the Department of Labor issued regulations to implement the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (“FFCRA”) which provided employees paid leave for COVID-19 related illness for themselves and/or a family member and provided employers with tax credits. The FFRCA expired on December 31, 2020. In March 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act (“ARPA”) was signed into law. The ARPA made tax credits available to employers with fewer than 500 employees who voluntarily chose to grant employees paid leave under the FFCRA through September 30, 2021 and updated certain FFCRA leave provisions. We voluntarily chose to extend the FFCRA paid leave to our employees through its expiration on September 30, 2021 and take the tax credits. Since its expiration, we have ceased to offer COVID-19-specific paid leave benefits to our employees. Family, medical, and other types of leave remain available to employees under existing company policy.
In March 2021, California passed its own COVID-19 Supplemental Paid Sick Leave law (“CA SPSL”). It provided employees paid leave for COVID-19 related reasons such as caring for themselves, family members, or for vaccine related appointments or illnesses caused by COVID-19 or the vaccine from January 1, 2021 through September 30, 2021. The CA SPSL allowed employees to retroactively request reimbursement for qualifying leave or to use it towards future requests through September 30, 2021. Employers whose employees utilized CA SPSL are eligible for federal tax credits to offset the costs of providing the CA SPSL. On September 30, 2021, the CA SPSL paid leave expired.
In June 2021, the Governor of California terminated the executive order that put into place the Stay Home Order and Blueprint for a Safer Economy. This removed restrictions on physical distancing, capacity limits on businesses, and the county tiers system. We have elected to allow employees to continue working remotely and made arrangements to reduce our office space to an executive and shared office for other employees to come in periodically in 2022.
In February 2022, California passed another COVID-19 Supplemental Paid Sick Leave law (“CSPSL”). It provides employees paid leave for COVID-19 related reasons such as caring for themselves, family members, or for vaccine related appointments or illnesses caused by COVID-19 or the vaccine from January 1, 2022 through September 30, 2022. The CSPSL allows employees to retroactively request reimbursement for qualifying leave or to use it towards future requests through September 30, 2022. Unlike the CA SPSL from 2021, employers whose employees utilize CSPSL are ineligible for federal tax credits to offset the costs of providing the CSPSL.
We will continue to offer COVID-19-specific paid leave benefits to our employees until the expiration of CSPSL. Family, medical, and other types of leave remain available to employees under existing Company policy. As of April 2022, we have incurred negligible payroll, benefits, administrative, and liability costs related to CSPSL. However, we could incur some significant costs if a second booster shot is recommended or required later in 2022, or if another spike in COVID-19 results in increased usage of the CSPSL benefit by employees.
Unlike much of the U.S. economy, we have maintained relatively steady employee recruitment and retention. Our maintenance of a successful remote environment, including high employee morale and cohesive culture via technology, has also allowed us to seek candidates in a wider range of locations, some of which have lower costs of living and lower wage norms, as well as increasing the quantity of qualified applicants. While we cannot predict or control future trends in labor in our industry, we believe that our solid recruitment practices and the opportunities presented by remote work options will help us adapt to a changing workforce environment.
In response to COVID-19 and transitioning to a remote workforce, we have taken measures to ensure data security, but there is no guarantee that these measures will be completely effective, that our productivity will not be adversely impacted, or that we will not encounter some of the common risks associated with a remote workforce, including employees accessing company data and systems remotely. As discussed in greater detail in Item 1A Risk Factors of this annual report, our business has been and could continue to be materially and adversely affected by the potential interruptions to our business operations resulting from changes to our business model in response to COVID-19.
Summary of Fiscal 2021
During the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenues decreased 11%. Revenue from HCO remained flat while MPN and medical bill review revenue increased by 4% and 21%, respectively. Revenue from utilization review, medical case management, and other fees decreased 4%, 26%, 16%, respectively.
During fiscal 2021, operating expenses decreased by 6%, primarily as a result of decreases in depreciation, bad debt provision, consulting fees, salaries and wages, insurance, outsource service fees, and general and administration expenses. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in data maintenance, while professional fees remained flat. As a result, our income from operations was $516,475 compared to $820,271 during fiscal 2020.
Our provision for income tax expense decreased 26% during fiscal 2021, from $270,701 in 2020 to $201,055 in 2021 due to a reduction in income from operations.
Our net income also increased 81% from $549,570 in 2020 to $995,020 in 2021 primarily as a result of the Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness income. Basic and fully diluted earnings per share during fiscal 2021 was $0.08 and $0.08, respectively compared to $0.04 and $0.04, respectively during fiscal 2020.
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from fees charged for access to our provider networks, and for review and medical case management services.
HCO
HCO revenue is generated largely from fees charged to our employer customers for claim network fees to access to our HCO networks, employee enrollment into our HCO program, program administration, custom network fees, annual and new hire notifications and fees for other ancillary services they may select.
MPN
Like HCO revenue, MPN revenue is generated largely from fees charged to our employer customers for claim network fees to access our MPN networks, custom network fees, employee enrollment into our MPN program, program administration, and fees for other services our MPN customers may select. Unlike the HCO, MPNs do not require annual and new hire notifications, MPNs are only required to provide a notice to an injured worker at the time the employer is notified by the injured worker that an injury occurred.
Utilization review
Utilization review is the review of medical treatment requests by providers to provide a safeguard for employers and injured workers against unnecessary and inappropriate medical treatment from the perspective of medical necessity, quality of care, appropriateness of decision-making, and timeliness of treatment. Its purpose is to reduce employer liability for medical costs that are not medically appropriate or approved by the relevant medical and legal authorities and the payor.
Medical bill review
California and many other states have established fee schedules for the maximum allowable fees payable under workers’ compensation for a variety of procedures performed by medical providers. Many procedures, however, are not covered under the fee schedules, such as hospital bills, which still require review and negotiation. Medical bill review involves analyzing medical provider services and equipment billing to ascertain proper reimbursement. Such services include, but are not limited to, coding review and re-bundling, confirming that the services are customary and reasonable, fee schedule compliance, out-of-network bill review, pharmacy review, and preferred provider organization repricing arrangements. Our medical bill review services can result in significant savings for our customers.
The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the percentage each revenue item identified in our audited consolidated financial statements contributed to total revenue during the respective period.
Expense
Consulting fees
Consulting fees include fees we pay to third parties for IT, marketing, and in-house legal advice for the various services we offer.
Salaries and wages
Salaries and wages reflect employment-related compensation we pay to our employee, payroll processing, payroll taxes and commission.
Professional fees
Professional fees include fees we pay to third parties to provide medical consulting, medical case management, and board of director’s fees for board meetings, as well as, legal and accounting fees.
Insurance
Insurance expense is comprised primarily of health insurance benefits offered to our employees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, Workers’ Compensation coverage and business liability coverage.
Data maintenance fees
Data maintenance fees includes fees we pay to a third party to process HCO and MPN employee enrollment. These fees fluctuate throughout the year because of the varied timing of customer enrollment into the HCO or MPN program and the number of employees they have in their workforce.
Outsource service fees
Outsource service fees consist of costs incurred by our subsidiaries in partially outsourcing utilization review, medical bill review, administrative services for medical case management and Medicare set-aside services and typically tends to increase and decrease in correlation with the demand for those services.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of office rent, advertising, dues and subscriptions, equipment/repairs, IT enhancement, licenses and permits, telephone, office supplies, parking, postage, printing and reproduction, rent expense for equipment, miscellaneous expenses, shareholders’ expense, charity - cash contribution, auto expenses, bank charges, education, travel and entertainment, and vacation expense.
The following table sets forth, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the percentage each expense item identified in our audited consolidated financial statements contributed to total expense during the respective period.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following represents selected components of our consolidated results of operations, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, together with changes from year-to-year:
Key trends affecting results of operations
As noted throughout this annual report, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, COVID-19 has impacted the businesses of our customers, our business and our results of operations. Most of our clients, and their employees are located in California. Throughout 2020 and for periods of 2021, California had in place COVID-19 restrictions on businesses which resulted in many of our customers reducing their workforces and caused a decrease in the number of new workers’ compensation claims, as a result of fewer workers working. Allowable medical treatment for workers’ compensation claims were also limited to help ease the burden of COVID-19 on medical facilities. We are beginning to see revenues for HCO and MPN enrollment increase as restrictions lift and employers begin hiring, but some of our customers’ industries have been impacted by the recent national trend of workforce resignations and difficulties in hiring. If our customers cannot attract new workers, it is possible that some jobs will be replaced with technology. If technology replaces workers, and/or workplace injuries continue at lower rates because there are more employees working from home and fewer employees suffering injuries in the workplace, the increases in revenues we are beginning to see could flatten or decline.
Our revenues for medical case management were also impacted because there was a smaller labor pool which resulted in fewer new workers’ compensation claims. We believe this trend will be temporary, as the economy recovers from the effects of COVID-19, but if the trend to smaller labor pools continues, medical case management reviews could continue to remain lower in the future.
Revenue
HCO
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, HCO revenue was essentially flat. The slight decrease in HCO revenue was attributable to the loss of four customers in 2021 and fewer claim network fees from existing customers, partially offset by increases in claim network fees from other existing customers.
MPN
The 4% increase in MPN revenue for 2021 compared to 2020, resulted primarily from increases in the number of claims reported by existing customers which led to in an increase in the number of MPN claim network fees.
Utilization review
During the year ended December 31, 2021, utilization review revenue decreased 4%. The decrease in utilization review revenue was due to the loss of three customers, partially offset by increases in utilization review referrals from other customers and the addition of a new customer in 2021.
Medical bill review
The 21% increase in medical bill review revenue during 2021 was primarily due to an increase in hospital and non-hospital bills reviewed, partially offset by the loss of three customers in 2021.
Medical case management
During the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenue from medical case management decreased 26% principally as a result of the loss of two customers, a decrease in the number of new claims, and pauses in work on open claims due to medical treatment delays in 2021. In 2020 and 2021, the decrease in the number of new claims was due to the reduction in our customers’ workforce and COVID-19 business and medical office restrictions. Medical offices were slow to resume full capacity and our medical management nurses could not work on the open claims until medical treatment was provided or was in progress. We believe that as the economy recovers, that medical case management will return to pre-pandemic levels.
Other
Other fees consist of revenue from network access fees derived from out of network referrals to our network of physicians, claims fees, expert witness testimony, lien representation, legal support services, Medicare set-aside, and workers’ compensation carve-out services. Other fee revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased 16% when compared to the same period a year earlier. The decrease was the result of a loss of a customer which reduced our claims fees for accessing our network. The claims fees generated by this type of service is no longer offered in the current marketplace. Since losing the customer, we have chosen to discontinue this service in 2021.
Expense
Salaries and wages
Salaries and wages decreased by 6% in 2021 compared to 2020. This decrease was the result of a reduction in our workforce in 2021 due to a decline in demand for our services caused by the effects of COVID-19 restrictions on our customers.
Professional fees
Professional fees decreased marginally during 2021. The decrease in professional fees was primarily the result of fewer fees incurred for board of director’s fees and medical management services as a result of decreased medical case management activity, partially offset by increases in accounting and legal professional fees.
Insurance
During 2021 we decreased insurance expenses by 8% compared to 2020. The decrease in insurance expenses was primarily attributed to a decrease in medical insurance premiums as a result of our lower employee count and lower insurance expense for business, directors’ and officers’ liability, and Workers’ Compensation coverage.
Outsource service fees
Outsource service fees decreased 19% during the twelve-month period ended December 2021. The decrease was primarily the result of decreases in the number of utilization review referrals, medical bill reviews, referrals sent out for Medicare set-aside arrangements, partially offset by increases in medical case management administrative services. We anticipate our outsource service fees will continue to move in correspondence with the level of utilization review, medical bill review, certain medical case management services and Medicare set-aside services we provide in the future.
Data maintenance
During the year ended December 31, 2021 data maintenance fees increased 11% primarily as a result of an increase in the number of customers’ employees enrolled in our HCO and MPN programs. In 2021, we saw an increase in the number of MPN enrollees as our customers began hiring employees. We anticipate that as businesses recover from the pandemic that data maintenance fees will increase and then level off to a modest growth.
General and administrative
During 2021, we were able to reduce our general and administrative expenses by 5%. This decrease was the result of decreases in advertising, dues and subscriptions, equipment/repairs, IT enhancement, licenses and permits, office supplies, parking, postage, printing and reproduction, rent expense for equipment, miscellaneous expenses, and shareholders’ expense, partially offset by increases in charity - cash contribution, auto expenses, bank charges, education, telephone, office rent, travel and entertainment, and vacation expense. These changes in general and administrative expenses were largely attributable to changes in how we conducted our business in response to COVID-19. While we anticipate certain general and administrative expenses will remain lower in the long-term, such as office rent, internet and phone, as a result of changes to our business operations in response to COVID-19, we expect other general and administrative expenses, such as IT enhancements, hardware and other technology-related expenses will remain at higher than historic levels in future periods.
Income from Operations
The 6% decrease in total expenses we achieved during fiscal 2021 was not sufficient to fully offset the 11% decrease in total revenues during the same period, resulting in a 37% decrease in income from operations during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
In February 2021 the principal and interest on the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans in the aggregate amount of $460,700 (the “first draw PPP loans”) issued to PHCO, MMC and MMM in April and May 2020 were forgiven in full. In December 2021 the principal and interest on the section 311 of the Economic Aid Act Paycheck Protection Program Second Draw Loans in the amount of $218,900 (the “second draw PPP loan”) issued to MMM in April 2021 were also forgiven in full. As a result, we realized income from paycheck protection loan forgiveness of $684,785 and loan interest expense from paycheck protection loans of $5,185 during the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in total other income during 2021 of $679,600. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we realized no other income (expense). We do not expect there to be further similar forgivable loans in future periods and as a result, we expect other income (expense) to be significantly less in future periods than during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Provision
Our income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased 26%, as a result of a 37% decrease in income from operations during 2021, compared to 2020.
Net Income
Despite the fact that declines in our total revenues outpaced reductions in our total expenses during 2021, as a result of the recognition in 2021 of PPP loan forgiveness we realized an 81% increase in net income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We do not expect this to recur in future periods and expect net income will be lower in future periods until revenues increase.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measurement of our ability to meet our potential cash requirements for general business purposes. We consistently monitor our liquidity and financial position and take actions management believes are in the best interest of our Company and shareholders to ensure the long-term financial viability of our Company. Historically, we have realized positive cash flows from operating activities, which coupled with positive reserves of cash on hand, have been used to fund our operating expenses and obligations. We have not historically used, nor do we currently possess a credit facility or other institutional source of financing.
During the past two fiscal years we have experienced declining revenues as a result of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the businesses of our customers and the overall economy. In April and May 2020, PHCO, MMM and MMC received first draw PPP loans in the aggregate amount of $460,700. In the spirit of the PPP loan program policy of protecting the continued economic stability of employees, we put virtually all of the PPP loan amounts toward payroll and employee benefit expenses. In February 2021 PHCO, MMC, and MMM received full forgiveness of their first draw PPP loans including accrued interest. In April 2021 MMM received the second draw PPP loan in the amount of $218,900. The second draw PPP loan was also used to pay for qualifying expenses, such as payroll, group health benefits, rent and utilities. In December 2021 MMM received full forgiveness of the second draw PPP loan including accrued interest. In addition to availing the Company of the benefits of these government sponsored programs, we have also focused on reducing other operating expenses while maintaining our ability to provide the high-quality care to which our customers are accustomed. Since the outbreak of the pandemic in early 2020, we have realized a net reduction in our workforce of six employees. At the end of April 2022 the office lease on the business space we currently occupy will expire. We have moved towards operating remotely and have taken this opportunity to reduce our office rent expense. We are currently in the process of relocating to a smaller office. The office lease on this new space commenced on April 1, 2022. The operating costs for internet and phone at our offices will be less in the new office space. Some of those savings will be incorporated to enhance our IT security and new internet phone system.
Despite the fact that, net of the effects of PPP loan forgiveness, we have realized reduced revenues and lower net cash from operating activities, and the fact that we have incurred expense in transitioning our employees to remote work, we have continued to realize net income and net cash from operations and have increased our net cash position. Management currently believes that absent (i) any unanticipated further COVID-19 impact, (ii) a longer-term downturn in the general economy as a result of inflation and the sanctions, countermeasures and other actions in response to the Russia-Ukraine conflict, or (iii) the loss of several major customers within a condensed period, cash on hand and anticipated revenues from operations will be sufficient to cover our operating expenses for at least the next twelve months.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash on hand of $10,085,372 compared to $9,498,457 at December 31, 2020. The $586,915 increase in cash on hand was primarily the result of net cash provided by our operating and financing activities, partially offset by cash used in investing activities.
We currently have planned certain capital expenditures including moving our corporate offices to a new location and the decommissioning of certain IT systems, implementation of new internet phone services and a move to a new software platform. We do not anticipate these costs to be significant and have adequate capital on hand to cover these expenses. We do not anticipate these expenditures will require us to seek outside sources of funding.
We believe our strong cash position could allow us to identify and capitalize on potential opportunities to expand our business either through the acquisition of existing businesses that may have insufficient resources to overcome the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including accretion of existing business lines or expansion into new business lines and related industries, including, but not limited to, the insurance industry. We may also seek growth through organic development of new lines of business or expansion of existing offerings. Depending upon the nature of the opportunities we identify, such acquisitions or expansion could require greater capital resources than we currently possess. Should we need additional capital resources, we could seek to obtain such through debt and/or equity financing. We do not currently possess an institutional source of financing and there is no assurance that we could be successful in obtaining equity or debt financing when needed on favorable terms, or at all. We could also use shares of our capital stock as consideration for a business acquisition transaction, but there is also no assurance that there would be significant interest in our capital stock by a potential seller or the market.
As a result of the unique nature of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on our operations, the operations of our customers and the broader economy, coupled with uncertainty surrounding the potential impacts rising inflation and the Russia-Ukraine conflict could have, we cannot provide any assurance that the assumptions management has used to estimate our liquidity requirements will remain accurate in either the short-term or the longer-term. The ultimate duration and impact of these events on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows is dependent on future developments, which are our uncertain, largely beyond our control and cannot be predicted with any degree of certainty at this time. However, we expect that our results of operations, including revenues, in future periods will continue to be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and potentially by rising inflation and the Russia-Ukraine conflict and their negative effects on economic conditions.
Cash Flow
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash was primarily used to fund operations. We had net increases in cash of $586,915 and $1,394,293 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See below for additional, discussion and analysis of cash flow.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $386,391 and $987,441 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $601,050 in cash flow from operating activities was the result of realizing lower net income coupled with decreases in accounts receivable, bad debt provision, prepaid income tax, receivable - other, deferred taxes, accounts payable, income tax payable, and deferred rent expense, partially offset by increases in taxes receivable, deferred rent asset, prepaid expenses, accrued expenses, and unearned revenue.
Net cash used in investing activities was $18,376 and $53,848 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities was less by $35,472 in 2021 because of a decrease in purchases of computers, furniture and equipment.
In 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $218,900 from a second draw PPP loan issued to MMM compared to $460,700 of PPP loans issued to PHCO, MMC and MMM, respectively, in 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet financing arrangements.
Inflation
We experience pricing pressures in the form of competitive pricing. Insurance carriers and third-party administrators often try to take our customers by offering bundled claims administration services with their own managed care services at a lower rate. We are also impacted by rising costs for certain inflation-sensitive operating expenses such as labor and employee benefits and facility leases. We believe that these impacts can be material to our revenues or net income. Some of our customers are public entities which contract with us at a fixed price for the term of the contract. Increases in labor and employee benefits can reduce our profit margin over the term of these contracts. See also “Effects of inflation” of Item 1A Risk Factor of this annual report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principle generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). Application of these principles requires us to make estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. We continually evaluate our accounting policies, estimates, and judgments and base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the inherent uncertainty in making estimates and judgments, actual results could differ from our estimates and judgments. We consider (i) revenue recognition, (ii) leases, (iii) allowance for uncollectible accounts, and (iv) income taxes to be the most critical accounting policies because they relate to accounting areas that require the most subjective or complex judgments by us, and, as such, could be most subject to revision as new information becomes available.
Revenue Recognition: We recognize revenue when control of the promised services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be entitled to in exchange for those services. As we complete our performance obligations which are identified below, we have an unconditional right to consideration as outlined in our contracts with our customers. Generally, our accounts receivable are expected to be collected in 30 days in accordance with the underlying payment terms.
We offer multiple services under our managed care and network solutions service lines, which the customer may choose to purchase. These services are billed individually as separate components to our customers. Revenue is recognized as the work is performed in accordance with our customer contracts. Based upon the nature of our products, bundled managed care elements are generally delivered in the same accounting period. Advance payments from subscribers and billings made in advance are recorded on the balance sheet as deferred revenue.
Leases: We determine if an arrangement includes a lease at inception. Right-of-use assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term; and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date of the lease, renewal date of the lease or significant remodeling of the lease space based on the present value of the remaining future minimum lease payments. Leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets and short-term and long-term lease liabilities, as applicable.
Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are initially recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As a result, we utilize our incremental borrowing rate to discount lease payments, which reflects the fixed rate at which we could borrow on a collateralized basis the amount of the lease payments in the same currency, for a similar term, in a similar economic environment. Our leases may include options to extend or terminate the lease which are included in the lease term when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise any such options. Lease expense for lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts: We determine our allowance for uncollectible accounts by considering a number of factors, including the length of time trade accounts receivable are past due, our previous loss history, the customers’ current ability to pay its obligation to us, and the condition of the general economy and the industry as a whole. We write off accounts receivable when they become uncollectible.
We must make significant judgments and estimates in determining contractual and bad debt allowances in any accounting period. One significant uncertainty inherent in our analysis is whether our past experience will be indicative of future periods. Although we consider future projections when estimating contractual and bad debt allowances, we ultimately make our decisions based on the best information available to us at the time the decision is made. Adverse changes in general economic conditions or trends in reimbursement amounts for our services could affect our contractual and bad debt allowance estimates, collection of accounts receivable, cash flows, and results of operations. Three customers accounted for 10% or more of accounts receivable at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Accounting for Income Taxes: We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of our reported results of operations. The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance, if necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement.
Management believes it is more likely than not that forecasted income, including income that may be generated as a result of certain tax planning strategies, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event we determine all, or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, we will make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would be charged to earnings in the period such determination is made. In addition, the calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results. The significant assumptions and estimates described above are important contributors to our ultimate effective tax rate in each year.