Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For a complete understanding, this Management's Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes to the Financial Statements contained in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Revenues, Cost of Goods Sold, and Gross Profit
The table below presents information regarding revenues, cost of goods sold, and gross profit.
Total revenues increased by 23% which was primarily driven by improved customer demand associated with modest recoveries from the COVID-19 pandemic and associated macro industry challenges. The average oil price in 2021 was $68.14 per barrel compared to $39.16 per barrel in 2020, representing an increase of 74%. The 2021 weekly average of the onshore rig count for North America was 595, up 18% from a weekly average of 505 rigs in 2020. Although oil prices have recovered from the historic lows of 2020, which were caused by a flood of supply from Russia and Saudi Arabia and a dramatic drop in global demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the operating environment in 2021 continued to be characterized by uncertainty surrounding economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and geopolitical factors. This uncertainty continued to create strain in oil supply and demand dynamics. As a result of these extraordinary macro pressures and uncertainties, exploration and production companies remain cautious and have not invested in new production at the same pace as they did prior to the pandemic when oil prices were last at their current historic levels. Despite this ongoing challenges, we were able to increase revenue and business activity year over year.
Total cost of goods sold increased, in large part, due to the increase in revenues. As a percentage of revenue, cost of goods sold increased during 2021 due to changes in product mix and product related services as well as due to inflationary pressures for both direct and indirect costs. We continue to work with our suppliers in an effort to control our inventory costs and limit the impacts of inflation. As a result of these changes, total gross profit increased by $1,874,814 during 2021 compared to 2020, but as a percentage of revenues, total gross profit decreased due to factors described above.
Operating Expenses
The table below presents information on operating expenses:
General and administrative expenses increased by $892,374 or 8% during 2021 compared to 2020 but decreased as a percentage of revenue because we were able to keep the increase in fixed costs lower than the growth in revenues during the same period. The increase in 2021 was driven primarily by employee costs as we unwound some of the significant, but temporary, cost reduction measures implemented in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting oil market supply and demand dynamics. Increases also resulted from supply chain challenges and rising inflation.
Research and development expenses decreased by $179,023 or 14% during 2021 compared to 2020 and decreased slightly as a percentage of revenue. These decreases were largely a result of higher certification related costs and activities in the prior year. We continue to prioritize research and development projects to ensure that we remain a leader in technology and automation in the oil and gas industry. We intend to expand our research and development efforts during 2022 in order to further diversify and enhance our product offerings.
Depreciation and amortization expense (inclusive of amounts in COGS) increased by $91,925 or 8% in 2021 compared to 2020 due in part to the completion of our new Canada building in 2020 which increased depreciation after the building was finalized and placed in service. The increase in depreciation from our new building was recorded throughout all of 2021 but not for the full year in 2020, which explains why depreciation and amortization expense increased.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Management is committed to maintaining strong liquidity in an effort to be conservative and be able to respond quickly to changes in industry or economic conditions. The Company currently has no long-term debt, and does not have any immediate plans that would require long-term financing. While management believes sources of financing are available if needed, we cannot be certain that financing would be available to us on favorable terms, or at all. We currently do not expect any material changes to our capital resource mix during the next year.
We acquired land for a new office building and research and development facility in Canada in June of 2018. In the first quarter of 2020, we completed the construction of this new building in Acheson, Canada. Excluding the cost of the land, the total cost of the building was approximately $4,600,000 USD. We completed the sale of the old office building in Canada in January 2021 and received overall cash proceeds from the sale of $1,154,714 CAD.
The table below presents information on cash and investments:
The Company invests its available cash in investment grade securities. All of the investments either mature within one year or historically can be sold quickly in response to liquidity needs, if necessary.
The table below presents information regarding cash flows:
Our liquidity position is impacted by operating, investing and financing activities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $648,927 of positive cash flow from operating activities. Most of this was generated through cash operating activities excluding non-cash expenses. The various movements in working capital items offset one another to a small net increase in working capital during the year. The sizable increase in accounts receivable was offset by the decrease in inventory and the increase in accounts payable. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $817,503 of cash in investing activities, primarily due to liquid investment purchases, partially offset by cash proceeds from the sale of property and equipment. Investing activity trends consist of changes in the mix of our investment portfolio, purchases or sales of fixed assets, and acquisition activities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $836,139 of cash in financing activities,
primarily related to the purchase of treasury stock. Financing activity trends consist of transactions related to equity awards and purchases or sales of treasury stock.
The global COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact our business in 2021 and as a result, we have remained focused on reinvesting in and building back our corporate structure as we continue to navigate the uncertainty caused by the pandemic and the resulting oil market supply and demand imbalance. The extent to which the global COVID-19 pandemic will continue to affect our liquidity position will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. As of December 31, 2021, we hold $17,461,762 of cash and investments that form our core excess liquidity which could be utilized, if required, due to the issues described above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, nor do we plan to engage in any in the foreseeable future.