ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We provide technology-enabled audit, recovery, and analytics services in the United States with a focus in the healthcare industry. We work with healthcare payers through claims auditing and eligibility-based (also known as coordination-of-benefits) services to identify improper payments. We engage clients in both government and commercial markets. We also have a call center which serves clients with complex consumer engagement needs. Our clients typically operate in complex and highly regulated environments and contract for their payment integrity needs in order to reduce losses on improper healthcare payments.
We historically worked in recovery markets such as defaulted student loans, federal treasury and state tax receivables, and commercial recovery. However, with the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic which commenced in 2020, and the Department of Education’s decision to continue to pause student loan recovery work through 2021, we sold certain of our non-healthcare recovery contracts, and we did not renew or restart existing recovery contracts, nor pursue new non-healthcare recovery opportunities.
Our revenue model is generally success-based as we earn fees on the aggregate correct audits and/or amount of funds that we enable our clients to recover. Our services do not require significant upfront investments by our clients and we offer our clients the opportunity to recover significant funds otherwise lost. Because our model is based upon the success of our efforts, our business objectives are aligned with those of our clients and we are generally not reliant on their spending budgets.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
We continue to face uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as its impact on the U.S. economy, the ongoing business operations of our clients, and the results of our operations and financial condition. While our management team continues to actively monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and may take further actions to our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and clients, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities, the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2022 and beyond cannot be estimated at this point.
The following discussions are subject to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our ongoing business operations.
Sources of Revenues
We derive our revenues from services for clients in a variety of different markets. These markets include our two largest markets, healthcare and recovery, as well as our other markets which include but are not limited to outsourced call center services, delinquent state and federal taxes and federal treasury and other receivables.
(1)Represents student lending, state and municipal tax authorities, IRS, Department of the Treasury, and Premiere Credit of North America.
Healthcare
We derive revenues from both commercial and government clients by providing healthcare payment integrity services, which include claims-based and eligibility-based services. Revenues earned under claims-based contracts in the healthcare market are driven by auditing, identifying, and sometimes recovering improperly paid claims through both automated and manual review of such claims. Eligibility-based services, which may also be referred to as coordination-of-benefits, involve identifying and recovering payments in situations where our client should not be the primary payer of healthcare claims because a member has other forms of insurance coverage. We are paid contingency fees by our clients based on a percentage of the dollar amount of improper claims recovered as a result of our efforts. The revenues we recognize are net of our estimate of claims that we believe will be overturned by appeal or disputed following payment by the provider.
For our healthcare business, our business strategy is focused on utilizing our technology-enabled services platform to provide claims-based, eligibility-based, and analytical services for healthcare payers. Revenues from our healthcare services were $77.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to revenues of $68.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In 2017, we were awarded the Medicare Secondary Payer Commercial Payment Center (MSP) contract by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). Under this agreement, we are responsible for coordination-of-benefits, which includes identifying and recovering payments in situations where Medicare should not be the primary payer of healthcare claims because a beneficiary has other forms of insurance coverage, such as through an employer group health plan or certain other payers.
In 2016, CMS awarded two new Medicare Recovery Audit Contractor (RAC) contracts to us, for audit Regions 1 and 5. The RAC contract award for Region 1 allows us to continue our audit of payments under Medicare’s Part A and Part B for all provider types other than Durable Medical Equipment, Prosthetics, Orthotics and Supplies (DMEPOS) and home health and hospice within an 11 state region in the Northeast and Midwest. The Region 5 RAC contract provides for the post-payment review of DMEPOS and home health and hospice claims nationally.
In March 2021, CMS re-awarded the Region 1 RAC contract to us after a competitive procurement process. The renewed contract has an eight and a half year term.
Many of our healthcare clients are expanding the scope of services that we provide, and during 2021, we continued to renew contracts with several of our healthcare customers by way of competitive contract procurement. We believe this growth trend will continue as our suite of payment integrity services and our customer relationships continue to mature. We currently anticipate that our healthcare revenues will drive the majority of our overall company revenue growth.
Healthcare providers have the right to appeal a claim and may pursue additional appeals if the initial appeal is found in favor of the healthcare insurer. Our total estimated liability for appeals was approximately $1.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020, respectively. This represents our best estimate of the amount probable of being refunded to our healthcare clients following successful appeals of claims for which commissions were previously collected.
Recovery
Historically, the recovery market revenues contributed a majority of our revenues. However, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on our recovery revenues. On March 29, 2021, we announced that we will continue to fulfill our current recovery contracts, but we do not plan to renew or restart existing contracts, nor pursue new non-healthcare recovery opportunities.
Recovery market revenues were derived from student lending, Internal Revenue Services (IRS), state and municipal tax authorities, the Department of the Treasury, and Premiere Credit of North America. Commencing in 2022, we do not anticipate generating significant revenues from these non-healthcare recovery markets.
Customer Care / Outsourced Services
We derive revenues from first party call center and other outsourced services for certain clients and the licensing of hosted technology solutions to certain clients. Our revenues for these services include contingency fees and fees based on dedicated headcount to our clients.
Costs and Expenses
We generally report two categories of operating expenses: salaries and benefits and other operating expense. Salaries and benefits expenses consist primarily of salaries and performance incentives paid and benefits provided to our employees. Other operating expenses include expenses related to our use of subcontractors, other production related expenses, including costs associated with data processing, retrieval of medical records, printing and mailing services, amortization and other outside services, as well as general corporate and administrative expenses.
Factors Affecting Our Operating Results
Our results of operations are influenced by a number of factors, including costs associated with commencing new contracts, claim recovery volume, contingency fees, regulatory matters, client contract cancellation and macroeconomic factors.
Costs Associated with Commencing New Client Contracts
When we obtain an engagement with a new client or a new contract with an existing client, it typically takes a long period of time to plan our services in detail, which includes integrating our technology, processes and resources with the client’s operations and hiring new employees, before we receive any revenues from the new client or new contract. Our clients may also experience delays in obtaining approvals or managing protests from unsuccessful bidders, delays associated with system implementations, as we had experienced with the implementation of our first RAC contracts with CMS. If we are not able to pay the upfront expenses out of cash from operations or availability of borrowings under our lending arrangements, we may scale back our operations or alter our business plans, either of which could prevent of us from earning future revenues under any such new client or new contract engagements.
Claim Recovery Volume
Our claims-based audit business reflects the scale of claims which are deemed permissible to audit by certain of our healthcare clients. Non-permissible claims may result from client product lines which are determined by our clients to be out of scope of our audit services, claims related to excluded providers or excluded provider groups, changes in policy, or other factors such as geographies disrupted by natural disasters or a global pandemic like the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on overall hospital utilization rates in the United States. This negative impact on overall hospital utilization rates has caused delays with the healthcare industry as a whole, which in turn has had a negative impact on our healthcare business.
Claims volume provided by our healthcare clients also impact our eligibility-based services. To the extent claims volume is impacted by any of the factors above, it may result in an adverse effect on our revenues and results of operations.
Contingency Fees
Our revenues consist primarily of contract-based contingency fees. The contingency fee percentages that we earn are set by our clients or agreed upon during the bid process and may change from time to time either under the terms of existing contracts or pursuant to the terms of contract renewals. Changes in contingency fee percentages set by our clients may have a material effect on our revenues and results of operations.
Regulatory Matters
Each of the markets which we serve is highly regulated. Accordingly, changes in regulations that affect the types of receivables and claims that we are able to service or the manner in which any such receivables and claims can be recovered will affect our revenues and results of operations.
For example, in March 2020, CMS paused medical review activities under our two RAC contracts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which were later resumed in August 2020. This had a negative impact on both our 2020 and 2021 healthcare revenues.
In addition, our entry into the healthcare market was facilitated by the passage of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006, which mandated CMS to contract with private firms to audit Medicare claims in an effort to increase the recovery of improper Medicare payments. Any changes to the regulations that affect the Medicare program or the audit and recovery of Medicare claims could have a significant impact on our revenues and results of operations.
Client Contract Cancellation
Substantially all of our contracts entitle our clients to unilaterally terminate their contractual relationship with us at any time without penalty. Our revenues could decline if we lose one or more of our significant clients, or if one of our significant clients decides to limit the amount of claims that we are allowed to audit or if the terms of compensation for our services change or if there is a reduction in the level of placements provided by any of these clients. Further, our revenues could be adversely affected if one of our significant clients is acquired by an entity that does not wish to continue use our services.
Macroeconomic Factors
Certain macroeconomic factors influence our business and results of operations. For example, the growth in Medicare expenditures or claims made to private healthcare providers resulting from changes in healthcare costs or the healthcare industry taken as a whole, as well as the fiscal budget tightening of federal, state and local governments as a result of general economic weakness and lower tax revenues.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could have reasonably used different accounting estimates, and in other instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period-to-period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues primarily from providing healthcare audit and eligibility services. Revenues are recognized upon completion of these services for our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, the performance obligations are satisfied
We account for a contract when it has approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable.
Our contracts generally contain a single performance obligation, delivered over time as a series of services that are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer to a client, as the promise to transfer the individual services is not separately identifiable from other promises in the contracts and, therefore, not distinct.
Our contracts are composed primarily of variable consideration. Fees earned under our healthcare and recovery service contracts consist primarily of contingency fees based on a specified percentage of the amount we enable our clients to recover. The contingency fee percentage for a particular recovery depends on the type of recovery or claim facilitated.
We generally either apply the as-invoiced practical expedient, where our right to consideration corresponds directly to our right to invoice our clients, or the variable consideration allocation exception, where the variable consideration is attributable to one or more, but not all, of the services promised in a series of distinct services that form part of a single performance obligation. As such, we have elected the optional exemptions related to the as-invoiced practical expedient and the variable consideration allocation exception, whereby the disclosure of the amount of transaction price allocated to the remaining performance obligations is not required.
We estimate variable consideration only if we can reasonably measure our progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation using an output method based on reliable information, and recognize such revenue over the performance period only if it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Any change made to the measure of progress toward complete satisfaction of our performance obligation is recorded as a change in estimate. We exercise judgment to estimate the amount of constraint on variable consideration based on the facts and circumstances of the relevant contract operations and availability and reliability of data. Although we believe the estimates made are reasonable and appropriate, different assumptions and estimates could materially impact the amount of variable consideration recognized.
For contracts that contain a refund right, these amounts are considered variable consideration, and we estimate our refund liability for each claim, as needed, and recognize revenue net of such estimate.
Under certain contracts, consideration can include periodic performance-based bonuses which can be awarded based on our performance under the specific contract. These performance-based awards are considered variable and may be constrained by us until there is not a risk of a material reversal.
We have applied the as-invoiced practical expedient and the variable consideration allocation exception to contracts with performance obligations that have an average remaining duration of less than a year.
Healthcare providers of our clients have the right to appeal claims audit findings and may pursue additional appeals if the initial appeal is found in favor of healthcare clients. For eligibility, or COB contracts, insurance companies or other responsible parties may dispute our findings regarding our clients not being the primary payer of healthcare claims. Total estimated liability for appeals and disputes was $1.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and $1.0 million as of December 31, 2020. This represents our best estimate of the amount probable of being refunded to our healthcare clients as a result of appeals relating to our audit findings.
We have determined that we do not have any material costs or expenses related to obtaining or fulfilling a contract that are recoverable and as such, these costs are expensed as incurred.
Contract assets were $8.1 million and $4.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Contract assets relate to our right to consideration for services completed during the respective years, but not invoiced at the reporting date, and receipt of payment is conditional upon factors other than the passage of time. Contract assets primarily consist of commissions that we estimate we have earned from completed claims audit findings submitted to our healthcare clients. The increase in contract assets resulted from additional consideration earned for services provided to our healthcare clients during 2021 and an update in the measure of progress under a certain contract, offset by invoiced amounts.
Contract assets are recorded to accounts receivable when our right to payment becomes unconditional, which is generally when third-party healthcare providers have paid our clients. There was no impairment loss related to contract assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We had contract liabilities of $0.6 million and $0.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our contract liabilities for these periods related to certain reimbursable costs due to a client in 2021 and an advance healthcare commission payment received from a customer in 2020 for which we recognized revenue as services were delivered in 2021.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table represents our historical operating results for the periods presented:
Revenues
Total revenues were $124.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $31.5 million or 20%, compared to total revenues of $155.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Healthcare revenues were $77.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $8.9 million, or 13%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Healthcare revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in claims-based services during 2021.
Recovery revenues were $33.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an decrease of $40.0 million, or 54%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic that caused many of our customers to pause work on our recovery contracts and our decision to sell certain of our recovery contracts and to not renew or extend our other existing recovery contracts during the course of 2021.
Customer Care / Outsourced Services revenues were $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing a decrease of $0.5 million, or 3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to reduced demand for our services as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Salaries and Benefits
Salaries and benefits expense was $87.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $13.2 million, or 13%, compared to salaries and benefits expense of $100.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in salaries and benefits expense was primarily driven by lower headcount in our recovery business, which was partially offset by increases to headcount in our healthcare business, and increased severance costs related to reductions of employees servicing our recovery contracts as a result of our decision to sell certain of our non-healthcare recovery contracts and to not renew or extend our other existing recovery contracts.
Other Operating Expense
Other operating expense was $38.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $4.0 million, or 9%, compared to other operating expense of $42.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other operating expenses was primarily due to lower activity levels resulting from the pause or termination of recovery services that we provided during 2021, partially offset by an increase in consulting fees.
Impairment of Goodwill
Impairment of goodwill was $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $27.0 million, compared to $27.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The impairment of goodwill recognized in 2020 were non-cash charges resulting primarily from the decrease in our stock price and associated market capitalization.
Loss from Operations
As a result of the factors described above, loss from operations was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to loss from operations of $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease in the loss from operations of $12.6 million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 57%. Interest expense increased primarily due to higher amortization of debt issuance costs and a $3.4 million loss on extinguishment of debt and a $3.4 million loss on extinguishment of debt as a result of the execution of Amendment No. 5 in May 2021 and then the full repayment in December 2021 of our prior lending arrangement, partially offset by lower principal balances.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an income tax benefit of $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our effective income tax rate decreased to (1)% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 34% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the effective tax rate is primarily driven by the change in certain tax components that were applicable in 2020 and not 2021, which included a change in valuation allowance, nondeductible goodwill impairment, and net operating loss (NOL) carryback benefit recorded as a result of the newly enacted provisions of the CARES Act in 2020.
Net Loss
As a result of the factors described above, net loss was $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which represents a decrease in net loss of $3.7 million compared to net loss of $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, and cash and cash equivalents on hand. Cash and cash equivalents, which includes restricted cash and consists primarily of cash on deposit with banks, totaled $19.6 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $18.3 million as of December 31, 2020. The $1.3 million increase in the balance of our cash and cash equivalents from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, was primarily due to $0.9 million provided by operating activities and $0.6 million provided by financing activities, offset by $0.3 million used in investing activities. We have a $15.0 million revolving loan commitment in the Credit Agreement signed with MUFG Union Bank, N.A on December 17, 2021, which was undrawn as of December 31, 2021.
Our ability to fund our business plans, capital expenditures and to fund our other liquidity needs depends on our financial and operating performance, which is subject to prevailing economic and competitive conditions and to certain financial, business and other factors beyond our control, and the availability of borrowings under our existing lending facility. Our current financial projections show that we expect to be able to maintain a level of cash flows from operating activities sufficient to permit us to fund our ongoing and planned business operations and to fund our other liquidity needs. If, however, we are required to obtain additional borrowings to fund our ongoing or future business operations, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining such additional borrowings or upon terms that are acceptable to us.
The COVID-19 pandemic led certain of our customers to delay the recovery and audit services that we provide as a result of the economic hardships that were faced by a large portion of the population. For example, pursuant to the terms of the CARES Act enacted in March 2020, the U.S. Federal government suspended payments, ceased accruing interest, and stopped involuntary collections of payments (e.g., wage garnishments) for student loans owned by the Department of Education through September 30, 2020, which was most recently extended through April 30, 2022.
A pause by any of our clients as a result of the continued effects of the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely affect our financial condition and the achievement of our strategic objectives. Conditions in the financial and credit markets may also limit the availability of funding or increase the cost of funding, which could adversely affect our business, financial position and results of operations.
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations cannot be fully estimated at this point and the speed of economic recovery in the markets we serve is highly uncertain. While we currently believe our financial projections are attainable, considering the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, there can be no assurances that our financial results will be recognized in a time frame necessary to meet our ongoing cash requirements. If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient to fund our planned business operations or to fund our other liquidity needs, we may need to reduce or delay capital expenditures, alter our business plans, curtail the services we provide to our current or future clients, execute additional reductions in workforce (both through furloughs and layoffs), sell assets or operations, seek additional capital, restructure or refinance our indebtedness, any of which could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Our Credit Agreement contains, and any agreements to refinance our debt likely will contain, certain financial covenants, including the maintenance of minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and total debt to EBITDA ratio, as well as restrictive covenants that require us to limit our ability to incur additional debt, including to finance future operations or other capital needs, and to engage in other activities that we may believe are in our long-term best interests, including to dispose of or acquire assets. After considering a variety of potential effects the COVID-19 pandemic could have on our revenues and results of operations, as well as the actions we have already taken and other options available to us, we currently believe we will be in compliance with our covenants for the remainder of the term of the Credit Agreement. If conditions change in the future due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or for other reasons and we expect to be out of compliance as a result, we will likely seek waivers from our lender prior to any covenant violation. Any covenant waiver may lead to increased costs, increased interest rates, additional restrictive covenants and other available lender protections that would be applicable. There can be no assurance that we would be able to obtain any such waivers in a timely manner, or on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to comply with these financial covenants or the restrictive covenants may result in an event of default, which, if not cured or waived, could accelerate the maturity of our indebtedness or result in modifications to our credit terms. If our indebtedness is accelerated, we may not have sufficient cash resources to satisfy our debt obligations and we may not be able to continue our operations as planned.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash provided by operating activities was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and was primarily a result of reductions in trade accounts receivable and income tax receivable, and changes in other operating assets and liabilities, offset by an increase in contract assets.
Operating activities provided by $20.8 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020. This included a net loss of $14.0 million in 2020, which was impacted by a non-cash goodwill impairment charge of $27.0 million. Excluding the non-cash impairment charge, net income in 2020 would have been $13.3 million. The remaining factors contributing to the change were due to favorable movements in working capital balance sheet accounts.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in investing activities of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to proceeds from the sale of certain recovery contracts, offset by cash used in capital expenditures related to information technology software, data storage, hardware, telecommunication systems, and security enhancements to our information technology systems.
Investing activities resulted in cash outflow of $3.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and was used primarily for capital expenditures related to information technology, data storage, hardware, and security enhancements to our information technology systems.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to $42.6 million of proceeds from our public offering, net of costs and $20.0 million of borrowings from notes payable, offset by $60.9 million in repayments of notes payable.
Cash used in financing activities of $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $3.5 million in repayments of notes payable.
Restricted Cash
As of December 31, 2021, restricted cash included in current assets on our consolidated balance sheet was $2.2 million. Restricted cash is held in certificates of deposit as collateral for letters of credit issued by a bank on our behalf.
Notes Payable
On December 17, 2021, we entered into a credit agreement with MUFG Union Bank, N.A. (the Credit Agreement). The Credit Agreement includes a $20 million term loan commitment, which was fully advanced at closing and a $15 million revolving loan commitment, which was undrawn as of December 31, 2021. A portion of the revolving loan commitment of up to $2.5 million is available for the issuance of letters of credit. Subject to certain customary exceptions, the obligations under the Credit Agreement are, or will be, guaranteed by each of our existing and future, direct or indirect, domestic subsidiaries. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by liens on substantially all of our assets and each of our domestic subsidiaries that are guarantors under the Credit Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, $20.0 million was outstanding under the Credit Agreement. The Company’s annual interest rate at December 31, 2021 was 5.6%.
The Credit Agreement matures on December 17, 2026. The proceeds from the term loan under the Credit Agreement were used, together with cash on hand, to refinance its credit agreement dated as of August 17, 2017, with ECMC Group, Inc. (as amended, the Prior Credit Agreement), and to pay fees and expenses in connection with the Credit Agreement.
Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, we are required to repay the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the term loan under the Credit Agreement in quarterly installments commencing March 31, 2022 in an amount that would result in amortization of (a) 2.5% of the term loan principal in the first full year following commencement of amortization, (b) 5.0% of the term loan principal in the second full year following commencement of amortization, (c) 7.5% of the term loan principal in each of the third and fourth full years following commencement of amortization, and (d) 10% of the term loan principal in the fifth full year (or portion thereof) following commencement of amortization. In addition, we must make mandatory prepayments of the term loan principal under the Credit Agreement with the net cash proceeds received in connection with certain specified events, including certain asset sales, casualty and condemnation events (subject to customary reinvestment rights). Any remaining outstanding principal balance of the term loan under the Credit Agreement is repayable on the maturity date. Amounts repaid or prepaid with respect to the term loan under the Credit Agreement cannot be reborrowed.
We may, at our option, prepay any revolving loan borrowings under the Credit Agreement, in whole or in part, at any time and from time to time without premium or penalty (except in certain circumstances). Borrowings of revolving loans under the Credit Agreement are also subject to mandatory prepayment in the event that outstanding borrowings and letter of credit usage exceed aggregate revolving loan commitments then in effect.
Under the Credit Agreement, loans generally may bear interest based on term SOFR (the secured overnight financing right) or an annual base rate, as applicable, plus an applicable margin based on our leverage ratio each quarter that may range between 2.50% per annum and 3.00% per annum, in the case of term SOFR loans and between 1.50% per annum and 2.00% per annum in the case of base rate loans. In addition, a commitment fee based on unused availability of the revolving credit facility is also payable which may vary from 0.30% per annum to 0.40% per annum, also based on our leverage ratio.
The Credit Agreement contains certain customary representations, warranties, and affirmative and negative covenants by us and our subsidiaries that restrict the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to take certain actions, including, incurrence of indebtedness, creation of liens, making certain investments, mergers or consolidations, dispositions of assets, assignments, sales or transfers of equity in subsidiaries, repurchase or redemption of capital stock, entering into certain transactions with affiliates, or changing the nature of the Company’s business. The Credit Agreement also contains two financial covenants, which require us to maintain, as of the last day of each fiscal quarter commencing with March 31, 2022, (a) a total leverage ratio of not greater than (i) 3.00 to 1.00 through September 30, 2022 and (ii) 2.50 to 1.00 thereafter and (b) a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.20 to 1.00. The obligations under the Credit Agreement may be accelerated or the commitments terminated upon the occurrence of events of default under the Credit Agreement, which include payment defaults, defaults in the performance of affirmative and negative covenants, the inaccuracy of representations or warranties, bankruptcy and insolvency related defaults, cross defaults to other material indebtedness, defaults arising in connection with changes in control, and other customary events of default.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we have disclosed in the table below and within this report adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss), both of which are non-GAAP financial measures. We have provided a reconciliation below of adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) and adjusted net income (loss) to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure to these non-GAAP financial measures.
We have included adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) in this report because they are key measures used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to prepare and approve our annual budget. Accordingly, we believe that adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) provide useful information to investors and analysts in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
Our use of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense on our indebtedness;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments;
•adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) do not reflect the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation;
•adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) do not reflect the impact of certain non-operating expenses resulting from matters we do not consider to be indicative of our core operating performance; and
•other companies may calculate adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) differently than we do, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) alongside other financial performance measures, including net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
The following tables present a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA and adjusted net income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 to actual net income (loss) for these periods:
(1)Represents interest expense and amortization of debt issuance costs related to our Credit Agreement.
(2)Represents amortization of intangibles related to the acquisition of Performant by an affiliate of Parthenon Capital Partners in 2004.
(3)Represents amortization of debt issuance costs related to our Credit Agreement.
(4)Represents a non-cash goodwill impairment charge in 2020 mainly due to the decrease of our market capitalization in the first half of 2020.
(5)Represents the change from prior reporting periods in the fair value of the potential earnout consideration payable to ECMC group in connection with the Premiere acquisition.
(6)Represents severance expenses incurred in connection with a reduction in force for our non-healthcare recovery services.
(7)Represents professional fees related to strategic corporate development activities.
(8)Represents gain on the sale of certain non-healthcare recovery contracts in 2021.
(9)Represents tax adjustments assuming a marginal tax rate of 27.5% at full profitability.
(10)While net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13,989, the computation of adjusted net income (loss) results in adjusted net income of $8,469. Therefore, the calculation of the adjusted earnings per diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes dilutive common share equivalents of 44 added to the basic weighted average shares of 54,414. Similarly, the calculation of the adjusted earnings per diluted share for the three months ended December 31, 2020 includes dilutive common share equivalents of 1,452 added to the basic weighted average shares of 54,754.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See "New Accounting Pronouncements" in Note 1(s) of the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV - Item 15 of this report.