Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We believe the following discussion and analysis provides information that is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis will help you understand:
•Key events during 2021;
•Our results of operations for 2021, as well as certain projections for the future;
•Our liquidity and capital resources;
•The impact of recently issued accounting standards on our financial statements; and
•Our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Key Events
On July 2, 2021, the Company entered into a definitive agreement to sell our LiveArea operating segment for approximately $250.0 million in cash, subject to certain adjustments and customary closing conditions including receipt of regulatory approvals (the "LiveArea Transaction"). The LiveArea Transaction closed on August 25, 2021 (the "LiveArea Transaction Date"). As of June 30, 2021, the criteria for reporting LiveArea as a discontinued operation were met and, as such, all periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been recast to present LiveArea as a discontinued operation. Unless otherwise specified, the financial information and discussion in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on our continuing operations (i.e., PFS Operations) and exclude any results of our discontinued operations (i.e., LiveArea).
The LiveArea Transaction generated gross proceeds of approximately $250.0 million in cash, resulting in a pre-tax gain of $200.8 million. The Company incurred approximately $15 million in cash-based transaction related costs during 2021 and used proceeds of approximately $35 million to make estimated income tax payments related to the LiveArea Transaction, of which approximately $30 million was paid during the December 2021 quarter.
In completing the discontinued operations presentation, certain LiveArea revenues, costs of fees and gross profit related to client contracts that were not fully transferred to contracts directly operating under the LiveArea operating entities as of
the August 2021 transaction date were maintained by PFSweb as part of the continuing operations presentation. As of the LiveArea Transaction Date, future activities of certain contracts where we have subcontracted services to LiveArea are expected to be recorded as pass-through revenue and pass-through costs, for as long as such contracts continue to be maintained directly through PFSweb. Additionally, certain costs previously reported as LiveArea selling, general and administrative costs in prior segment reporting have been reallocated to continuing operations costs, if such rights and obligations were not transferred as part of the LiveArea Transaction, and certain costs previously reported as unallocated corporate expenses have been reported as discontinued operations if such costs were related to rights and obligations that were transferred as part of the LiveArea Transaction. As such, the historical continuing operations presentation included herein reflects the historical PFS Operations segment and certain components of the LiveArea business which will not be reflected in a similar manner going forward.
Overview
PFS is a premier eCommerce order fulfillment provider for consumer branded manufacturers, internet retailers, and distributors, bringing together technologies, systems and people to create exceptional post-click customer experiences that drive revenue and maximize the impact of its clients’ brands. PFS provides services to support or improve the physical, post-click experience, such as logistics and fulfillment, customer care, and order-to-cash services including distributed order orchestration and payment services. We offer our services on an à la carte basis or as a bundled solution. In addition to services, PFS provides technology enablement products from client owned/operated locations to facilitate multi-node, omnichannel and in-store retail commerce. Our clients turn to us to optimize their customer experiences and enhance their traditional and online business channels.
Service Fee Model. We refer to our standard seller services financial model as the Service Fee model. In this model, our clients own the inventory, are the merchants of record, and engage us to provide various infrastructure, technology and digital agency services in support of their business operations. We offer our services as an end-to-end solution, which enables our clients to outsource their complete eCommerce needs to a single source and focus on their core competencies, though clients are also able to select individual or groupings of our various service offerings on an à la carte basis.
We currently provide services to clients that operate in a range of vertical markets across DTC and B2B. These industries include health, fragrance and beauty products, cosmetics, fashion apparel and accessories, footwear, luxury goods, consumer packaged goods, coins and collectibles, jewelry, housewares, computer and office products, among others. In the Service Fee model, we typically charge for our services on a time and material basis, a cost-plus basis, a percent of shipped revenue basis, project or retainer basis for our professional services or a per transaction basis, such as a per labor hour basis for web-enabled customer contact center services and a per-item basis for fulfillment services. Additional fees are billed for other services. We price our services based on a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, our labor costs, the depth and complexity of the services provided, the amount of capital expenditures or systems customization required, order volume, geography served and the length of contract.
Many of our service fee contracts involve third-party vendors who provide additional services, such as package delivery. The costs we are charged by these third-party vendors for these services are often passed on to our clients. Our billings for reimbursements of these costs and other ‘out-of-pocket’ expenses include shipping and handling costs, telecommunication charges and travel and are included in pass-through revenue.
Agent (Flash) Model. As an additional service, we offer the Agent, or Flash, financial model, in which our clients maintain ownership of the product inventory stored at our locations as in the Service Fee model. When a customer orders the product from our clients, a “flash” sale transaction passes product ownership to us for each order and we in turn immediately re-sell the product to the customer. The “flash” ownership exchange establishes us as the merchant of record, which enables us to use our existing merchant infrastructure to process sales to end customers, removing the need for the clients to establish these business processes internally, but permitting them to control the sales process to end customers. In this model, based on the terms of our current client arrangements, we record product revenue net of cost of product revenue as a component of service fee revenue in our consolidated statement of operations.
Retail Model. We also provide a Retail model which allows us to purchase inventory from the client. We place the initial and replenishment purchase orders with the client and take ownership of the product either upon shipment to or delivery to our facility. In this model, depending on the terms of our client arrangements, we may own the inventory and the accounts receivable arising from our product sales. Under the Retail model, depending upon the product category and sales characteristics, we may require the client to provide product price protection as well as product purchase payment terms, right of return, and obsolescence protection appropriate to the product sales profile. Depending on the terms of our client arrangements in the Retail model, we record in our consolidated statement of operations either: 1) product revenue as a component of product revenue, or 2) product revenue net of cost of product revenue as a component of service fee revenue. In general, we seek to structure client
relationships in our Retail model under the net revenue approach to more closely align with our service fee revenue financial presentation and mitigate inventory ownership risk, although we have one client still operating under the gross revenue approach. Freight costs billed to customers are reflected as components of product revenue. This business model generally requires significant working capital, for which we have credit available either through credit terms provided by our clients or under senior credit facilities.
Currently, we are targeting growth within our Retail model through relationships with clients under which we can record service fee revenue in our consolidated statement of operations. These relationships are often driven by the sales and marketing efforts of the manufacturers, retailers, and third-party sales partners. In addition, as a result of certain operational restructuring of its business, our primary client relationship operating in the Retail model, Ricoh, has implemented, and will continue to implement, certain changes in the sale and distribution of Ricoh products. The changes have resulted, and are expected to continue to result, in reduced product revenues and profitability under our Retail model.
Pass-through revenue - Revenues earned related to freight distribution services provided by the Company and are fully offset by the cost of pass-through revenues as described below.
Growth is a key element to achieving our future goals, including achieving and maintaining sustainable profitability. Growth in our company is driven by two main elements: new client relationships and organic growth from existing clients. We primarily focus our sales efforts on larger contracts with brand-name companies within four primary target markets, health and beauty, home goods and collectibles, fashion, and consumer packaged goods. We focus our sales efforts on both new clients and also on existing clients where we believe opportunity exists to expand a client relationship to include additional services and/or services across multiple geographies. We continue to monitor and control our costs to focus on profitability. While we are targeting our new service fee contracts to yield incremental gross profit, we also expect to incur incremental investments in technology development, operational and support management and sales and marketing expenses to help generate growth.
Our expenses comprise primarily four categories: 1) cost of service fee revenue, 2) cost of product revenue, 3) cost of pass-through revenue and 4) selling, general and administrative expenses.
Cost of service fee revenue - consists primarily of compensation and related expenses for our web-enabled customer contact center services, international fulfillment and distribution services and professional services, and other fixed and variable expenses directly related to providing services under the terms of fee based contracts, including certain occupancy and information technology costs and depreciation and amortization expenses.
Cost of product revenue - consists of the purchase price of product sold and freight costs, which are reduced by certain reimbursable expenses. These reimbursable expenses include pass-through customer marketing programs, direct costs incurred in passing on any price decreases offered by vendors to cover price protection and certain special bids, the cost of products provided to replace defective product returned by customers and certain other expenses as defined under the distributor agreements.
Cost of pass-through revenue - the related reimbursable costs for pass-through expenditures are reflected as cost of pass-through revenue.
Selling, General and Administrative expenses - consists of expenses such as compensation and related expenses for sales and marketing staff, distribution costs (excluding freight) applicable to certain Retail Model engagements, executive, management and administrative personnel and other overhead costs, including certain occupancy and information technology costs, certain depreciation and amortization expenses and restructuring and other costs.
Monitoring and controlling our available cash balances and our expenses continues to be a primary focus. Our cash and liquidity positions are important components of our financing of both current operations and our targeted growth.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (and any variants thereof) on all aspects of our business. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our results of operations to date, the future impacts of the pandemic and any continuing and/or additional future economic impacts are still uncertain, especially with as the pandemic continues. We have experienced labor rate increases in certain of our markets for fulfillment activities and labor shortages in all markets. We believe this will continue and that this could impact our overall fulfillment related costs and staffing. In the interim, we are leveraging our multi-node network and distributing work to our centers with more available labor and/or lower costs, implementing certain productivity enhancements, working together with our clients to reduce costs, and offsetting the cost increases with price increases where necessary.
We have taken a number of precautionary measures designed to help minimize the risk of the spread of the virus to our employees and adjusted our operations wherever necessary to help ensure a safe environment for our staff across business functions. As a result of the impact of COVID-19, many businesses continue to experience short-term or long-term liquidity issues. Based on our current expectations, we believe we have the appropriate financial structure in place to support our own business operations through the pandemic. However, we do expect potential risk from the viability of clients and their ability to make payments on time. We have and will continue to closely monitor our clients’ financial results, payment patterns and business updates in an effort to minimize any potential credit risk impact.
While many of the related restrictions have been lifted, we have also seen a resurgence of the virus (including new variants) in many geographic regions, which could have a negative impact on our business and adversely affect the Company’s results of operations, cash flows and financial position as well as that of our clients.
We incurred additional costs related to the enhanced cleaning regimen implemented in our facilities and purchases of personal protective equipment ("PPE") for employees. However, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the increased costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, excluding hourly wage rate related labor cost increases, were not material. We will continue to monitor these for potential impacts to future cash flow.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our operations to date, the extent and duration of future impacts of the pandemic (including any variants of COVID-19) and any resulting economic impact on our business are largely unknown and difficult to predict.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act was enacted and signed into law. The Company has made use of the allowance granted under section 2302 of the CARES Act, which permits employers to forgo timely payment of the employer portions of Social Security and RRTA taxes that would otherwise be due from March 27 through December 31, 2020, without penalty or interest charges. We have elected this option and it has resulted in deferred payments totaling $3.7 million in calendar year 2020, of which half was due and paid in December 2021 with the remainder to be paid in December 2022. Similarly, the UK and Belgium governments had granted businesses the option to defer the payment of certain value-added tax ("VAT") amounts. We elected to take advantage of the options available to us but the effects were immaterial and all amounts were fully paid as of December 31, 2021.
Operating Results
The following table discloses certain financial information for the periods presented, expressed in terms of dollars, dollar change, percentage change and as a percentage of total revenues (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Represents the measure as a percentage of Service fee revenue.
(2)Represents the measure as a percentage of Product revenue, net.
(3)Represents the measure as a percentage of Pass-through revenue.
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $4.4 million compared with the prior year. Service fee revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $7.5 million compared to the prior year primarily due to (1) new client activity, (2) expansion of existing client relationships, and (3) fulfillment volumes during the three months ended March 31, 2021 being much higher than the pre-pandemic fulfillment volumes in the corresponding three month period in 2020, all of which were partially offset by certain client terminations and the impact of certain LiveArea client related activity as described below.
Certain client contracts supported by the LiveArea segment were not fully transferred to the buyer as part of the LiveArea Transaction. Subsequent to the LiveArea Transaction Date, PFSweb is acting as a prime contractor for these certain client contracts and the related services are being provided by the former LiveArea business as a subcontractor of PFSweb. The services provided under these client contracts are currently being managed by PFSweb, and as such, the related service fee revenues, costs of revenues and gross profit previously generated by this LiveArea related activity have been included in our continuing operations. Service fee revenue billed under this contractor-subcontractor relationship are expected to be recorded as pass-through revenue and pass-through costs for as long as such contracts continue to be managed directly by PFSweb. Service fee revenues generated under these contracts applicable to our former LiveArea segment of $8.8 million and $13.1 million are included in service fee revenue in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Product revenue, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $5.3 million compared with the prior year. Product revenue declined as it was primarily dependent on one client, which restructured its operations and discontinued certain product lines. In March 2022, our product revenue model was discontinued. See Note 17. Subsequent Events in Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Pass-through revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $2.2 million compared to the prior year. Pass through revenue increased primarily due to increased freight activity (the primary component of pass-through revenue) applicable to certain client accounts.
Gross margin decreased to 18.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 18.7% in the prior year. The decreased gross margin is due to a decrease of our service fee margin to 25.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 26.5% in the prior year, primarily as a result of increased fulfillment labor rates and personal protective equipment related costs, partially offset by higher margin project activity. Additionally, our gross margin was negatively impacted by reduced technology-related project activity and other higher margin non-fulfillment related activity. The overall gross margin decrease was partially offset by our service fee business, which generates a higher gross margin than the product revenue and pass-through revenue activity representing a larger proportion of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year. The increase was primarily attributable to (1) the prior year included a reduction to vacation expense related to a change in policy to allow for the introduction of a flexible vacation policy that was not restricted to time earned by the Company for US employees, (2) increased personnel related costs in 2021, (3) increased facility related costs, (4) transaction bonuses for certain executives and employees of PFSweb related to the LiveArea Transaction and (5) costs related to the Company's ongoing strategic alternatives assessment process. These increases were slightly offset by $1.3 million of other income applicable to the transition services agreement related to the LiveArea Transaction.
Income Taxes
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a tax provision of $1.5 million, comprised primarily of $2.6 million related to losses with no tax benefit, $0.8 million related to state income taxes, and $0.9 million related to tax liability on investment in a foreign subsidiary, offset by $2.4 million losses at the statutory rate and a $1.3 million release of valuation allowance. A valuation allowance has been provided for certain domestic net deferred tax assets, which are primarily related to our non-qualified stock options, foreign tax credit carryforwards, deferred revenue, accruals and certain foreign deferred tax assets.
Discontinued Operations
See Note 3. Discontinued Operations to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding discontinued operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In conjunction with the LiveArea Transaction in August 2021, we generated approximately $250.0 million in gross proceeds, of which approximately $62.5 million was used to pay off and extinguish the Company’s Credit Agreement with Regions Bank ("the Amended Facility"). Additionally, we incurred approximately $15 million in cash-based transaction related costs in 2021 and used proceeds of approximately $35 million to make estimated income tax payments related to the LiveArea Transaction. Our improved cash position, as a result of the LiveArea Transaction, will satisfy our known operating cash needs, working capital and capital expenditure requirements, debt and lease obligations, loans to our subsidiaries, if needed, and potential distributions to shareholders for at least the next twelve months. However, our cash position could be adversely impacted by the uncertain duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic, increasing labor costs and our ability to adjust our overall cost structure to support a smaller remaining business following the completion of the LiveArea Transaction.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operations was $42.7 million, which includes $35.8 million of income tax payments primarily related to the LiveArea Transaction, compared to net cash provided by operations of $1.8 million in the prior year. The year ended December 31, 2021 included a net use of cash related to operations before changes in operating assets and liabilities. The year ended December 31, 2020 included a benefit from cash income generated from
operations before changes in operating assets and liabilities. Such cash use and benefit were then either increased or decreased, depending on period, by the net impact of changes in assets and liabilities, primarily related to the amount and timing of client revenue billings and collections, vendor purchasing and payment activity and payment of income taxes.
We have deferred payments totaling $3.7 million under the CARES Act, in calendar year 2020, of which half was due and paid in December 2021 with the remainder to be paid in December 2022.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 included proceeds from the LiveArea Transaction, net of transaction costs and cash divested of $236.4 million. Capital expenditures were $7.6 million and $4.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, exclusive of property and equipment acquired under debt and finance lease financing, which consisted primarily of capitalized software costs and equipment purchases. Due to the proceeds received from the LiveArea Transaction, the Company is now primarily using its existing cash to fund capital expenditures, whereas in the past the company would utilize a combination of cash and debt. Capital expenditures have historically consisted of additions to upgrade our management information systems, development of customized technology solutions to support and integrate with our service fee clients and general expansion and upgrades to our facilities, both domestic and foreign. We expect to incur capital expenditures to support new facilities, contracts and anticipated future growth opportunities. Based on our current client business activity and our targeted growth plans, we anticipate our total investment in additions and upgrades to facilities and information technology solutions and services for the upcoming twelve months, including costs to implement new clients, will be approximately $8.0 million to $10.0 million, although additional capital expenditures may be necessary to support the infrastructure requirements of new clients. To maintain our current operating cash position, a portion of these expenditures may be financed through client reimbursements or operating or finance leases.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities was $44.5 million primarily driven by the repayment of the Amended Facility with proceeds from the LiveArea Transaction. Cash used in financing activities was $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to net borrowing and payment activity on our revolving loan and other debt.
Working Capital
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our working capital increased to $165.1 million compared to $24.0 million at December 31, 2020, which was primarily driven by the net proceeds received from the LiveArea Transaction, less working capital sold in conjunction with the LiveArea Transaction, and the extinguishment of the Company’s Amended Facility.
To obtain any necessary additional financing in the future, in addition to our current cash position, we continue to evaluate our needs in light of various financing alternatives potentially available including the sale of equity, utilizing capital or operating leases, or entering into new debt agreements. No assurances can be given we will be successful in obtaining any additional financing or the terms thereof. We currently believe our cash position and funds generated from operations will satisfy our presently known operating cash needs, our working capital and capital expenditure requirements, our current debt and lease obligations, and additional loans to our subsidiaries, if necessary, for at least the next twelve months.
Inventory Financing
Supplies Distributors, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, has a short-term credit facility with Peridot Financing Solutions (as successor to IBM Credit LLC) and its assignees (“IBM Credit Facility”) to finance its purchase and distribution of Ricoh products in the United States, providing financing for eligible Ricoh inventory and certain receivables up to $5.5 million, as per an amended agreement. The agreement has no stated maturity date and provides either party the ability to exit the facility following a 90 day notice.
Given the structure of this facility and as outstanding balances, which represent inventory purchases, are repaid within twelve months, we have classified the outstanding amounts under this facility, which were $3.5 million and $3.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, as trade accounts payable in the consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021, Supplies Distributors had $0.1 million of available credit under this facility. The IBM Credit Facility contains cross default provisions and various restrictions upon the ability of Supplies Distributors to, among other things, merge, consolidate, sell assets, incur indebtedness, make loans and payments to related parties (including entities directly or indirectly owned by PFSweb, Inc.), provide guarantees, make investments and loans, pledge assets, make changes to capital stock ownership structure and pay dividends. The IBM Credit Facility also contains financial covenants, such as annualized revenue to
working capital, net profit after tax to revenue, and total liabilities to tangible net worth, as defined, and is secured by certain of the assets of Supplies Distributors, as well as a collateralized guaranty of PFSweb. Additionally, PFSweb is required to maintain a minimum Subordinated Note receivable balance from Supplies Distributors of $1.0 million, as per an amended agreement. Borrowings under the IBM Credit Facility accrue interest, after a defined free financing period, at prime rate plus 0.5%, which resulted in a weighted average interest rate of 3.75% for both December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants under the IBM Credit Facility. In the first half of 2022 the IBM Credit Facility was terminated in connection with the transition of our relationship with Ricoh. See Note 17. Subsequent Events to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Debt and Finance Lease Obligations
US Credit Agreement. Until August 25, 2021, we had a credit agreement, which was later amended (“Amended Facility”) with Regions Bank and certain other banking parties. The Amended Facility provided revolving loan availability up to $60.0 million, with the ability for an increase of $20.0 million, and had a maturity date of November 1, 2023. Borrowings under the Amended Facility accrued interest at a variable rate based on prime rate or LIBOR, plus an applicable margin. At December 31, 2020, the weighted average interest rate on the Amended Facility was 2.52%.
In connection with LiveArea Transaction, all amounts outstanding under the Amended Facility were paid in full on August 25, 2021 and the Amended Facility was terminated.
Master Lease Agreements. We have various agreements that provide for leasing or financing transactions of equipment and other assets and will continue to enter into such arrangements as needed to finance the purchasing or leasing of certain equipment or other assets. Borrowings under these agreements, which generally have terms of three to five years, are generally secured by the related equipment, and in certain cases, by a Company parent guarantee.
Other than our finance and operating lease commitments, we do not have any other material financial commitments, although future client contracts may require capital expenditures and lease commitments to support the services provided to such clients.
Debt Covenants
The IBM Credit Facility contains financial covenants, such as annualized revenue to working capital, net profit after tax to revenue, and total liabilities to tangible net worth, as defined, and is secured by certain of the assets of Supplies Distributors, as well as a collateralized guaranty of PFSweb. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all financial covenants under the IBM Credit Facility.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 “Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our discussion about new accounting pronouncements adopted and those pending.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. These accounting principles require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. While we do not believe the reported amounts would be materially different, application of these policies involves the exercise of judgment and the use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and, as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates. If there is a significant unfavorable change to current conditions, it could result in a material adverse impact to our business, operating results and financial condition. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. All of our significant accounting policies are disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
We have defined a critical accounting estimate as one that is both important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and requires us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments or estimates about matters that are uncertain. During the past two years, we have not made any material changes in accounting methodology used to establish the critical accounting estimates discussed below. The following represent certain critical accounting policies that require us to exercise our business judgment or make significant estimates. In addition, there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation but are not deemed critical as defined above.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue primarily from services provided under contractual arrangements with our clients or from the sale of products under our distributor agreements. We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606"), when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our clients and customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
We will often enter into contracts with clients and customers that contain multiple promises to transfer control of multiple products and/or services. To the extent a contract includes provisioning multiple products or services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised deliverables are capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, sales of different products or services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation. For arrangements with multiple distinct performance obligations, we allocate consideration among the performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling price is the price at which we would sell a promised good or service separately to our client and customers.
The Company may execute more than one contract or agreement with a single customer. The separate contracts or agreements may be viewed as one combined arrangement or separate agreements for revenue recognition purposes. In order to reach appropriate conclusions regarding whether such agreements should be combined, the Company evaluates whether the agreements were negotiated as a package with a single commercial objective, whether the amount of consideration to be paid in one agreement depends on the price and/or performance of another agreement, or whether the good or services promised in the agreements represent a single performance obligation. The conclusions reached can impact the identification of distinct performance obligations, allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation and the timing of revenue recognition related to those arrangements
Our service fee revenue primarily relates to our order to cash, fulfillment, customer care, consulting, and technology services.
We typically charge our service fee revenue on either a cost-plus basis, a percent of shipped revenue basis, a time and materials basis, project or retainer basis for our professional services, or a per transaction basis, such as a per item basis for fulfillment services or a per labor hour basis for web-enabled customer contact center services. Additional fees are billed for other services. For technology services, we typically charge on a fixed cost basis based on an estimated maximum number of professional service labor hours or bill for each professional labor hour at a per hour price.
Our performance obligations typically consist of standing ready to provide a service over a contract term. As such, our performance obligations within service fee revenue across the company are generally transferred to clients over time. A time-elapsed output measure is used to determine progress, with individual time increments representing a single series performance obligation. Variable consideration, including discounts, rebates, incentives, penalties and other similar items, charged within these contracts is allocated to the individual reporting period in which the service was provided. The Company has determined that the above method provides a reasonable depiction of the transfer of services to the customer.
We perform set-up and integration services to support our fulfillment activities. When we determine these set-up and integration services do not meet the criteria for recognition as a separate performance obligation, any start up fees received represent a non-refundable up-front fee and are allocated to the other performance obligations within that contract. The Company recognizes revenue for non-refundable upfront implementation fees on a straight-line basis over the period between the initiation of the services through the end of the contract term. Related costs are capitalized as costs to fulfill the contract and are recognized over the expected performance period.
For contracts recognized over time, we recognize the estimated loss to the extent the project has been completed based on actual hours incurred compared to the total estimated hours. A loss is recognized when the current estimate of the consideration we expect to receive, modified to include any variable consideration, is less than the current estimate of total costs for the contract.
In instances where revenue is derived from sales of third-party vendor services, we record revenue on a gross basis when we are a principal to the transaction and net of costs when we are acting as an agent between the customer or client and the vendor. Whether we are the principal or agent in the transaction is determined by whether we control the service being provided.
Depending on the terms of the customer arrangement, product revenue is recognized at a point in time when control transfers to the customer. This is either upon shipment of the product or when the customer receives the product. Product revenue is reported net of estimated variable consideration related to returns and allowances, which are estimated based upon historical return information. Management also considers any other current information and trends in making estimates. If actual sales returns, allowances and discounts are greater than estimated by management, additional expense may be incurred.
Stock Compensation
We utilize our Employee Stock and Incentive Plan (the “Employee Plan”) to help attract, retain and incentivize qualified executives, key employees and non-employee directors to increase our shareholder value and help build and sustain growth. The Employee Plan provides for the granting of incentive awards in a variety of forms, such as the award of an option, stock appreciation right, restricted stock award, restricted stock unit, deferred stock unit, among other stock-based awards.
Compensation cost is measured based on the grant date fair value of the award. Depending on the conditions associated with the vesting of the award, compensation cost is recognized on a straight-line or graded basis, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period of each award.
We estimate the fair value of each option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For certain of the awards that have a market condition, we estimate the compensation cost using a Monte-Carlo simulation. The estimated fair value for awards involves assumptions for expected dividend yield, stock price volatility, risk-free interest rates and the expected life of the award.
If, in the future, we determine that another method of estimating an award’s fair value is more reasonable, or, if another method for calculating these input assumptions is prescribed by authoritative guidance, and, therefore, should be used to estimate expected volatility or expected term, the fair value calculated for our stock-based compensation could change significantly.
Income Taxes
The liability method is used for determining our income taxes, under which current and deferred tax liabilities and assets are recorded in accordance with enacted tax laws and rates. Under this method, the amounts of deferred tax liabilities and assets at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets to their net realizable value when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In determining the need for valuation allowances, we have considered and made judgments and estimates regarding estimated future taxable income. These estimates and judgments include some degree of uncertainty and changes in these estimates and assumptions could require us to adjust the valuation allowances for our deferred tax assets. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends on the generation of sufficient taxable income in the applicable taxing jurisdictions. Although we believe our estimates and judgments are reasonable, actual results may differ, which could be material.
Because we operate in multiple countries, we are subject to the jurisdiction of multiple domestic and foreign tax authorities. Determination of taxable income in any jurisdiction requires the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and the use of estimates and assumptions regarding significant future events such as the amount, timing and character of deductions, permissible revenue recognition methods under the tax law and the sources and character of income and tax credits. Changes in tax laws, regulations, foreign currency exchange restrictions or our level of operations or profitability in each taxing jurisdiction could have an impact on the amount of income taxes that we provide during any given year.