ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. A discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been reported previously in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021 (File No. 001-39100) under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.”
Overview
We envision a world where anyone who wants to have a child can do so. Our mission is to make dreams of parenthood come true through healthy, timely and supported fertility journeys. Through our differentiated approach to benefits plan design, patient education and support and active network management, our clients’ employees are able to pursue the most effective treatment from the best physicians and achieve optimal outcomes.
Progyny is a leading benefits management company specializing in fertility and family building benefits solutions in the United States. Our clients include many of the nation’s most prominent employers across a broad array of industries. We launched our fertility benefits solution in 2016 with our first five employer clients, and we have grown our current base of clients to over 265 with at least 1,000 covered lives. We currently have contracts to provide coverage to approximately 4.0 million employees and their partners (known in our industry as covered lives), whom we refer to as our members. We have achieved this growth by demonstrating that our purpose-built, data-driven and disruptive platform consistently delivers superior clinical outcomes in a cost-efficient manner while driving exceptional client and member satisfaction. We have retained substantially all of our clients since inception, and our member satisfaction over that same time period is evidenced by our most recent industry-leading Net Promoter Score, or NPS, of +81 for our fertility benefits solution and +79 for our integrated pharmacy benefits solution, Progyny Rx as of December 31, 2021. Our members experience healthier pregnancies and superior rates of pregnancy and live births, as well as reduced rates of miscarriages and multiple births, saving valuable time and money and limiting personal and professional disruption.
Fertility Benefits Solution. Our fertility benefits solution includes providing members with access to effective and cost-efficient fertility treatments through our Smart Cycle plan design. Smart Cycles are proprietary treatment bundles designed by us to include those medical services available to our members through our selective network of high-quality fertility specialists. Medical services under our Smart Cycles include everything needed for a comprehensive fertility treatment cycle, including all necessary diagnostic testing and access to the latest technology (such as, in the case of in vitro fertilization, or IVF, preimplantation genetic testing). We currently offer 19 different Smart Cycle treatment bundles, which may be used in various combinations depending on the member’s need. Each Smart Cycle treatment bundle has a separate unit value (i.e., some have fractional values and some have whole values). Our clients contract to purchase a cumulative Smart Cycle unit value per eligible member. These can range from one to an unlimited unit value. Members, in consultation with their Patient Care Advocates, or PCAs, can choose their preferred provider clinics within our network and utilize the specific Smart Cycle treatment bundles necessary for the treatment pathway they determine throughout their fertility journey.
In addition, we provide care management services as part of our fertility benefits solution, which include active management of our selective network of high-quality fertility specialists, real-time member eligibility and treatment authorization, member-facing digital solutions, detailed quarterly reporting for our clients supported by our dedicated account management teams and end-to-end comprehensive concierge member support provided by our in-house staff of PCAs. Clients can also add adoption and surrogacy reimbursement programs as part of this solution.
Pharmacy Benefits Solution. We went live with our integrated pharmacy benefits solution in 2018. Progyny Rx can only be purchased by clients that purchase our fertility benefits solution. Progyny Rx provides our members with
access to the medications needed during their fertility treatment. As part of this solution, we provide care management services, which include our formulary plan design, simplified authorization, assistance with prescription fulfillment and timely delivery of the medications by our network of specialty pharmacies, as well as medication administration training, pharmacy support services and continuing PCA support.
Our Clients. We currently have contracts to serve over 265 employers with at least 1,000 covered lives in the United States across more than 30 industries. Our current clients, who are industry leaders across both high-growth and mature industries and who range in size from approximately 1,000 to 500,000 employees, represent approximately 4.0 million covered lives under contract.
Revenue Model
Our clients primarily contract with us to provide our fertility benefits solution and, where added on by our clients, our Progyny Rx solution. Our revenue has both a utilization-based component and a population-based component, as follows:
● Utilization Component. Clients pay us for the fertility benefits and Progyny Rx solutions utilized by their employees. With respect to the fertility benefits solution, we bill clients for Smart Cycles in accordance with our bundled case rates, which vary by the type of fertility service rendered and clinic location. Case rates include all third-party fertility specialists, anesthesiology and laboratory services, as well as all of our care management services. With respect to Progyny Rx, we bill the client for the fertility medication dispensed to their employees in connection with the authorized fertility treatments. Medication fees also include our formulary management, drug utilization review and cost containment services and other care management services.
● Population-Based Component. Clients who purchase our fertility benefits solution also typically pay us a per employee per month fee, or PEPM fee, which is population-based. This allows us to provide access to our PCAs for fertility and family building education and guidance and other digital tools to all of our members, regardless of whether they ultimately pursue fertility treatment. PEPM fees represented 1% and 2% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our revenue in a given year is determined by the level and mix of the utilization of our fertility benefits and Progyny Rx solutions by our members as well as the number of members enrolled in our clients’ benefits plans. Each year, we contract with new clients for our fertility benefits solution and, where added by the client, our Progyny Rx solution. Given that the majority of our clients contract with us for a January 1st benefits plan start date, our sales cycle follows the conventional healthcare benefits cycle, which largely concludes by the end of October of the prior year to allow for benefits education and annual open enrollment to occur in November. For some clients that are considering a start date later in the year, the sales cycle can extend through the next year.
Similarly, for existing clients, any changes in plan designs are typically elected by the end of October so that clients can inform their employees of the benefits during the open enrollment period ahead of a January 1st plan year start.
Key Operational and Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key operational and business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts, and make strategic decisions.
Member and Client Base. Our addressable market is primarily large self-insured employers. There are approximately 8,000 employers in the United States (excluding quasi-governmental entities, such as universities, school systems, and labor unions) who have a minimum of 1,000 employees, representing approximately 75 million potential covered lives in total. Our current member base of approximately 4.0 million covered lives under contract represents a low single digit percent of our total market opportunity. We intend to continue to drive new client acquisition by investing significantly in sales and marketing to engage, educate and drive awareness of the unmet need around fertility solutions among benefits executives. We also increase brand awareness and adoption with employers by leveraging our strong relationships with benefits consultants. In particular, we are focused on expanding the number of clients with
more than 2,500 covered lives. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we served 191 and 135 clients, respectively, representing 2,935,000 and 2,335,000 members, respectively.
Importantly, as we have continued to grow, we have meaningfully diversified our client base across more than 30 different industries currently from just two industries when we launched our fertility benefits solution in 2016. We are expanding our client base within each industry and have an industry-specific strategy that enables us to most effectively target our addressable market. Because our clients within an industry compete with each other for employees, we believe our solutions are increasingly viewed as an important way for them to differentiate from, or remain competitive with, one another. Additionally, we believe that our expanding presence has resulted in a heightened awareness of the need to offer fertility benefits and has informed the market of the value we provide to our clients and our members, which we believe also helps facilitate growth. In addition, we are continuously utilizing our established client relationships to evaluate other potential fertility solutions that could benefit our members and simultaneously drive growth. Our ability to attract new clients will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of our solutions, offerings of our competitors, the effectiveness of our marketing efforts to drive awareness and the demand for fertility benefits solutions overall. We define a client as an organization for which we have an active contract in the period indicated. We count each organization we contract with as a single client including divisions, segments or subsidiaries of larger organizations to the extent we contract separately with them.
Benefits Utilization. A key driver of our revenue is the number of members we serve and the rate at which they utilize their fertility benefits. As our client base has grown, our membership has grown from approximately 110,000 members in 2016 when we launched our fertility benefits solution to 2.9 million members as of December 31, 2021.
The following table highlights the number of ART cycles performed for Progyny members and the member utilization rates for each of the periods presented.
(1) Represents the number of ART cycles performed, including IVF with a fresh embryo transfer, IVF freeze all cycles/embryo banking, frozen embryo transfers and egg freezing.
(2) Represents the member utilization rate for all services, including but not limited to, ART cycles, initial consultations, IUIs and genetic testing. The utilization rate for all members includes all unique members (female and male) who utilize the benefit during that period while the utilization rate for female only includes only unique females who utilize the benefit during that period. For the purposes of calculating utilization rates in any given period, the results reflect the number of unique members utilizing the benefit for that period. Individual periods cannot be combined as member treatments may span multiple periods.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted various markets around the world, including the United States. As described below, restrictions related to COVID-19, including variants, and our responses to them have significantly impacted and may continue to impact how our members use our services, access our providers, and how our employees work and provide services to our clients and members, resulting in an impact to our revenue.
Employee safety is our first priority, and as a result, we had implemented a remote working policy for all of our employees. We have recently re-opened our corporate offices to employees on a hybrid basis, while implementing additional safety measures and protocols. We are also working closely with all of our clients, members, providers and other external business partners. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our cash needs, however, we continue to monitor liquidity, as necessary, and ensure that our business can continue to operate during these uncertain times.
The outbreak and preventative measures taken to contain COVID-19, especially in the first half of 2020, negatively impacted our members’ access to care due to a temporary unavailability of the full range of fertility treatments at our provider clinics. In March 2020, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, or ASRM, issued guidelines recommending suspension of fertility services. Those guidelines were lifted in May 2020, which has enabled our clinics to resume care with enhanced safety protocols for patient safety. COVID-19, including variants, and related restrictions continued to have a negative impact on our revenue growth for the three months and year ended December 31, 2021.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, future results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including, without limitation, new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and variants, the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic; the availability, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines as well as vaccine hesitancy; the imposition of protective public safety measures; and the economic impact on local, regional and national markets. To the extent that the markets we serve experience increased cases of COVID-19, state or local governments may reinstitute measures to control its spread, which could again negatively impact our members’ access to care. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of these potential impacts to our business, results of operations and liquidity.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue includes fertility benefits solution revenue, pharmacy benefits solution revenue and PEPM fees.
Fertility Benefits Solution Revenue
Fertility benefits solution revenue primarily represents utilization of our fertility benefits solution. Our client contracts are typically for a three-year term and pricing for this solution is established for each Smart Cycle treatment bundle, based in part on when the client first became a client and the number of members covered under the solution. Fertility benefits solution revenue includes amounts we receive directly from members, including deductibles, co-insurance and co-payments associated with the treatments under the fertility benefits solution. Revenue is recognized based on the negotiated price with our clients and includes the portion to be paid directly by the member. Revenue is recognized when Smart Cycle services are completed for a member. Revenue is also accrued for authorized Smart Cycle services rendered based on member appointments scheduled with a fertility specialist in our network but for which no claim has yet been reported, net of expected changes and cancellations of services.
Pharmacy Benefits Solution Revenue
Pharmacy benefits solution revenue primarily represents utilization of Progyny Rx. For clients who contract for the fertility benefits solution, we offer an add-on, separate, fully integrated pharmacy benefits solution designed by us. Progyny Rx provides our members with access to our formulary plan design, simplified authorization, prescription fulfillment and timely delivery of the medications used during treatment through our network of specialty pharmacies, as well as provides our members with medication administration training and other pharmacy support services. Prescription drugs are dispensed by our contracted mail order specialty pharmacies. Revenue related to the dispensing of prescription drugs by the specialty pharmacies in our network includes the prescription fees negotiated with our clients, including the portion that we collect directly from members (deductibles, co-insurance and co-payments). The contractual fees agreed to with our clients are inclusive of the cost of the prescription drug from our specialty providers, less any applicable discounts, as well as the related clinical and care management services. Revenue from these arrangements is recognized
when the drugs are dispensed. This solution was introduced in the marketplace in the third quarter of 2017 and went live with a select number of clients on January 1, 2018.
Per employee per month (PEPM) fee
Clients who purchase our fertility benefits solution also pay us a population based PEPM fee which provides access to our PCAs for fertility and family building education and guidance and other digital tools for all of our covered members, regardless of whether or not they ultimately pursue fertility treatment. We earn a PEPM fee for the majority of our clients. Revenue from the PEPM fee is billed and recognized monthly based upon the contractual fee and the number of employees at that specific client for that month.
Cost of Services
Our cost of services has three primary components: (1) fertility benefit services; (2) pharmacy benefit services; and (3) vendor rebates.
Fertility Benefits Services
Fertility benefits services costs include: (1) fees paid to provider clinics within our network, labs and anesthesiologists; (2) costs incurred (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, other related costs, and an allocation of our general overhead, depreciation and amortization) for those employees associated with our care management service functions: Provider Account Management, PCA, Provider Relations and Claims Processing teams; and (3) related information technology support costs. Our contracts with provider clinics are typically for a term of one to two years.
Pharmacy Benefits Services
Pharmacy benefits services costs include: (1) the fees for prescription drugs dispensed and clinical services provided during the reporting period by our specialty pharmacy partners; (2) costs incurred (including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, other related costs, and an allocation of our general overhead, depreciation and amortization) for those employees associated with our care management service functions: PCA, Provider Relations and Claims Processing teams; and (3) related information technology support costs. Contracts with the specialty pharmacies are typically for a term of one year.
Vendor Rebates
We receive a rebate on certain medications purchased by our specialty pharmacies. Our contractual arrangements with pharmacy program partners provide for us to receive a rebate from established list prices, which is paid subsequent to dispensing. These rebates are recorded as a reduction to cost of services when prescriptions are dispensed.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is total revenue less total cost of services. Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. We expect that gross profit and gross margin will continue to be affected by various factors including the geographic location where treatments are performed, as well as pricing with each of our clients, provider clinics, labs, specialty pharmacies and pharmaceutical companies, all of which are negotiated separately, have different contracting start and end dates and durations which are not coterminous with each other. Additionally, staffing levels necessary to deliver our care management services will continue to grow as we continue to add clients and their associated members.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense consists primarily of employee related costs, including salaries, bonuses, commissions, benefits, stock-based compensation, other related costs, and an allocation of our general overhead, depreciation and amortization for those employees associated with sales and marketing. These expenses also include third-party consulting services, advertising, marketing, promotional events, and brand awareness activities. We expect sales and marketing expense to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest and grow our business.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense consists primarily of employee related costs, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, other related costs, and an allocation of our general overhead, depreciation and amortization for those employees associated with general and administrative services such as executive, legal, human resources, information technology, accounting, and finance. These expenses also include third-party consulting services and facilities costs. We anticipate that we will incur additional general and administrative expenses on an ongoing basis as a public company and to support growth in the business.
Other Income, net
Other income (expense) includes investment income as well as interest income and expense.
Benefit for Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States. Income tax expense consists of taxes currently payable and changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities calculated according to local tax rules. Deferred income taxes are recorded for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and amounts recognized for income tax purposes. As of each reporting date, management considers new evidence, both positive and negative, that could affect its view of the future realization of deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2020, in part because we had achieved three years of cumulative income, along with our projections of profitability, management determined that there was sufficient positive evidence to conclude that it was more likely than not that the net deferred tax assets of $38.0 million were realizable and therefore released substantially all of our valuation allowance. We continue to maintain this position as of December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of revenue for those periods:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2) Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure defined by us as net income, adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, other income (expense), net, interest income, net, benefit for income taxes, and settlement cost and legal fees associated with a vendor arbitration. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Result of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measure - Adjusted EBITDA’ below for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure - Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental financial measure that is not required by, or presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, when taken together with our U.S. GAAP financial results, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating performance and facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. In particular, we believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA is helpful to our investors as it is a measure used by management in assessing the health of our business, determining incentive compensation, evaluating our operating performance, and for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
Adjusted EBITDA is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA include: (1) it does not properly reflect capital commitments to be paid in the future; (2) although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the underlying assets may need to be replaced and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect these capital expenditures; (3) it does not consider the impact of stock-based compensation expense; (4) it does not reflect other non-operating income and expenses, including other income (expense), net and interest income (expense), net; (5) it does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; and (6) it does not include settlement cost and legal fees associated with a vendor arbitration. In addition, our Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because they may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner as we calculate the measure, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including our net income from continuing operations and other U.S. GAAP results.
We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net income, adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, other income (expense), net, interest income, net, benefit for income taxes, and settlement cost and legal fees associated with a vendor arbitration. The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income for each of the periods indicated:
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by $155.8 million, or 45%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to a $102.1 million, or 40% increase, in revenue from our fertility benefits solution and a $53.7 million or 59% increase in revenue from our Progyny Rx solution. The increase in revenue from our fertility benefits solution was primarily due to the increase in the number of clients and covered lives. The increase in revenue from our pharmacy benefits solution was also driven by the number of clients and covered lives that added the Progyny Rx benefit. Progyny Rx went live with only a select number of clients on January 1, 2018 and has continued to add both new and existing fertility benefit solution clients since its initial launch. Our revenue growth for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was negatively impacted by COVID-19.
Cost of Services
Cost of services increased by $113.7 million, or 41%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase in medical treatment and pharmacy prescription costs associated with fertility treatments delivered as well as increases in personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased by $42.1 million, or 60%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross margin increased 210 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to favorable new terms with our pharmacy program partners, the net impact of regular contract renewals with our providers as well as continued efficiencies gained across our care management services.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing Expense
Sales and marketing expense increased by $5.2 million, or 34%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $4.4 million increase in personnel-related costs (including a $3.4 million increase in stock-based compensation) relating to additional headcount, employee equity grants, and commissions for sales and marketing functions, and a $0.8 million increase in other related sales and marketing expenses.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $12.9 million, or 28%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a $16.9 million increase in personnel-related costs (including a $11.6 million increase in stock-based compensation) as a result of additional headcount and employee equity grants, a $4.2 million increase in bad debt expense, and a $1.1 million increase in other related general and administrative expenses, which was partially offset by a $9.3 million decrease in settlement cost and legal fees for a vendor arbitration. See Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies - in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details regarding the vendor arbitration.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net decreased by $0.2 million, or 71%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to decreases in income on investments.
Benefit for Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a benefit for income taxes of $33.3 million, primarily due to equity compensation activity that occurred during the period. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a benefit for income taxes of $37.8 million, primarily as a result of the release of substantially all of our valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets as we concluded there was sufficient positive evidence that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets are realizable.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $91.4 million of cash and cash equivalents and $28.0 million of marketable securities. Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through sales of our solutions and the net proceeds we have received from sales of equity securities as further detailed below. Our cash and cash equivalents and working capital are affected by the timing of payments to third party providers and collections from clients and have increased as our revenue has increased. In particular, during the ramp up and onboarding of new clients who typically begin their benefits plan year as of January 1st, our accounts receivable has historically increased more than our accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities in the early part of each calendar year. Historically, these timing impacts have reversed throughout the remainder of the fiscal year. Accordingly, our working capital, and its impact on cash flow from operations, can fluctuate materially from period to period.
On October 29, 2019, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 6,700,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $13.00 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $77.6 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions of $5.9 million and offering costs of $3.6 million. For additional information, See Note 1 - Business and Basis of Presentation to our financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, including the proceeds from our IPO, and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including sales of our solutions and client renewals, the timing and the amount of cash received from clients, the expansion of our sales and marketing activities and the continuing market adoption of our solutions.
Other than the impact on our revenue growth and the related cash flows resulting from the various restrictions on activities due to the COVID-19 pandemic, our sources and uses of cash were not otherwise materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic in the three months and year ended December 31, 2021 and, to date, we have not identified any material liquidity deficiencies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Based on the information currently available to us, we do not expect the COVID-19 pandemic to have a material impact on our liquidity. We will continue to monitor and assess the impact the COVID-19 pandemic, including variants, may have on our business and financial results. In addition, while the potential impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and our business in particular may be difficult to assess or predict, the pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, which could reduce our ability to access capital and could negatively affect our liquidity in the future. If the disruption persists and deepens, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our operations. For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations and financial condition.
In June 2018, we entered into an agreement with Silicon Valley Bank to replace our then-outstanding term loan with a revolving line of credit of up to $15.0 million, which was amended in April 2019, January 2020, June 2020 and February 2021. The line of credit matured on June 8, 2021.
The following table summarizes our cash flows from continuing operations for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisting of net income of $65.8 million adjusted for certain non-cash items, which include $33.7 million of stock-based compensation expense, $33.3 million of deferred tax assets, $9.8 million of bad debt expense, and $1.3 million of depreciation and amortization. Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in cash used in operating activities from an increase in accounts receivable of $68.7 million and other noncurrent assets and liabilities of $3.3 million, partially offset by cash provided by operating activities from increases in accounts payable of $17.8 million, accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $2.2 million, and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.7 million. These changes are a result of the impact of revenue growth and our operating results as well as the timing of payments to third party providers and collections from customers.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $36.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of net income of $46.5 million adjusted for certain non-cash items, which include $38.0 million of deferred tax assets, $12.8 million of stock-based compensation expense, $5.6 million of bad debt expense, and $1.9 million of depreciation and amortization. Changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in cash used in operating activities from an increase in accounts receivable of $35.3 million and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $0.3 million, more than offset by cash provided by operating activities from increases in accounts payable of $25.0 million, accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $17.4 million, and other noncurrent assets and liabilities of $0.6 million. These changes are a result of the impact of revenue growth and our operating results as well as the timing of payments to third party providers and collections from customers. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 included the impact of the settlement cost and legal fees associated with a vendor arbitration of $8.9 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of net proceeds of $10.9 million from marketable securities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $40.0 million, primarily consisting of net investments of $39.0 million in marketable securities. The remainder of the activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of purchases of computers, software, including capitalized software development costs, and leasehold improvements, including leasehold improvements associated with the buildout of our new corporate office which was occupied in February 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of payments of $18.0 million for employee taxes related to equity awards, partially offset by $2.9 million in proceeds from stock option exercises and $1.3 million in proceeds from contributions to our employee stock purchase plan.
Net cash used in financing activities was $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of payments of $8.9 million for employee taxes related to equity awards and $0.9 million for IPO costs, partially offset by $2.3 million in proceeds from stock option exercises and $1.2 million in proceeds from contributions to our employee stock purchase plan.
Operating Lease Commitments
In September 2019, we commenced a sublease agreement for our corporate offices in New York, New York. The sublease is for a 25,212 square foot office and will expire in May 2029. Pursuant to the sublease, we will pay the base rent of approximately $1.3 million per year through the end of the fifth lease year and approximately $1.4 million per year thereafter through the expiration date.
In February 2022, we entered into a lease agreement for additional space in our corporate offices in New York, New York, consisting of a 24,099 square foot office and a 21,262 square foot office, and also for continued occupancy of the 25,212 square foot office after the expiration of the current sublease. For the 24,099 square foot office, we will pay the base rent of approximately $1.4 million per year starting in the fourth quarter of 2023 for five years and approximately $1.5 million per year thereafter through the first quarter of 2035, the expiration date. For the 21,262 square foot office, we will pay the base rent of approximately $1.3 million starting in the first quarter of 2025 for five years and approximately $1.4 million per year thereafter through the first quarter of 2035, the expiration date. For our current 25,212 square foot office, we will pay the base rent of approximately $1.6 million per year beginning in June 2029 through the first quarter of 2035, the expiration date.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and our actual results, our future financial statements will be affected.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with our accrued receivables related to revenue recognition, accrued claims payable, stock-based compensation, and accounting for income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting estimates.
For additional information about our significant accounting policies and estimates, see Note 1 - Business and Basis of Presentation and Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accrued Receivable and Accrued Claims Payable
Fertility benefits solution revenue is recognized based on the negotiated price with our clients and includes the portion to be paid directly by the member. Revenue is recognized when Smart Cycle services are completed for a member. Revenue is also accrued, which we refer to as accrued receivables, for authorized Smart Cycle services rendered based on member appointments scheduled with a fertility specialist in our network but for which no claim has yet been reported.
We estimate accrued receivables based on historical experience for those fertility benefit services provided but for which a claim has not been received from the provider clinic, which includes assumptions regarding the lag between the authorization date and service date as well as estimates for changes and cancellations of services. We include accrued receivables within accounts receivable on our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, accrued receivables were $30.2 million and $28.2 million, respectively.
At the same time, we estimate cost of services and accrued claims payables based on the amount to be paid to the provider clinic and expected gross margin on fertility benefit services. Accrued claims payable of $20.0 million and $22.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, are included within accrued expenses and other current liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet.
Our estimates are adjusted to actual at the time of billing and these adjustments have historically not been material.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense based on the fair value of stock-based awards granted to employees and directors on the date of grant. We estimate the fair value of each stock-based award on the measurement date using either the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for stock options and stock purchased under the employee stock purchase plan or the closing market price of our common stock for restricted stock units.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including (1) the expected stock price volatility, (2) the expected term of the award, (3) the risk-free interest rate and (4) expected dividends. Due to the lack of historical and implied volatility data of our common stock, the expected stock price volatility is estimated based on the historical volatilities of the daily closing prices of a specified group of companies in our industry for a period equal to the expected term of the option. We selected companies with comparable characteristics to our Company, including enterprise value, risk profiles and position within the industry, that have historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected term of the stock option. The expected term of the award represents the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding and is calculated utilizing the simplified method, which is the mid-point between the vesting date and end of the contractual term for each option. The risk-free interest rate is based on the yield of zero-coupon U.S. Treasury securities for the period that is consistent with the expected term of the stock option. The dividend yield is assumed to be none as we have not paid dividends, nor do we anticipate paying dividends. The weighted-average estimated fair value of stock option awards granted in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $30.60. Changes in these inputs could result in a significant change in the fair value of stock options.
The following assumptions were used to calculate the fair value of stock options granted to employees:
Our outstanding stock-based awards as of December 31, 2021 are subject to service-based vesting and we recognize compensation expense over the vesting period of the award on a straight-line basis. Forfeitures and cancellations of awards are recognized as they occur. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, stock-based compensation expense was $33.7 million and $12.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had $164.2 million and $86.5 million of unrecognized compensation costs related to unvested options and restricted stock units, respectively. Both are expected to be expensed and vest over a weighted-average remaining period of approximately 3.6 years.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Deferred income taxes are recorded for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and amounts recognized for income tax purposes. We periodically review the recoverability of deferred tax assets recorded on the consolidated balance sheet and provide valuation allowances as deemed necessary to reduce such deferred tax assets to the amount that will, more likely than not, be realized. Income tax expense consists of taxes currently payable and changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities calculated according to local tax rules.
Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made. As of December 31, 2020, the Company achieved three years of cumulative income, along with projections of profitability, for which management determined that there was sufficient positive evidence to conclude that it is more likely than not that
substantially all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. As such, we released almost all of the valuation allowance on our realizable deferred tax assets. Management maintains this position as of December 31, 2021.
The amount of deferred tax provided is calculated using tax rates enacted at the balance sheet date. The impact of tax law changes is recognized in periods when the change is enacted.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $71.3 million and $38.0 million of net deferred tax assets, respectively. There was a valuation allowance of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a full discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.