Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Progress Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We were formed on September 23, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more target businesses. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region although we currently are focusing on target businesses in the nexus of media, entertainment and technology. We are intending to utilize cash derived from the proceeds of our initial public offering, our securities, debt or a combination of cash, securities and debt, in effecting a business combination. The issuance of additional shares of common stock or preferred stock:
● may significantly reduce the equity interest of our stockholders, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in our Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of our Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of our Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of Class A common stock if we issue shares of preferred stock with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of Class A common stock;
● will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of Class A common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after a business combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations:
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand; and
● our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding.
On February 11, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 15,000,000 units. Each unit consists of one share of common stock of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share (“Common Stock”), and one-half of one redeemable warrant of the Company, with each warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Common Stock for $11.50 per whole share. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000.
On February 11, 2021, simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 4,450,000 warrants to our sponsor at a purchase price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $4,450,000.
On February 22, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full to purchase 2,250,000 units. On February 22, 2021, simultaneously with the closing of the underwriters’ full exercise of the over-allotment option, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 200,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor, at a purchase price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $200,000.
Following the closing of our initial public offering on February 11, 2021 and the underwriters’ full exercise of over-allotment option on February 22, 2021, $172,500,000 from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in our initial public offering, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the private placement warrants was placed in a trust account established for the benefit of our public stockholders (the “trust account”) and maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, as trustee.
If we are unable to complete our initial business combination by November 11, 2022, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including any interest not previously released to us but net of franchise and income taxes payable, divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to its obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete our initial business combination by November 11, 2022 and, in such event, such amounts will be included with the funds held in the trust account that will be available to fund the redemption of the public shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the assets remaining available for distribution will be less than $10.00.
Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that we will have only until November 11, 2022 to complete an initial business combination. If we have not completed an initial business combination by such date, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including any interest not previously released to us but net of taxes payable, divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we have not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from September 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and initial public offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the initial public offering and placed in the trust account.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,041,478 which was comprised of interest income of $12,282 from marketable securities held in our Trust Account, unrealized gain on change in fair value of warrants of $3,658,935, less operating costs of $991,895, unrealized loss on change in fair value of over-allotment option of $319,493, and other expense relating to fair value exceeding amount paid for warrants of $1,318,351.
For the period from September 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,579 which pertains solely to operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.1 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $0.2 million, excluding franchise tax payable.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $141,700. We fully paid the note to the Sponsor on February 12, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor, officers, directors and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans (the “Working Capital Loans”), as defined below. To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
We anticipate that the $0.1 million outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021, will not be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months, assuming that an initial business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of the initial business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional Working Capital Loans, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
We believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. We will need to raise additional capital through loans from our sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of the sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of our business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Going Concern Consideration
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.1 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $0.2 million. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our financing and acquisition plans.
In addition, if we are unable to raise additional funds to alleviate liquidity needs as well as complete an initial business combination by November 11, 2022, then we will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern one year from the issuance date of the financial statements. Management plans to address this uncertainty through loans from its Sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of the sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, us. There is no assurance that our plans to raise capital or to consummate an initial business combination will be successful. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheets as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined the private placement warrants are a derivative instrument.
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of the ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist principally of professional and registration fees incurred through the balance sheet date that are related to the initial public offering and were charged to temporary equity upon the completion of the initial public offering.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 17,250,000 Class A common stock sold as part of the Units in the initial public offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to our Amended and Restated Certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all Class A common stock has been classified outside of permanent equity.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Stock
Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares. The 13,275,000 potential common stock for outstanding warrants to purchase shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income per common stock is the same as basic net income per common stock for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the period from September 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, weighted average shares were reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 562,500 shares of common stock that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised by the underwriters. At December 31, 2020, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in the earnings of us. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of the independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of this offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.