Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 30, 2021, as a Cayman Islands corporation for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or assets. We have not selected any business combination target, and we have not entered into any definitive agreement to effect a business combination with any target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the net proceeds of the initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
Pursuant to our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association, if we have not completed our initial business combination within 15 months (extendable at our sponsor’s option up to 21 months) from the closing of our initial public offering, we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and which interest shall be net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (3) as promptly
as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
As indicated in the financial statements, as of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,031,397. Further, we expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from March 30, 2021 (Inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and initial public offering, and, since the completion of the initial public offering, our search for a target to consummate a business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of a business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the initial public offering and placed in the trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
We classify the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering and private placement as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrant instruments to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations.
For the period from March 30, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,352,902, consisting of formation and operating costs of $708,717, warrant issuance costs of $520,432, offset by an unrealized gain on fair value changes of warrants of $3,570,000 and the gain on marketable securities (net), dividends and interest on cash held in Trust Account of $12,051.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,031,397 in cash held outside of the trust account and working capital of $1,515,928.
Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was from the $25,000 of proceeds from our sponsor’s purchase of founder shares and a loan of $212,710 from our sponsor pursuant to a promissory note to cover certain expenses. The promissory note was repaid in full on October 26, 2021.
On October 26, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 20,000,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 9,000,000 private placement warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $9,000,000.
On November 4, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the Over-Allotment Option and, on November 8, 2021, purchased an additional 2,500,000 Units. As a result of the partial over-allotment exercise, the Company also sold 750,000 private placement warrants to the sponsor, generating an additional $750,000 gross proceeds.
We incurred $13,124,654 in transaction costs, including $4,500,000 of underwriting discounts, $7,875,000 of deferred underwriting commissions and $749,654 of other offering costs (excluding directors and officers insurance premiums).
Upon the closing of the initial public offering, the anchor investors received 1,375,000 founder shares (“anchor shares”) from the sponsor. The fair value of the anchor shares of $9,784,020 was treated as an issuance cost of the offering which was allocated to the Class A ordinary shares and public warrants.
Following the initial public offering, the sale of the private placement warrants and the partial exercise of the Over-Allotment Option, a total of $227,250,000 was placed in the trust account. With the gain on marketable securities (net), dividends and interest on cash held in Trust Account of $12,051, the total amount held in the trust account totaled $227,262,051 at December 31, 2021. We also have $1,031,397 cash held outside of the trust account, after payment of costs related to the initial public offering, available for working capital purposes at December 31, 2021.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any outstanding working capital loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the sponsor a monthly fee of $14,000 for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to the Company. We began incurring these fees on October 22, 2021, and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to deferred commissions of $0.35 per unit, or $7,875,000 in the aggregate. The deferred commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the current liquidity conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through one year from the date of filing this Annual Report. The financial statements accompanying this Annual Report do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrants
We account for the public warrants and private placement warrants as liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 480, "Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity" (“ASC Topic 480”) and ASC Topic 815, "Derivatives and Hedging" (“ASC Topic 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC Topic 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC Topic 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC Topic 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent reporting period while the warrants are outstanding. Because we do not control the occurrence of events, such as a tender offer or exchange, that may trigger cash settlement of the warrants where not all of the shareholders also receive cash, the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, as such, the warrants must be recorded as derivative liability.
The public warrants are publicly traded and as such are classified as Level 1 (as described in the notes to financial statements accompanying this Annual Report) and no longer require a valuation. The estimated fair value of the private placement warrants is determined using Level 3 inputs (as described in the notes to financial statements accompanying this Annual Report). Inherent in a binomial model are assumptions related to expected stock-price volatility, expected term, dividend yield and risk-free interest rate. The Company estimates the volatility of its Class A ordinary shares based on management’s understanding of the volatility associated with instruments of other similar entities. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the private placement warrants. The expected life of the private placement warrants is simulated based on management assumptions regarding the timing and likelihood of completing a business combination. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates will remain at zero.
The inputs used as of December 31, 2021 were as follow: risk-free rate of 1.23%; expected term of 5.00 years for the warrants; expected volatility of 11.0% and stock price of $9.81.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in ASC Topic 480. Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity (deficit). The Company’s Class A ordinary shares contain certain redemption rights that are considered by the Company to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 22,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, at redemption value, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of the Company's balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable Class A ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in additional paid-in capital, or in the absence of additional paid-in capital, in accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
The statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per Class A redeemable public share and income (loss) per founder non-redeemable share following the two-class method of income per share. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the public Class A redeemable shares and founder non-redeemable shares, the Company first considered the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares. This is calculated using the total net income (loss) less any dividends paid. For purposes of calculating net income (loss) per share, any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the public shareholders.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)” to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity's own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company’ and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.