Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report, particularly in section Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this annual report.
Our audited consolidated financial statements are stated in United States dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles.
Restatement for Revenue Recognition and Cost of Goods Sold
In June 2022, while preparing the financial statements for the year-ending March 31, 2022, the Company identified an error with respect to the application of the revenue recognition accounting policy. In previous accounting periods, the Company identified three distinct performance obligations for the sale of marine scrubbers: certified design and engineering work, acceptance of delivered equipment to customers, and acceptance of commissioned equipment. These three components were determined to be separate performance obligations within the contracts. However, based on further analysis of our marine scrubber sale contracts and a review of the five-step revenue recognition model, the Company has now concluded that the three components do not meet the definition of being “distinct” according to ASC 606-10-25-14. Customers purchase the entire marine scrubber system and do not benefit from the separate components on their own. Therefore, a single performance obligation is appropriate.
According to ASC 606-10-25-27, if the entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, revenue should be recognized over time. The Company’s scrubber system is customized to each vessel at the detailed design level, so the performance under the contract does not create an asset with an alternative use. According to the Company’s contracts signed with customers under English law, the customers are contractually and legally obliged to pay for performance completed to date that covers cost plus a reasonable profit margin. The Company has sought independent legal counsel to confirm this conclusion. Therefore, the Company concluded that revenue from the sale of marine scrubbers should be recognized over time versus at points in time for the original three performance obligations. The Company recognizes revenue based on the input method and it is the change in the cost of goods sold (using a percentage of costs to complete) that has driven the change in revenues.
Reclassification of Cost of Goods Sold
The Company has reassessed its presentation of cost of goods sold.
In previous periods the Company presented the cost of amortization of its technical intellectual property in expenses. Having reconsidered this, the Company concludes that these costs relate to fulfilling its obligations under its marine scrubber revenue contracts and, as a result, should be presented within cost of goods sold. The Company has identified certain marine sales commission costs previously included in Management and technical consulting fees that it has determined should be presented within cost of goods sold as they are considered to relate to initiating its revenue contracts. In addition, through incremental analysis, the Company has also identified certain salaries previously included in Salaries and wages and technical consulting fees previously included in Management and technical consulting fees that it has determined are appropriate to present within cost of goods sold as they are considered to relate to fulfilling the Company’s obligations under its revenue contracts. The sales commission costs represented 12.6% of total cost of goods sold for the year ended March 31, 2021. The salaries and technical consulting fees represented 4.2% of total cost of goods sold for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Effects of Adjustments on the Restated Financial Statements
The correction of these errors and the restatement adjustments for these changes to the Company’s previously issued audited annual consolidated financial statements are shown in Note 2 to the financial statements, and the previously issued unaudited quarterly consolidated financial statements are shown in Note 22 to the financial statements.
The impact of the change to revenue recognition resulted in earlier recognition of revenues and related cost of goods sold for scrubber sales. The impact on the opening deficit at March 31, 2020 was a reduction of $2,353,912. For the year ended, March 31, 2021, revenues decreased by $8,795,042 and the related cost of goods sold decreased by $5,803,538 for a net reduction of $2,991,504 to net income.
Results of Operations
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements for the years ended March 31, 2022 and also for March 31, 2021 which is as restated.
Revenue for the year ended March 31, 2022 was $15,439,199 versus $52,618,478 for the year ended March 31, 2021. The Company’s revenues were mainly derived from the sale of products (marine scrubbers). During the year ended March 31, 2022, the Company was in the process of commissioning 8 (2021 - 44) marine scrubber units which contributed to revenue of $12,680,104 (2021 - $50,728,436). The decrease in revenue was due to a major client deferring 32 marine scrubber units. 6 of these units have proceeded while 13 have cancelled. The remainder are still postponed with an option to either proceed or cancel. Revenue from services, including specific services performed in the marine business sector and design and engineering services in the solar business sector, was $2,759,096 (2021 - $1,890,042).
During the year ended March 31, 2022, the gross profit margin for products and services were 80% (2021- 20%) and 26% (2021 - 38%) respectively. The gross profit margin for products increased in 2022 because of higher contract value and consistent cost of goods sold for marine scrubbers delivered in 2022. In addition, the Company released a $2.2 million accrual from a major supplier due to settlement. Overall, the gross profit margin for the year ended March 31, 2022 was approximately 70% (2021 - 20%).
Expenses for the year ended March 31, 2022 were $22,111,094 as compared to $16,350,477. This increase was due to large one-off impairment expenses of goodwill and intangible assets. This year, the company recovered bad debt expenses of $36,526, after receiving amounts previously assumed to be unrecoverable. Management and technical consulting fees were comprised of fees paid to our directors, officers and advisors for business development efforts and advisory services. Advertising and professional fees decreased due to reduced business activities. For the year ended March 31, 2022, the Company recorded a warranty expense recovery of $731,529 (2021 - expense of $1,228,092) related to the estimated expectation of warranty costs. The impact of various international factors on FX rates caused fluctuations which saw the Company’s foreign exchange losses increase dramatically.
For the year ended March 31, 2022, our company had a net loss of $10,752,458 ($0.23 per share) compared to net loss of $1,810,425 ($0.04 per share) for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Our financial results for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 are summarized as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
Cash Flows
As of March 31, 2022, we had $6,286,468 in cash, $24,854,658 in total current assets, $19,079,665 in total current liabilities, and working capital of $5,774,993, compared to working deficit of $589,893 as at March 31, 2021. The Company’s working capital improved as we released liabilities previously accrued with a major supplier through a settlement agreement and third party’s commitment for equity contribution. The Company’s prepaid manufacturing costs, contract liabilities and accruals changed significantly from period to period, depending on the status of equipment deliveries, customer receipts and payments to third party manufacturers.
During the year ended March 31, 2022, we used $15,955,899 in operating activities, whereas we received $3,402,719 from operating activities for the year ended March 31, 2021. Operating cash flows for the year ended March 31, 2022 primarily consist of deposits and installments received from customers and our corresponding manufacturing outlays. The negative operating cash flow for the year ended March 31, 2022 mainly resulted from reduction in revenue.
During the year ended March 31, 2022, we used $1,965,172 in investing activities, whereas we used $1,559,728 in investing activities during the year ended March 31, 2021. Our investing activities for the year ended March 31, 2022 were primarily related to the acquisition of office equipment.
During the year ended March 31, 2022, we used $99,504 related to financing activities, whereas we received $1,750 from financing activities during the year ended March 31, 2021. Our financing activity for the year ended March 31, 2022 related to exercise of stock options and repurchase of shares.
Anticipated Cash Requirements
We do not anticipate requiring additional funds to fund our forecast normal operating expenditure over the next 12 months. We do require funds to construct our first BESS 99.98MW facility project at Richborough Energy Park in Kent, United Kingdom. On May 11, 2022 the Company announced it had entered into a Subscription and Shareholders Agreement with a third party investor, who has committed $16 million (£13 million) of equity funds to the project. On June 21, 2022 the Company announced it had reached financial close (“Financial Close”) for $34.90 million (£28.25 million) of senior debt for the Richborough project. The senior debt, in conjunction with the equity investment, will provide the Company with the funding to bring the battery park to commercial operations in June 2023. The senior debt facility agreement is entered into with Close Leasing Limited (“CLL”), pursuant to which CLL will provide a development loan to fund the construction, which will be utilized in stages following the expenditure of the equity investment. The development loan will then be refinanced into a 10-year amortized term loan upon the start of commercial operations.
Our cash requirement estimates may change significantly depending on the nature of our business activities and our ability to raise capital from our shareholders or other sources.
We currently have office locations in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, China, Hong Kong, Abu Dhabi, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and Australia. We have hired staff in various regions and rely heavily upon the use of contractors and consultants. Our general and administrative expenses for the year will consist primarily of technical consultants, management, salaries and wages, professional fees, transfer agent fees, bank and interest charges and general office expenses. The professional fees relate to matters such as contract review, business acquisitions, regulatory filings, patent maintenance, and general legal, accounting and auditing fees.
Should we require additional funding over the next twelve months, we would intend to raise new cash requirements from private placements, shareholder loans or possibly a registered public offering (either self-underwritten or through a broker-dealer). If we are unsuccessful in raising enough money through such efforts, we may review other financing possibilities such as bank loans. At this time, we do not have a commitment from any broker-dealer to provide us with financing. There is no assurance that any financing will be available to us or if available, on terms that will be acceptable to us.
As of March 31, 2022, we had $6,286,468 in cash on hand. Our realized and anticipated profits derived from sales of ENVI marine units plus anticipated sales of products and services in our new Batteries and Solar businesses are expected to fund our planned expenditure levels. After careful consideration we believe current operations, anticipated deliveries and expected profit from such deliveries to be sufficient to cover expected cash operating expenses over the next 12 months.
Going Concern
Our financial statements for the year ended March 31, 2022 have been prepared on a going concern basis.
The assessment of the liquidity and going concern requires the Company to make judgments about the existence of conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued. This includes judgments about the Company’s future activities and the timing thereof and estimates of future cash flows. Significant assumptions used in the Company’s forecasted model of liquidity include forecasted sales, costs, and capital expenditures. Changes in the assumptions could have a material impact on the forecasted liquidity and going concern assessment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Our company bases its estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual results experienced by our company may differ materially and adversely from our company’s estimates. To the extent there are material differences between the estimates and the actual results, future results of operations will be affected. Accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and uncertainties.
Useful lives of Intangible Assets
The carrying value of our intangible assets represents its original cost at the time of purchase, less accumulated amortization. We depreciate our intangible assets using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives. The estimated useful life of our intangible assets are listed in the table below.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
We review long-lived assets such as property and equipment and intangible assets with finite useful lives for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstance indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The determination of whether impairment indicators exist requires significant judgment in evaluating underlying significant assumptions including expected sales contracts, operating costs, and current market value of assets. If an indication is identified, and the total of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of the asset, a loss is recognized for the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the asset.
We recorded an impairment charge of $2,641,639 on intangible assets during the year ended March 31, 2022 (2021- $37,700) as management’s estimated fair value of the assets were less than its carrying value.
Goodwill
We allocate the cost of acquired companies to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets and liabilities acquired, with the remaining amount being classified as goodwill. The allocation of the purchase price of acquired companies requires certain judgments and estimates. Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated annually for impairment at the reporting unit level or when indicators of a potential impairment are present. The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill requires significant judgment and are based upon existing contracts, historical experience, financial forecasts, and general economic conditions
We recorded an impairment charge of $3,870,223 on Engin goodwill and $549,092 on Innoergy goodwill during the year ended March 31, 2022 (2021- $nil) as management’s estimated fair value of the reporting unit was less than its carrying value determined during impairment testing.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue from the sale of products and delivery of services. Irrespective of the types of revenue described above, revenue is recognized when control of products or services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those promised products or services. The Company’s marine scrubber sales contracts contain a single performance obligation satisfied over time.
Revenue recognition requires significant judgements from management in regard to the determination of accounting treatment for contracts with customers. Management is required to assess contracts with customers to the identify whether performance obligations in the contract are distinct and to determine whether contract terms provide the Company with a basis to recognize revenue over time. As discussed in Note 2, the Company restated the March 31, 2021 financial statements to correctly account for its contracts with customers.
In previous accounting periods, the Company identified three distinct performance obligations for sale of marine scrubbers: certified design and engineering work, acceptance of delivered equipment to customers, and acceptance of commissioned equipment. These three components were determined to be separate performance obligations within the contracts. However, based on further analysis of our contracts and a review of the five-step revenue recognition model, the Company concluded that the three components do not meet the definition of being “distinct” according to ASC 606-10-25-14. Customers purchase the entire marine scrubber system and do not benefit from the separate components on their own. Therefore, a single performance obligation is appropriate.
According to ASC 606-10-25-27, if the entity’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to the entity and the entity has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, revenue should be recognized over time. The Company’s scrubber system is customized to each vessel at the detailed design level, so the performance under the contract does not create an asset with an alternative use. According to the Company’s contracts signed with customers under English law, the customers are contractually and legally obliged to pay for performance completed to date that covers cost plus a reasonable profit margin. Therefore, the Company concluded that revenue should be recognized over time versus at points in time for the original three performance obligations. The Company recognizes revenue based on the input method and it is the change in cost of goods sold (using a percentage of costs to complete) that has driven the change in revenues.
In the case of settlement agreements with customers where no continued performance obligation is required, we recognize revenue based on consideration settled according to the agreement.
A contract signed with one customer has a significant financing component. 20% of the contract price is payable at least 6 calendar months prior to the dry dock date. The remaining 80% is payable in 24 equal monthly installments starting at the end of the calendar month following the installation date on a vessel-by-vessel basis. As 80% of the contract price is payable after the last performance obligation towards the scrubber, a significant financing component is separated from revenue and interest income at 5.4% is recorded when payments are received from the customer.
Contract Liabilities, Prepaid Manufacturing Costs, and Accrued Revenue
We have analyzed our sales contracts under ASC 606 and identified performance conditions that are not directly correlated with contractual payment terms with customers. As a result of the timing differences between customer payments and satisfaction of performance conditions, contractual assets and contractual liabilities have been recognized.
Contractual arrangements with customers for the sale of a scrubber unit generally provide for deposits and installments through the procurement and design phases of equipment manufacturing. Amounts received from customers, which are not yet recorded as revenues under the Company’s revenue recognition policy, are presented as contract liabilities.
Similarly, contractual arrangements with suppliers and manufacturers normally involved with the manufacturing of scrubber units may require advances and deposits at various stages of the manufacturing process. Payments to our manufacturing partners, which are not yet recorded as costs of goods sold under the Company’s revenue recognition policy, are recorded as prepaid manufacturing costs.
The Company presents the contract liabilities and prepaid manufacturing costs on its balance sheet when one of the parties to the revenue contract and supply contract, respectively, has performed before the other.
Accrued revenue is revenue that has been earned by providing a good or service, but for which the Company has not yet billed the customer.
Accounts Receivable
We assess the collectability of accounts receivable and long-term receivable on an ongoing basis and establish an allowance for doubtful accounts when collection is no longer reasonably assured. In establishing the allowance, we consider factors such as known troubled accounts, historical experience, age, financial information that is publicly accessible and other currently available evidence.
Warranty Provision
The Company reserves a 2% warranty provision on the completion of a contract following the commissioning of marine scrubbers. The specific terms and conditions of those warranties vary depending upon the product sold and geography of sale. The Company’s product warranties generally start from the commissioning date and continue for up to twelve to twenty-four months. The Company provides warranties to customers for the design, materials, and installation of scrubber units. The Company has a back-to-back manufacturing guarantee from its major supplier, which covers materials, production, and installation. Factors that affect the Company’s warranty obligation include product failure rates, anticipated hours of product operations and costs of repair or replacement in correcting product failures. These factors are estimates that may change based on new information that becomes available each period. Similarly, the Company also accrues the estimated costs to address reliability repairs on products no longer in warranty when, in the Company’s judgment, and in accordance with a specific plan developed by the Company, it is prudent to provide such repairs. The Company intends to assess the adequacy of recorded warranty liabilities quarterly and adjusts the liability as necessary.