Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this annual report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon our current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this annual report.
Overview
We are a late clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing and commercializing novel treatments for gastrointestinal, or GI, diseases. Our initial product candidate, vonoprazan, is an oral small molecule P-CAB. P-CABs are a novel class of medicines that block acid secretion in the stomach. Vonoprazan has shown rapid, potent, and durable anti-secretory effects and has demonstrated clinical benefits over the current standard of care as a single agent in the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD, and in combination with antibiotics for the treatment of H. pylori infection. Takeda developed vonoprazan and has received marketing approval in numerous countries in Asia and Latin America as well as Russia. Vonoprazan generated approximately $850 million in net sales in its seventh full year on the market since its approval in Japan in late 2014. In May 2019, we in-licensed the U.S., European, and Canadian rights to vonoprazan from Takeda.
In 2021 we reported topline data from two pivotal Phase 3 clinical trials for vonoprazan: one for the treatment of H. pylori infection (PHALCON-HP), and a second for the treatment of erosive GERD (PHALCON-EE), also known as erosive esophagitis, or EE. In April 2021, we reported positive topline data from PHALCON-HP, and in October 2021, we reported positive topline data from PHALCON-EE. In September 2021, we submitted two new drug applications (NDAs) for treatment regimens containing vonoprazan for the treatment of H. pylori, and in November 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, accepted both NDAs for filing, granted each of them Priority Review, and assigned us a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) action date in May 2022. Based on the results of the PHALCON-EE trial, we expect to submit an NDA for vonoprazan for the treatment of erosive esophagitis in March 2022. In August 2019, we received Qualified Infectious Disease Product, or QIDP, and Fast Track designations from the FDA, for vonoprazan tablets in combination with amoxicillin tablets and clarithromycin tablets and with amoxicillin tablets alone for the treatment of H. pylori infection. In January 2021 and May 2021, respectively, we received additional Fast Track and QIDP designations to include amoxicillin capsules in addition to amoxicillin tablets. QIDP designation provides a potential extension of any regulatory exclusivity awarded, if approved. We have also initiated development of vonoprazan for the treatment of NERD. In February 2022, we commenced enrollment of patients in a Phase 3 trial studying vonoprazan, dosed on a once-daily basis, for the treatment of NERD with topline data expected in 2023. Also in February 2022, we reported positive topline data from a Phase 2 trial studying vonoprazan for on-demand treatment of NERD.
If approved, we plan to independently commercialize vonoprazan in the United States. We also plan to seek commercial partnerships for vonoprazan in Europe and Canada, expand development of vonoprazan into other indications, dosing regimens and alternative formulations and packaging, and in-license or acquire additional clinical or commercial stage product candidates for the treatment of GI diseases in a capital efficient manner.
We commenced our operations in 2018 and have devoted substantially all of our resources to date to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing our initial product candidate, vonoprazan, meeting with regulatory authorities, conducting our Phase 3 clinical trials of vonoprazan, preparing applications for regulatory approval for vonoprazan and preparing for a potential commercial launch. Our operations to date have been funded primarily through the issuance of convertible promissory notes, commercial bank debt, the proceeds from our initial public offering and our follow-on public offering. From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have raised aggregate gross proceeds of $90.3 million from the issuance of convertible promissory notes, $100.0 million of debt, net proceeds from our initial public offering of $191.5 million from the sale of 10,997,630 shares of common stock, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 1,434,473 additional shares at a public offering price of $19.00 per share, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs, and net proceeds of $88.6 million from the sale of 2,250,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $39.48 per share after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, and an additional $0.2 million in offering costs. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $183.3 million. Based on our current operating plan, and subject to the potential delays and cost increases resulting from the evolving COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents together with the drawdown of the remaining $100 million under our Loan Agreement with Hercules will be sufficient to fund our operations into the middle of 2023.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have incurred net losses since our inception. Our net losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $143.9 million and $129.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $529.4 million. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical development activities, other research and development activities and pre-commercialization activities. We expect our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially as we advance vonoprazan through clinical trials, seek regulatory approval for vonoprazan, expand our clinical, regulatory, quality, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities, incur significant commercialization expenses for marketing, sales, manufacturing and distribution if we obtain marketing approval for vonoprazan, protect our intellectual property, expand our general and administrative support functions, including hiring additional personnel, and incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We have never generated any revenue and do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for vonoprazan. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of vonoprazan, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, our Loan Agreement, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all, and this risk could be exacerbated by the impact of COVID-19 on global economic conditions. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
License Agreement with Takeda
On May 7, 2019, we and Takeda entered into the Takeda License, pursuant to which we in-licensed the U.S., European, and Canadian rights to vonoprazan fumarate. During the term of the Takeda License, we and our affiliates are not permitted to commercialize any pharmaceutical product, other than vonoprazan, that treats acid-related disorders, except for certain generic and OTC competing products in specified circumstances. We will be responsible at our cost for the development, manufacture and commercialization of vonoprazan products. We are required to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop and commercialize the vonoprazan products in our licensed territory.
Under the Takeda License, Takeda has the sole right and authority, with our input, to prepare, file, prosecute, and maintain all Takeda and joint patents on a worldwide basis at its own cost. We are responsible, at our cost, for preparing, filing, prosecuting, and maintaining patents on inventions made solely by us in connection with vonoprazan, subject to input from Takeda.
We paid Takeda upfront consideration consisting of a cash fee of $25.0 million, 1,084,000 shares of our common stock, the Takeda Warrant to purchase 7,588,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.00004613 per share, and issued Takeda a right to receive an additional common stock warrant, or the Takeda Warrant Right, if Takeda’s fully-diluted ownership of the Company represented less than a certain specified percentage of the fully-diluted capitalization, including shares issuable upon conversion of then outstanding convertible promissory notes, calculated immediately prior to the closing of our IPO. The Takeda Warrant Right expired without effect since no fair value had been allocated to it upon completion of our IPO, and no additional warrant was issued. We agreed to make milestone payments to Takeda upon achieving certain tiered aggregate annual net sales of licensed products in the United States, Europe and Canada up to a total maximum milestone amount of $250.0 million. We also agreed to make tiered royalty payments at percentages in the low double digits on net sales of licensed products, subject to specified offsets and reductions. Royalties will be payable, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis from the first commercial sale of such product in such country, until the latest of expiration of the licensed patents covering the applicable product, expiration of regulatory exclusivity in such country, or 15 years following first commercial sale in such country.
Components of Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
To date, our research and development expenses have related to the development of vonoprazan. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received.
Research and development expenses include:
•salaries, payroll taxes, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation charges for those individuals involved in research and development efforts;
•external research and development expenses incurred under agreements with CROs, and consultants to conduct and support our ongoing clinical trials of vonoprazan; and
•costs related to the manufacturing of vonoprazan for our clinical trials.
We plan to substantially increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of vonoprazan. We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future clinical trials and nonclinical studies of vonoprazan or any future product candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of clinical and preclinical development. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. In addition, we cannot forecast which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Our future clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the number of doses evaluated in the trials;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the phase of development of the product candidate;
•the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate; and
•delays and cost increases as a result of COVID-19
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, legal, human resources and other administrative functions, legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, and professional fees for accounting and consulting services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued research and development activities, pre-commercial preparation activities for vonoprazan and, if any future product candidate receives marketing approval, commercialization activities. We also anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs associated with operating as a public company.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest on our money market funds.
Interest Expense
Beginning on September 17, 2021, interest expense consists of (i) cash interest at a variable annual rate equal to the greater of (a) 5.50% and (b) the Prime Rate (as reported in the Wall Street Journal) plus 2.25% (the “Interest Rate”), (ii) payment-in-kind interest at a per annum rate of interest equal to 3.35%, and (iii) amortization of the Hercules Loan Agreement debt discount recorded in connection with the fair value of warrants issued to the lenders, the debt issuance costs incurred, and the obligation to make a final payment.
Prior to September 17, 2021, interest expense consisted of interest on our outstanding commercial bank debt with SVB at a variable annual rate equal to the greater of (a) 7.25% and (b) Prime Rate (as reported by the Wall Street Journal) plus 1.75% and amortization of the SVB Term Loan debt discount recorded in connection with the fair value of warrants issued to the lenders, the debt issuance costs incurred, and the obligation to make a final payment.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
In connection with the entry into the Loan Agreement, we issued the lenders warrants to purchase our capital stock, or the Lender Warrants. The Lender Warrants were accounted for as liabilities as they contained a holder put right under which the lenders could have required us to pay cash in exchange for the warrants. We adjusted the carrying value of the Lender Warrants to their estimated fair value at each reporting date, with any change in fair value of the warrant liabilities recorded as an increase or decrease to change in fair value of warrant liabilities in the statements of operations. The Lender Warrants were accounted for at fair value using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with an expected term equal to the remaining contractual term of the warrants. When we drew down an additional $25.0 million, or the Term Loan B, in March 2020, the Lender put right expired, and we recorded a final fair value adjustment and reclassified the Lender Warrants balance of $0.3 million to additional paid-in-capital.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were $72.3 million and $98.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease of $25.8 million consisted of $41.1 million of clinical trial costs, $0.7 million of consulting expenses, and $0.9 million of other operating expenses partially offset by an increase of $6.5 million of chemistry manufacturing and controls, or CMC, costs related to vonoprazan, $6.3 million of personnel-related expenses and $4.1 million of expenses related to regulatory requirements.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were $62.7 million and $27.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $35.2 million was due to increases of $17.2 million in personnel-related expenses, $15.7 million of professional services expenses for commercial, medical affairs and other services, $1.1 million in consulting fees and $1.2 million in other expenses. Due to the planned continued buildout of administrative and commercial functions, we expect General and Administrative expenses to increase in future periods.
Other Income (Expense). Other expense of $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $6.8 million of interest expense and $2.0 million of charges related to early extinguishment of debt. Other expense of $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $4.6 million of interest expense on outstanding commercial bank debt, partially offset by $1.1 million of interest income and $0.1 million of other income related to the decrease in the fair value of warrant liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $183.3 million.
Loan Agreement with Hercules
On September 17, 2021, (the “Closing Date”), we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Hercules Capital, Inc., in its capacity as administrative agent and collateral agent and as a lender (in such capacity, the “Agent” or “Hercules”) and the other financial institutions that from time to time become parties to the Loan Agreement as lenders (collectively, the “Lenders”).
The Loan Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $200.0 million (the “Term Loan”) under multiple tranches. The tranches consist of (i) a first tranche consisting of term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $100.0 million, all of which was funded on the Closing Date (the “First Advance”), (ii) a second tranche consisting of up to an additional $50.0 million, which became available to us upon achievement of the protocol-specified primary efficacy endpoints in our Phase 3 trial studying vonoprazan for the healing and maintenance of healing of erosive esophagitis with acceptable safety data, such that the results support the submission of a New Drug Application (“NDA”) or supplemental NDA without the need to conduct another Phase 3 study and will be available, if specified conditions are met, through December 15, 2022, (iii) a third tranche consisting of an additional $25.0 million, which will become available to us upon the achievement of (a) FDA approval of our NDA for vonoprazan and amoxicillin, or its NDA for vonoprazan, amoxicillin and clarithromycin, in each case for an indication relating to the treatment of H. pylori with an approved indication on the claim that is generally consistent with that sought in our NDA submission; and (b) filing of an NDA or supplemental NDA for vonoprazan for indications relating to the healing and maintenance of healing of erosive esophagitis (milestones (a) and (b), together, the “Second Performance Milestone”), and will be available, if specified conditions are met, through September 30, 2023, and (iv) a fourth tranche consisting of up to an additional $25.0 million, which will be available, if specified conditions are met, through March 31, 2024, upon achievement of the Second Performance Milestone. We intend to use the proceeds of the Term Loan advances for working capital and general corporate purposes. In addition, approximately $54 million of the proceeds from the First Advance was used to satisfy in full and retire our indebtedness under its previously outstanding credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank (the “SVB Term Loan”).
The Term Loan will mature on October 1, 2026 (the “Maturity Date”). The Term Loan bears (i) cash interest at a variable annual rate equal to the greater of (a) 5.50% and (b) the Prime Rate (as reported in the Wall Street Journal) plus 2.25% (the “Interest Rate”) and (ii) payment-in-kind interest at a per annum rate of interest equal to 3.35%. We may make payments of interest only through October 1, 2024, which may be extended to October 1, 2025, upon the achievement of the Second Performance Milestone on or prior to September 30, 2024 and the condition that no default or event of default exists, and which is further extendable to October 1, 2026, subject to FDA approval of our NDA (or supplemental NDA) for vonoprazan for an indication relating to the healing and maintenance of healing of erosive esophagitis with an approved indication on the label that is generally consistent with that sought in our NDA submission (or supplemental NDA submission) (the “Third Performance Milestone”) on or prior to September 30, 2025 and no default or event of default exists (the “interest only period”). After the interest-only period, the principal balance and related interest will be required to be repaid in equal monthly installments and continuing until the Maturity Date.
The Loan Agreement contains customary closing fees, prepayment fees and provisions, events of default, and representations, warranties and covenants, including a financial covenant requiring us to maintain certain levels of cash subject to a control agreement in favor of the Agent (minus accounts payable not paid within 120 days of invoice) (“Qualified Cash”), and commencing on May 15, 2023, trailing three-month net product revenue from the sale of vonoprazan and products containing vonoprazan. The revenue covenant will be waived at any time in which we maintain Qualified Cash equal to at least 60.0% (prior to the Third Performance Milestone), and 35% (following the Third Performance Milestone) of the total outstanding Term Loan principal amount, or our market capitalization is at least $900.0 million.
As collateral for the obligations, we granted to Hercules a senior security interest in all of our right, title, and interest in, to and under substantially all of our property, inclusive of intellectual property.
In connection with the entry into the Loan Agreement, we issued to Hercules a warrant (the “Warrant”) to purchase a number of shares of our common stock equal to 2.5% of the aggregate amount of the Term Loan advances funded, and will issue to Hercules additional warrants when future Term Loan advances are funded. On the Closing Date, we issued a Warrant for 74,782 shares of common stock. The Warrant will be exercisable for a period of seven years from the date of issuance at a per-share exercise price equal to $33.43, which was the closing price of our common stock on September 16, 2021.
Commercial Bank Debt with SVB
On May 14, 2019, we entered into the Loan Agreement with SVB, as administrative and collateral agent, and lenders SVB and WestRiver Innovation Lending Fund VIII, L.P. We borrowed $25.0 million, Term Loan A, at the inception of the Loan Agreement and an additional $25.0 million, Term Loan B, in March 2020, which we collectively refer to as the Term Loans.
The SVB Term Loan bore interest at a floating rate of the higher of the Wall Street Journal Prime rate plus 1.75% or 7.25%. Under the original SVB Loan Agreement, the monthly payments consisted of interest-only through May 31, 2021. Pursuant to the first amendment to the SVB Term Loan entered into on March 11, 2020, and the second amendment to the SVB Term Loan entered into on March 11, 2021, the interest-only payment period was initially extended through July 31, 2021, and was further extended until December 31, 2021, after we received positive data from its Phase 3 clinical trial in H. pylori infection sufficient to file a new drug application, or NDA, with the FDA. The interest-only payment period could have been further extended until November 30, 2022, if we would receive positive data from its Phase 3 clinical trial in erosive esophagitis for vonoprazan sufficient to file an NDA with the FDA. Subsequent to the interest-only period, the Term Loans would have been payable in equal monthly installments of principal, plus accrued and unpaid interest through the maturity date of May 1, 2024.
In addition, we were obligated to pay a final payment fee of 8.25% of the original principal amount of the SVB Term Loan. We could have elected to prepay all or a portion of the SVB Term Loan prior to maturity, subject to a prepayment fee of up to 2.0% of the then outstanding principal balance and payment of a pro rata portion of the final payment fee. After repayment, no SVB Term Loan amounts could have been borrowed again. The borrowings under the SVB Term Loan were collateralized by substantially all of our assets.
The SVB Term Loan contained certain customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default. The affirmative covenants included, among others, covenants requiring us to maintain our legal existence and governmental approvals, deliver certain financial reports, maintain insurance coverage and satisfy certain requirements regarding our operating accounts. The negative covenants included, among others, limitations on our ability to incur additional indebtedness and liens, merge with other companies or consummate certain changes of control, acquire other companies, engage in new lines of business, make certain investments, pay dividends, transfer or dispose of assets, amend certain material agreements or enter into various specified transactions. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, subject to any specified cure periods, all amounts owed by us would have begun to bear interest at a rate that is 4.00% above the rate effective immediately before the event of default and could have been declared immediately due and payable by SVB, as collateral agent.
In connection with the SVB Term Loan, we issued Lender Warrants, which became exercisable when we borrowed Term Loan B in March 2020. The Lender Warrants are exercisable for 16,446 shares of common stock. The Lender Warrants expire ten years from the date of issuance. The Lender Warrants included a put option pursuant to which, in the event that we did not draw down Term Loan B on or before March 31, 2020, the warrant holders could have required us to repurchase the warrants for a total aggregate repurchase price of $0.5 million. Upon the Term Loan B draw in March 2020, the put option related to the Lender Warrants expired, at which time we recorded a final fair value adjustment and reclassified the Lender Warrants balance of $0.3 million to additional paid-in-capital.
At-the-Market-Offering
On November 10, 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM, or the Sales Agreement, with Jefferies LLC, or the Sales Agent, under which we may, from time to time, sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $125.0 million through the Sales Agent, or the ATM Offering. Sales of our common stock made pursuant to the Sales Agreement, if any, will be made under our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 which was filed on November 10, 2020 and declared effective by the SEC on November 16, 2020. We are not obligated to, and we cannot provide any assurances that we will, make any sales of the shares under the Sales Agreement. The Sales Agreement may be terminated by the Sales Agent or us at any time. There were no sales of our common stock under the ATM Offering for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Underwritten Public Offering
On December 16, 2020, the Company completed an underwritten public offering, in which it sold 2,250,000 shares of its common stock at a price of $42.00 per share for total gross proceeds of $94.5 million. The net purchase price after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions was $39.48 per share, which generated net proceeds of $88.8 million. We incurred an additional $0.2 million of offering expenses in connection with the public offering.
Funding Requirements
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents together with the drawdown of the remaining $100 million under our Loan Agreement with Hercules will be sufficient to fund our operations into the middle of 2023. We expect such current cash and cash equivalents, when combined with our anticipated borrowing ability, will allow us to complete our ongoing Phase 3 clinical trial studying vonoprazan for NERD (daily dosing), and, if approved, launch vonoprazan for H. pylori and erosive esophagitis.. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress and expenses in these trials is uncertain.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the initiation, type, number, scope, results, costs and timing of our clinical trials of vonoprazan, and preclinical studies or clinical trials of other potential product candidates we may choose to pursue in the future, including feedback received from regulatory authorities;
•delays and cost increases as a result of COVID-19;
•the costs and timing of manufacturing for vonoprazan or any future product candidates, including commercial scale manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of vonoprazan or any future product candidates;
•the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel to satisfy our obligations as a public company, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our business grows, including additional executive officers and clinical development personnel;
•the timing and amount of the milestone or other payments we must make to Takeda and any future licensors;
•the costs and timing of establishing or securing sales and marketing capabilities for vonoprazan or any future product candidate;
•our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products;
•patients’ willingness to pay out-of-pocket for any approved products in the absence of coverage and/or adequate reimbursement from third-party payors;
•the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements; and
•costs associated with any products or technologies that we may in-license or acquire.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, the Loan Agreement, debt financings, or other capital sources, including potential collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise funds through collaborations, or other similar arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us and/or may reduce the value of our common stock. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Including our existing cash and cash equivalents, we believe that we have sufficient working capital on hand to fund operations such that there is no substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern at the date the financial statements were issued. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding, that our projections of future working capital needs will prove accurate, or that any additional funding would be sufficient to continue operations in future years. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents together with the drawdown of the remaining $100 million under the Loan Agreement with Hercules will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements into the middle of 2023.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $148.6 million and $69.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to approximately $121.1 million spent on ongoing research and development and general and administrative activities and a $27.5 net change in operating assets and liabilities. The net change in operating assets and liabilities primarily related to a $28.1 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses (including clinical trial expenses) in support of the growth in our operating activities, partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in prepaid assets. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to approximately $121.4 million spent on ongoing research and development and general and administrative activities, partially offset by a $51.7 million net change in operating assets and liabilities. The net change in operating assets and liabilities primarily related to a $8.0 million decrease in prepaid clinical activities, and a $43.9 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses in support of the growth in our operating activities, partially offset by a $0.2 million increase in other long-term assets.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to the cash we paid for acquiring property, plant and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $44.7 million, due to $96.9 million of net proceeds from the loan agreement with Hercules and $1.9 million of proceeds related to stock option exercises partially offset by the $54.1 million repayment of the SVB Term Loan. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $114.4 million, due to $88.8 million of proceeds from our underwritten public offering, $25.0 million of proceeds from our commercial bank debt, and $0.6 million of proceeds related to stock option exercises during the year.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
In addition to the contractual obligations summarized above, on May 5, 2020, we entered into a Commercial Supply Agreement with Takeda, pursuant to which Takeda will supply commercial quantities of vonoprazan bulk drug product. We incurred $1.8 million and $0.3 million of expenses related to the Commercial Supply Agreement during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We have an estimated remaining minimum purchase obligation of approximately $0.4 million related to this agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we are unable to estimate the timing of future expenses and, therefore, any related payments are not included in the table above.
Additionally, on December 30, 2020, we entered into a Supply and Packaging Services Agreement with Sandoz, pursuant to which Sandoz has agreed to supply commercial quantities of amoxicillin capsules and clarithromycin tablets, to package these antibiotics with vonoprazan, in finished convenience packs, and to supply us with these convenience packs. The supply agreement commits the Company to a minimum purchase obligation of approximately $3.8 million during the first 24-month period following the launch of the final product. As of December 31, 2021, we are unable to estimate the timing of future expenses and, therefore, any related payments are not included in the table above. We have not incurred any expenses under the agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business for our contract research services, contract manufacturing services, professional services and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and, therefore, are cancelable contracts and not included in the table above.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements and accompanying notes. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Leases
At the inception of any contractual arrangements we may enter into, we determine whether the contract contains a lease by assessing whether there is an identified asset and whether the contract conveys the right to control the use of the identified asset in exchange for consideration over a period of time. If both criteria are met, we record the associated lease liability and corresponding right-of-use asset upon commencement of the lease using either the implicit rate or a discount rate based on our credit-adjusted secured borrowing rate commensurate with the term of the lease. Additionally, we evaluate leases at their inception to determine if they are to be accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. We assess if a lease is accounted for as a finance lease if it meets one of the following five criteria: the lease has a purchase option that is reasonably certain of being exercised, the present value of the future cash flows is substantially all of the fair market value of the underlying asset, the lease term is for a significant portion of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset, the title to the underlying asset transfers at the end of the lease term, or if the underlying asset is of such a specialized nature that it is expected to have no alternative uses to the lessor at the end of the term. We account for leases that do not meet the finance lease criteria as operating leases, representing our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term. We also recognize operating lease liabilities as our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. We recognize operating lease liabilities with a term greater than one year and their corresponding right-of-use assets on the balance sheet at the commencement date of the lease based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. As needed, we make certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received. Because our leases do not typically provide an implicit rate, we utilize the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term and in a similar economic environment. We recognize lease costs on a straight-line basis over the lease term and variable lease payments as operating expenses in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. Variable lease payments primarily include common area maintenance, utilities, real estate taxes, insurance, and other operating costs that are passed on from the lessor in proportion to the space we lease.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense represents the cost of the grant date fair value of equity awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (generally the vesting period) on a straight-line basis with forfeitures recognized as they occur. We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to determine the fair value of our stock awards. Through December 31, 2021, our stock-based compensation expense consisted of recognized fair value related to our issuance of restricted stock awards, for which the fair value is determined based on the fair value of the underlying common stock, stock options, and ESPP awards.
Other Company Information
JOBS Act
As an emerging growth company under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, we will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of Sarbanes-Oxley.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the consummation of our IPO, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year, or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information required by this item is included in Note 1, Organization, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 15 of this annual report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented we did not have, nor do we currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.