ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Please refer to the discussion under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Overview
Phio Pharmaceuticals Corp. (“Phio,” “we,” “our” or the “Company”) is seeking to address the biggest challenges in immuno-oncology by creating new pathways to a cancer-free future for patients. We are developing therapeutics that leverage our INTASYL™ technology to target both tumor and immune cells by regulating genes to strengthen a patient’s immune system while weakening tumor defense mechanisms. With our INTASYL self-delivering RNAi technology, we aim to bring the benefits of RNA therapeutics into cancer care where other modalities may fall short.
We are developing a pipeline of immuno-oncology therapies using our INTASYL technology that has the ability to attack cancers in multiple ways. Our INTASYL-based therapeutics are used to: (1) strengthen immune cells, for example those administered as part of adoptive cell therapy (“ACT”), and (2) directly modify cells in the tumor microenvironment (the “TME”) to weaken a tumor’s defense. These two strategies allow for multiple therapeutic applications of our INTASYL products.
In contrast to other RNA technologies and platforms, the self-delivering nature of our INTASYL platform makes it ideally suited for use with ACT treatments, as well as for direct therapeutic use. By using INTASYL technology during the manufacturing of ACT cell products we can improve the phenotype and function of these cells, potentially leading to better therapeutic outcomes. Multiple inhibitory mechanisms restrain immune cells from effectively eradicating tumors, including immune checkpoints, reduced cell fitness and cell persistence. Furthermore, the immunosuppressive TME can pose a formidable barrier to immune cell infiltration and function. By using INTASYL based drugs administered directly, we can also reprogram cells in the TME to help overcome these immunosuppressive mechanisms.
INTASYL Use To Improve Adoptive Cell Therapy Products
ACT consists of the administration of immune cells with antitumor properties to patients to fight cancer after growing the cells in a lab to large numbers. These cells can be derived from unmodified (i.e. naturally occurring) immune cells, immune cells isolated from resected tumors or genetically engineered immune cells that recognize tumor cells. These cells have several shortcomings that inhibit their full therapeutic potential in patients with solid tumors.
There are several types of ACT, including: a.) non-engineered cell therapy in which immune cells are grown from the patient’s tumor or blood, such as tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (“TILs”), or from donor blood or tissue such as natural killer (“NK”) cells, dendritic cells (“DC”) and macrophages, and b.) genetically engineered immune cells that are genetically modified to recognize specific tumor proteins and to remain in an activated state (such as T cell receptor technology (“TCRs”), chimeric antigen receptor (“CAR”) T cells, or CAR-NK cells).
Multiple inhibitory mechanisms restrain immune cells used in ACT from effectively eradicating tumors, including immune checkpoints, reduced cell fitness and cell persistence, and other barriers to immune cell infiltration and function mainly in solid tumors. When used in ACT, we believe our INTASYL compounds can improve immune cell function, differentiation and metabolism, in order to make these immune cells more effective without the need for additional complicated manufacturing steps and/or genetic engineering.
Our approach builds on well-established methodologies of ACT and involves the treatment of immune cells with our INTASYL compounds ex vivo while they are grown in the lab and before administering them to the patient. In contrast to other RNA technologies, our INTASYL compounds do not require a delivery vehicle to penetrate into the cells, therefore we are able to enhance the function of these cells by merely adding our INTASYL compounds during the expansion process and without the need for genetic engineering, complex delivery vehicles or formulations, or additional complex manufacturing steps, which in themselves may be detrimental to the cells. By adding INTASYL to the cell culture media used during the cell expansion, we can reduce or eliminate the expression of genes that make the immune cells less effective.
Our lead product candidate, and our most advanced program being developed by the Company in ACT, is PH-762. PH-762 is an INTASYL compound that activates immune cells to better recognize and kill cancer cells by reducing the expression of the checkpoint protein PD-1, a clinically validated target for immunotherapy. Checkpoint proteins, such as PD-1, normally act as a type of “off switch” that prevent T cells, immune cells that protect the body from cancer cells and infections, from attacking certain cells in the body, such as cancer cells. The expression of PD-1 enables the cancer cell to evade the T cell. Reducing the expression of PD-1 can thereby reduce the ability of cancer cells to avoid T cell detection.
Data has shown that PH-762 silences PD-1 checkpoint expression in T cells, thereby removing the “off switch” and enabling T cells to overcome tumor resistance mechanisms, and thus improving their ability to destroy tumor cells. Preclinical studies show that PH-762 can silence the expression of PD-1 in target human T cells in a potent and durable manner and can increase their tumor cell-killing ability. Patient derived T cells treated with PH-762, in comparison to untreated T cells, were shown to have increased tumor killing potency against tumor cells of the same patient. As a result, we believe that PH-762 in ACT is well-positioned to enhance therapeutic responses in cancer.
In March 2021, the Company announced that it entered into a clinical development collaboration with AgonOx, Inc. (“AgonOx”), a private company developing a pipeline of novel immunotherapy drugs targeting key regulators of the immune response to cancer, in which the companies will collaborate on the development of novel T cell-based therapies using PH-762 and AgonOx’s “double positive” TIL (“DP TIL”) technology. Per the terms of the clinical development agreement, AgonOx will receive financial support from Phio to conduct a clinical trial in ACT with their DP TIL technology and PH-762, and Phio will be entitled to certain future development milestones and sales-based royalty payments from AgonOx’s DP TIL technology. AgonOx has demonstrated that their DP TIL enriched cell populations have increased tumor killing activity when compared to TILs that were not enriched prior to expansion. Preclinical data from our research collaboration with AgonOx has shown that treating DP TILs with PH-762 increases the tumor killing activity of the DP TILs even further (a two-fold increase). As a result, we expect the use of PH-762 treated DP TILs to enhance therapeutic responses in cancer. Based on this data, our clinical development collaboration will focus on conducting a clinical study for PH-762 treated DP TILs. As a result of impacts from the coronavirus pandemic, the availability of certain materials for the clinical trial are delayed. Based upon current information, the Company expects to start the clinical trial evaluating the use of PH-762 and DP TILs in ACT in the second quarter of 2022.
PH-762 use in ACT is not limited to TILs, but can also be used on other forms of T cell-based cell therapy. We recently presented in vivo data showing that PH-762 significantly enhanced the antitumor efficacy of HER2-targeted CAR-T cells (“HER2CART”) in solid tumors. Compared to untreated HER2CART cells, HER2CART cells treated with PH-762 showed a statistically significant and durable inhibition of tumor growth. Analysis of the PH-762 treated HER2CART cells isolated from the tumors suggest that PH-762 enhances CAR-T function through multiple mechanisms including enhanced efficiency, degranulation and promotion of memory/stem populations. We believe that this data provides proof of concept for the application of PD-1 checkpoint silencing with INTASYL in CAR-T cells prior to ACT to enhance the therapeutic efficacy of CAR-T cell therapy in solid tumors.
Our second product candidate in development for use in ACT is PH-894. PH-894 is an INTASYL compound that silences the epigenetic protein BRD4, which is an intracellular regulator of gene expression that impacts cell differentiation, and hence, cell function. Like other epigenetic targets, BRD4 is a protein that has been shown to be difficult to target with current drug modalities. Since BRD4 is an intracellular protein, antibody therapies cannot be used and small molecule inhibitors tested to date typically lack the required specificity. As our INTASYL compounds can target intracellular proteins as well as extracellular proteins with a high level of specificity, we believe that PH-894 has significant potential. In collaboration with the Karolinska Institutet in Sweden, PH-894 has been shown to improve T cell function and persistence by differentiating T cells into a more active state (stem-cell like memory phenotype). We have demonstrated that the application of PH-894 is shown to silence BRD4 in human T cells during expansion for ACT, which has the potential to confer superior anti-tumor activity.
Our INTASYL compound PH-804 is also being developed for use in ACT. PH-804 targets the suppressive immune receptor TIGIT, which is a checkpoint protein present on immune cells, such as T cells and NK cells. Similar to PD-1, cancer cells can suppress the activity of these immune cells by activating TIGIT. This triggers an “off switch,” resulting in tumor immune evasion, which can be prevented by blocking or silencing TIGIT. PH-804 provides powerful dose-dependent silencing of TIGIT that can be seen in both T cells and NK cells and we have shown that PH-804 can silence the expression of TIGIT in these cells, overcoming their “off switch” and thereby becoming “weaponized” to kill cancer cells.
Direct Therapeutic Use of INTASYL Towards the Tumor Microenvironment
Cancer cells have evolved natural defenses that can suppress the immune system surrounding the tumor, in an area called the tumor microenvironment, which decreases the effectiveness of many traditional immunotherapies. Reprogramming different cell types in the TME, such as cancer cells and immune cells, may overcome these natural tumor defenses and decrease resistance to immunotherapy. An optimal treatment therapy should have the ability to address targets both inside and on the surface of tumor and immune cells, creating multiple ways to prevent tumors from evading immune detection. Our INTASYL compounds can target both intracellular and extracellular targets, and are also being developed for use as direct therapeutics to reprogram the TME, for example, by in situ transfection and activation of immune cells in the TME. Therefore, INTASYL-based drug therapy is a novel way of fighting cancer by reprogramming the cells in the TME to make cancer more responsive to a patient’s immune system and to other anti-cancer drugs.
Our most advanced program being developed by the Company in our direct to tumor therapy programs, is PH-762. We have shown that we can reprogram the TME with PH-762 and achieve local activation of immune cells. Preclinical studies conducted by the Company showed that local administration of PH-762 through intratumoral injection resulted in potent anti-tumoral effects. Treated animals showed a complete and statistically significant inhibition of tumor growth, whereas placebo treated animals displayed exponential tumor growth. Recently announced in vivo data showed that intratumoral treatment with PH-762 inhibits tumor growth in a dose dependent fashion in PD-1 responsive and refractory models. Furthermore, on target efficacy was supported by modulation of immune cell populations toward anti-tumor phenotypes. Importantly, local administration of PH-762 resulted in activity against distal untreated tumors, indicative of a systemic anti-tumor response. The Company believes this data further supports the potential for PH-762 to provide a strong local immune checkpoint blockade without the dose immune-related adverse effects seen with systemic antibody therapy.
In January 2022, the Company was granted clinical trial authorization (CTA) by the French National Agency for the Safety of Medicines and Health Products to proceed with our first-in-human clinical trial for PH-762 to treat patients with melanoma at the Gustave Roussy Institute, one of the largest cancer centers in Europe. This first clinical trial with PH-762 will be a Phase 1b study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and anti-tumor activity of PH-762 in a neoadjuvant setting in subjects with advanced melanoma. Currently, there are no neoadjuvant treatment options approved for these patients. The clinical study will feature a dose escalation of PH-762 monotherapy and is designed to allow for a data driven evaluation of the recommended Phase 2 dose. The Company expects to start patient enrollment in the first quarter of 2022.
Our second direct to tumor product candidate is PH-894. In a study conducted in collaboration with the Karolinska Institutet, we demonstrated that PH-894 resulted in a strong, concentration dependent and durable silencing of BRD4 in T cells, and in various cancer cells. Data published with PH-894 in a hepatocellular carcinoma model showed potent and statistically significant anti-tumoral effects when administered locally. These data show that our PH-894 compound can reprogram T cells and other cells in the TME to provide enhanced immunotherapeutic activity. Recent in vivo data showed that local administration of PH-894 also resulted in a systemic anti-tumor response, similar to PH-762. PH-894 shows the power of our INTASYL compounds to modulate the expression of intracellular and/or commonly considered “undruggable” targets, a limitation for small molecule and antibody therapies. The Company currently expects to finalize IND-enabling studies for PH-894 in the second half of 2022.
We are also investigating the use of INTASYL to target multiple genes in a single formulation. New study data showed that PH-3861, a dual-targeting INTASYL towards PD-1 and BRD4, elicited complete cure of tumors in an in vivo hepatoma model and outperformed the efficacy of the small molecule and antibody control treatments toward the same targets. In addition, local INTASYL therapy was shown to induce a systemic anti-tumor response with clearance of untreated distal tumors. The animals which showed complete cure of their tumors were then rechallenged over two months after the original treatment of PH-3861 by re-implanting hepatoma cancer cells at a different location to the original tumor. All of the mice that were rechallenged with new tumors were cured again without requiring further treatment, while tumors grew steadily in the control group as expected. We believe that these data demonstrate that local administration of PH-3861 provides a durable and systemic anti-tumor immune response that can combat tumor growth.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
While measures to contain and prevent the spread of coronavirus and its variants may be modified or extended, we expect that our activities, including our internal research and development functions, will continue to remain largely operational, though we have experienced and may continue to experience delays in our clinical activities. We have implemented safety measures following the guidance provided by the World Health Organization (the “WHO”), the Centers for Disease Control (the “CDC”) and governmental authorities, such as working remotely and flexible scheduling. We expect to continue following these safety measures and may take further actions as we require, as government authorities require or recommend, or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees.
Current and future pandemic-related restrictions may further impact our operations and may slow or diminish our research and development activities.
As a result of the coronavirus pandemic, certain of our third-party suppliers and service providers on which we rely have seen impacts to their operations. The Company has undertaken efforts to mitigate potential future impacts by identifying and engaging alternative third-party service providers and suppliers, and because of that, the Company has been able to limit the impact of delays from our third-party service providers to our program’s anticipated timelines. However, the continued impacts to our third-party service providers, including, for example, limited availability of certain services and supplies, began to significantly affect our operations in the second quarter of 2021, resulting in delays to certain of our clinical program timelines. Further, while the steps required for us to initiate our clinical trials with PH-762 are ongoing, the commencement of new clinical trials and the enrollment and participation of patients in clinical trials have been impacted as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, and the Company does not yet know the full extent of similar potential delays or impacts related to its planned clinical activities. If measures to overcome the pandemic are insufficient, the availability of supplies and services that we purchase and rely on could be further reduced or delayed, which may in turn further slow or delay our preclinical and clinical activities.
In May 2020, the Company applied for and received a loan of $231,252 under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). In February 2021, the Small Business Administration (the “SBA”) approved the Company’s application for full loan forgiveness, and the full amount of the PPP loan was remitted to the lender for forgiveness. We believe this loan helped to mitigate the financial impact to us of the coronavirus pandemic on our financial condition.
While we believe that the coronavirus pandemic has not had a significant impact on our financial condition to date, the extent to which the pandemic impacts our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. There may be developments outside of our control that require us to adjust our operating plans, including new information which may emerge concerning the actions to contain the coronavirus or treat its impact, among others. We do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our business or our preclinical and clinical trial activities, and, therefore, given the nature of the situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact of the coronavirus on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and could have a material impact on our reported results. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments and estimates we use in preparing our financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses are charged to expense as incurred. Payments made by the Company in advance for research and development services not yet provided and/or for materials not yet received are recorded as prepaid expenses and expensed when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received. Accrued liabilities are recorded with respect to services provided and/or materials that it has received for which vendors have not yet billed the Company. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiation, vary from provider to provider and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In other instances, payment depends on factors such as the successful completion of milestones.
We are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses, of which a significant portion relate to third party providers the Company has contracted with to perform various research activities on our behalf for the continued development of our product candidates. This process includes reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, estimating the service performed and the associated cost incurred for research and development services not yet billed or otherwise notified of actual cost. Accrued liabilities for the services provided by contract research organizations are recorded during the period incurred based on such estimates and assumptions as expected cost, passage of time, the level of effort to be expended in each period, the achievement of milestones and other information available to us. Estimates of our research and development accruals are assessed on a quarterly basis based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and facts and circumstances known to us at that time, and adjusted accordingly.
Actual results may differ from these estimates and could have a material impact on the Company’s reported results. The Company’s historical accrual estimates have not been materially different from its actual costs. Due to the nature of estimates, we cannot provide assurance that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the conduct of our research activities.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company follows the provisions of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards. The fair value of restricted stock units is based upon our closing stock price at the grant date. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock options at the grant date. The Black-Scholes valuation model requires the input of valuation assumptions to calculate the value of stock options, including expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period, which generally represents the vesting period, and commences at the date of grant based on the fair value of the award.
Stock-based compensation expense recognized in the financial statements is based on awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Accordingly, we are also required to estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and to revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting award forfeitures and record stock-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. Our forfeiture rate estimates are based on an analysis of our actual forfeiture experience, employee turnover behavior, and other factors. The impact of any adjustments to our forfeiture rates is recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period of adjustment. To the extent that actual forfeitures differ from our estimates, the difference is recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period the estimates are revised.
Derivative Financial Instruments
During the normal course of business we may issue warrants to vendors as consideration to perform services. We may also issue warrants as part of a debt or equity financing. Warrants and other derivative financial instruments are accounted for either as equity or as an asset or liability, depending on the characteristics of each derivative financial instrument. Financial instruments that do not meet the definition of a derivative are classified as equity and measured at fair value and recorded as additional paid in capital in stockholders’ equity at the date of issuance. No further adjustments to their valuation are made. Financial instruments that meet the definition of a derivative are classified as an asset or liability are measured at fair value on the issuance date and are revalued on each subsequent balance sheet date. The changes in the fair value are recognized as current period income or loss.
Leases
At the inception of a contract, the Company determines whether the contract is or contains a lease based on all relevant facts and circumstances. For contracts that contain a lease, the Company identifies the lease and non-lease components, determines the consideration in the contract and recognizes the classification of the lease as operating or financing. For leases with a term greater than one year, the Company recognizes a liability to make lease payments and an asset representing the right to use the underlying asset during the lease term at the commencement date of the lease.
Lease liabilities and the corresponding right of use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments to be made over the lease term. The discount rate used to calculate the present value is the rate implicit in the lease, or if not readily determinable, the Company’s incremental borrowing rate. The Company’s incremental borrowing rate is the rate of interest that the Company would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Certain adjustments to the right of use asset may be required for items such as initial direct costs or incentives received. Lease payments, including scheduled increases, on operating leases are recognized on a straight-line basis over the expected term of the lease. Lease payments on financing leases are recognized using the effective interest method.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenues
To date, we have primarily generated revenues through government grants. We have not generated any commercial product revenue.
In the future, we may generate revenue from a combination of government grants, research and development agreements, license fees and other upfront payments, milestone payments, product sales and royalties in connection with future strategic collaborators and partners. We expect that any revenue we generate will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing of the achievement of any preclinical, clinical or commercial milestones and the timing and amount of payments received relating to those milestones and the extent to which any of our product candidates are approved and successfully commercialized by us or strategic collaborators and partners. If the Company or any future partner fails to develop product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, then our ability to generate future revenue and our results of operations and financial position would be adversely affected.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses relate to compensation and benefits for research and development personnel, facility-related expenses, supplies, external services, costs to acquire technology licenses, research activities under our research collaborations, expenses associated with preclinical and clinical development activities and other operating costs. Our research and development programs are focused on the development of immuno-oncology therapeutics based on our INTASYL therapeutic platform. Since we commenced operations, research and development has composed a significant portion of our total operating expenses and is expected to compose the majority of our spending for the foreseeable future.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses relate to compensation and benefits for general and administrative personnel, facility-related expenses, professional fees for legal, audit, tax and consulting services, as well as other general corporate expenses.
Other Income, net
Other income consists primarily of interest income and expense and various income or expense items of a non-recurring nature.
Results of Operations
The following data summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated, in thousands:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Expenses
The following table summarizes our total operating expenses, for the periods indicated, in thousands:
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 139% compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to manufacturing costs for the Company’s PH-762 and PH-894 INTASYL compounds, fees for the required preclinical studies in support of the Company’s clinical trials for PH-762 and CRO and consulting related costs to support the initiation of the Company’s clinical trials as compared to the same period in the prior year.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased 9% compared with the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to a decrease in patent and legal fees partially offset by increases in the use of an outside consultant to support business development activities and corporate insurance premiums.
Other Income
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $225,000 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the full forgiveness of the Company’s PPP loan by the SBA in the first quarter of 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, the Company’s primary source of funding has been through the sale of its securities. In the future, we will be dependent on obtaining funding from third parties, such as proceeds from the issuance of debt, sale of equity or strategic opportunities, in order to maintain our operations. We have reported recurring losses from operations since inception and expect that we will continue to have negative cash flows from our operations for the foreseeable future. At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $24,057,000 as compared with $14,244,000 at December 31, 2020.
In August 2019, the Company entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital, LLC (“LPC”), pursuant to which the Company has the right to sell to LPC up to $10,000,000 in shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the agreement. The Company is initially limited to the issuance of 19.99% of the Company’s shares outstanding on the date of the Purchase Agreement unless stockholder approval is obtained to issue more than such amount or the average price of all sales under the Purchase Agreement exceeds certain amounts set forth in the agreement. The Purchase Agreement expires in May 2022. To date, no shares of common stock have been sold to LPC under the Purchase Agreement.
In January 2021, the Company sold 4,420,863 shares of Company common stock at a purchase price per share of $3.07, pre-funded warrants to purchase an aggregate of 140,065 shares of Company common stock at a purchase price per pre-funded warrant share of $3.069, and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 3,420,696 shares of the Company’s common stock with an exercise price of $3.00 per warrant share in a private placement transaction. Net proceeds to the Company were $12,669,000 after deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses.
In February 2021, the Company sold 2,246,784 shares of Company common stock at a purchase price of $3.42 per share in a registered direct offering under the Company’s Form S-3 “shelf” registration statement. Net proceeds to the Company were $6,908,000 after deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses.
We believe that our existing cash at December 31, 2021 should be sufficient to fund operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of the release of the associated financial statements.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated, in thousands:
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $11,858,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $8,802,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily due to increases in net loss and changes in operating assets and liabilities as a result of increased spending primarily related to the Company’s manufacturing activities and preclinical studies in support of the clinical trials for PH-762.
Net Cash Flow from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $51,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $19,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily related to laboratory and computer equipment purchases.
Net Cash Flow from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $21,722,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared with $16,131,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to the net proceeds received by the Company from capital raising activities and warrant exercises.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In connection with certain license agreements, we are required to indemnify the licensor for certain damages arising in connection with the intellectual property rights licensed under the agreement. In addition, we are a party to a number of agreements entered into in the ordinary course of business that contain typical provisions that obligate us to indemnify the other parties to such agreements upon the occurrence of certain events. These indemnification obligations are considered off-balance sheet arrangements in accordance with ASC Topic 460, “Guarantor’s Accounting and Disclosure Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of Indebtedness of Others.” To date, we have not encountered material costs as a result of such obligations and have not accrued any liabilities related to such obligations in our financial statements. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of these indemnification agreements.