ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer Pyrophyte Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of Cayman Islands on February 12, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. While we may pursue an initial business combination opportunity in any industry or sector, we will seek targets around the world that we believe are market leaders in facilitating energy transition toward decarbonization and sustainable use of energy and natural resources, and are positioned to generate long-term value and growing cash flows. In particular, we will seek to identify companies provide the necessary products, equipment, services and technologies to support the energy transition, without the need to have their business rely solely on a single type of technology. We believe our leadership team’s broad and diverse global network of transaction sources and relationships across a wide spectrum of renewable energy sectors will allow us to effectively and efficiently identify and evaluate potential opportunities for our initial business combination
We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, and our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. Our registration statement for the Initial Public Offering became effective on October 26, 2021. We consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,125,000 Units on October 29, 2021. Each Unit consisted of one Class A ordinary share and one-half of one redeemable warrant, including the issuance of 2,625,000 Units as a result of the underwriter’s exercise of its over-allotment option in full. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share and one-half of one redeemable warrant, with each public warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one Class A ordinary share for $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $201,250,000, and incurred $11,068,750 in underwriting fees (inclusive of $8,433,750 in deferred underwriting fees).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering on October 29, 2021, we completed the closing of the Private Placement of an aggregate 10,156,250 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $10,156,250.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the over-allotment and the Private Placement, $206,281,250 ($10.25 per unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering, the over-allotment and the Private Placement were placed in the Trust Account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management and our board of directors have broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, the over-allotment and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination.
If we have not completed our initial business combination within the Combination Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses) divided by the number of the then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
Prior to the consummation of our Public Offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of Founder Shares for $25,000 by the Sponsor, and a total of $0 of loans and advances from the Sponsor.
On October 29, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,125,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $201,250,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 10,156,250 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $10,156,250.
As of December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $186,855. A net loss of $2,484,049 was offset by the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $3,293,420, formation and operating expenses paid by the Sponsor in exchange for Founder Shares of $714,674, and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $535,393.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $206,281,250 (equal to $10.25 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account, and we had $1,195,395 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us $966,695 of cash on our balance sheet and working capital of $1,226,278. We will use these funds primarily to find and evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. The interest income earned on the investments in our Trust Account are unavailable to fund operating expenses.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with the initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants issued to the Sponsor. Except as set forth above, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under the working capital loan.
Going Concern
On a routine basis, we assess going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40 “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern”. As of December 31, 2021, we had $966,695 in our operating bank account, $1,226,278 of working capital, and $206,299,296 of securities held in the Trust Account to be used for a Business Combination or to repurchase or redeem our common stock in connection therewith. We believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing, however, there is a risk that our liquidity may not be sufficient. The Sponsor intends, but is not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans to sustain operations in the event of a liquidity deficiency. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On February 24, 2021, the Sponsor paid an aggregate of $25,000 for certain expenses on our behalf in exchange for issuance of an aggregate of 5,750,000 Founder Shares, or approximately $0.004 per share. On September 29, 2021, the Sponsor surrendered 718,750 Founder Shares to us for cancellation for no consideration, resulting an aggregate of 5,031,250 Founder Shares outstanding. The Founder Shares included up to 656,250 Class B ordinary shares of which were subject to forfeiture depending on the extent to which the underwriter’s over-allotment option was exercised. Following the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option on October 29, 2021, no Founder Shares remain subject to forfeiture. The Founder Shares will automatically convert into Class A ordinary shares at the time of the Company’s initial business combination.
Our initial shareholders have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon conversion thereof until the earlier to occur of (A) one year after the completion of our initial business combination and (B) subsequent to our initial business combination, (x) if the closing price of our Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after our initial business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our public shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Related Party Loans
On February 25, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021, or the completion of the Public Offering. The Note was fully repaid on October 29, 2021.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, the Company’s search for a target business with which to complete a business combination and activities in connection with the search for a business
combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $2,484,049, which consists of formation and operating costs of $369,593, transaction costs allocated to derivative warrant liability of $457,833, decrease in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $3,293,420, gain on marketable securities of $18,046 and interest income of $9.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriter a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 2,625,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On October 29, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option.
Additionally, the underwriter was entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 4% of the gross proceeds of the base portion of the Public Offering and a deferred underwriting discount of 5.5% of the gross proceeds per over-allotment unit upon the completion of the Company’s initial business combination.
Administrative Support Agreement
The Company agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $15,000 per month, commencing on the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to members of the management team of which Mr. Major, our Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President of Business Development is paid $10,000 per month. Upon completion of the initial business combination or the liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. We incurred and paid $30,000 in these fees for the period from the effective date of our Initial Public Offering through December 31, 2021, respectively.
Other Commitments
On November 5, 2021 the company entered into an agreement with Clean Energy Associates. The agreement states that Clean Energy Associates may receive up to $80,000 for any introduction it makes to Pyrophyte Acquisition Corp. that Pyrophyte Acquisition Corp. subsequently enters into exclusivity with, acquires, or merges with the introduced company.
Pursuant to an engagement letter signed on March 10, 2022, UBS will be paid an merger and acquisition advisory fee of $3,000,000 upon closing of a de-SPAC transaction, and 4.0% of any amounts raised in a PIPE offering related to such de-SPAC transaction.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
Net income per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the periods. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in our Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per ordinary shares, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per ordinary shares is the same as basic earnings per ordinary share for the periods presented.
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares as long as an initial business combination is consummated. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued 10,062,500 public warrants to purchase Class A ordinary shares to investors in our Initial Public Offering and issued 10,156,250 Private Placement Warrants. All of our outstanding public warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of public warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities are included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account on the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The Company’s management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, to reduce the complexity of accounting for convertible debt and other equity-linked instruments. For certain convertible debt instruments with a cash conversion feature, the changes are a trade-off between simplifications in the accounting model (no separation of an “equity” component to impute a market interest rate, and simpler analysis of embedded equity features) and a potentially adverse impact to diluted EPS by requiring the use of the if-converted method. The new standard will also impact other financial instruments commonly issued by both public and private companies. For example, the separation model for beneficial conversion features is eliminated simplifying the analysis for issuers of convertible debt and convertible preference shares. Also, certain specific requirements to achieve equity classification and/ or qualify for the derivative scope exception for contracts indexed to an entity’s own equity are removed, enabling more freestanding instruments and embedded features to avoid mark-to-market accounting. The new standard is effective for companies that are SEC filers (except for Smaller Reporting Companies) for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within that year, and two years later for other companies. Companies can early adopt the standard at the start of a fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2020. The standard can either be adopted on a modified retrospective or a full retrospective basis. The Company has adopted the standard and the effects, if any, are immaterial to the Company’s financial statements.