Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes thereto included at the end of this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements regarding future events and the future results of the Company that are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts, and projections about the industry in which the Company operates and the beliefs and assumptions of the management of the Company. Words such as “expects,” “anticipates,” “targets,” “goals,” “projects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks,” “estimates,” variations of such words, and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are only predictions and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual results may differ materially and adversely from those expressed in any forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report. See also “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”. The Company undertakes no obligation to revise or update publicly any forward-looking statements for any reason. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion is based upon our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingencies. In the course of operating our business, we routinely make decisions as to the timing of the payment of invoices, the collection of receivables, the shipment of products, the fulfillment of orders, the purchase of supplies, and the building of inventory, among other matters. Each of these decisions has some impact on the financial results for any given period. In making these decisions, we consider various factors including contractual obligations, customer satisfaction, competition, internal and external financial targets and expectations, and financial planning objectives. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to sales returns, allowance for doubtful accounts, impairment of long-term assets, realization of deferred tax asset, assumptions used in the valuation of stock-based compensation, and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company uses a 52-53-week fiscal year ending on the Saturday nearest to December 31 each year. The years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 were 52- and 53-week years, respectively. These years are referred to herein as “2021” and “2020”, respectively. The Company’s fiscal quarters are generally 13 weeks in duration. When the Company’s fiscal year is 53 weeks long, the corresponding fourth quarter is 14 weeks in duration.
Introduction
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is provided in addition to the accompanying financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
● Overview.
● Key Performance Indicators.
● Factors Affecting Our Future Performance.
● Components of Results of Operations.
● Results of Operations.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources.
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.
This information should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included in the audited financial statements beginning under “Index to Financial Statements”  in this Annual Report.
Overview
We began operations in 2016 as a subscription-based e-commerce company on the proposition of making shopping easy, convenient, and accessible for parents by delivering fashionable and personalized outfits in a box, that their kids will love to wear. kidpik provides kids clothing subscription boxes for boys and girls (sizes 2T-16) that include mix-&-match coordinated outfits that are personalized based on each member’s style preferences. We focus on providing entire outfits from head-to-toe (including shoes) by designing each seasonal collection internally from concept to box.
Staying ahead in an emerging industry requires constant innovation in product and services. After launching with our girls’ subscription box for sizes 4-14 in 2016, we have continued to expand our product offering and marketing channels. We expanded into boys’ clothes, added larger sizes-up to 16 for apparel and 6 youth for shoes-added toddler sizes down to 2T & 3T for apparel and 7 & 8 toddler shoes, launched shop.kidpik.com, where we sell individual apparel items and shoes, launched gift.kidpik.com where we sell pre-styled outfit gift boxes and gift cards, and expanded to sell our branded products on Amazon.com, as well as Fulfilled by Amazon (FBA) and Fulfilled by Merchant (FBM) for pre-packs and individual items.
We launched our debut toddler collection in the first quarter of 2021, introducing sizes 2T and 3T apparel sizes, and added size 7 and 8 toddler shoes for boys and girls, which we began to ship in April 2021. We also introduced an “add-on” for all members pursuant to which they can add additional pieces of their choosing to their next box order. We plan to increase the number of add-on item selections offered in an effort to increase the box transaction size and gross margin per box.
As of the date of this Annual Report, we provide e-commerce services only throughout the 48 contiguous U.S. states and Army Post Offices (APOs) and Fleet Post Offices (FPOs).
We have started initiatives to expand our offerings into newborn sizes 12 months and 18 months as well as husky/plus and slim sizes. We currently anticipated launching husky/plus, slim sizes and the two new newborn sizes during Q3 2022. We plan to continue to analyze the marketplace for interest in new products and may further invest in expanding our current lines.
We have added new channels to our paid advertising strategy, including TikTok, Tap Joy and new affiliate partnerships, with the goal of increasing new member growth. In addition, we have focused on other revenue share marketing opportunities, such as scaling our influencer ambassador program and soft launching a consumer-facing brand ambassador program. We are also pursuing new organic growth strategies, such as cross-promotional opportunities with children’s companies with brand synergies.
In November 2021, the Company completed an initial public offering (the “IPO”), in which the Company issued and sold 2,117,647 shares of its authorized common stock for $8.50 per share for net proceeds of $16.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, and offering costs.
Key Performance Indicators
Key performance indicators that we use to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions include gross margin, shipped items, and average shipment keep rate, each described in greater detail below.
We also use the following metrics to assess the progress of our business, make decisions on where to allocate capital, time and technology investments and assess the near-term and longer-term performance of our business.
Gross Margin
Gross profit is equal to our net sales less cost of goods sold. Gross profit as a percentage of our net sales is referred to as gross margin. Cost of sales consists of the purchase price of merchandise sold to customers and includes import duties and other taxes, freight in, returned from customers, inventory write-offs, and other miscellaneous shrinkage.
Adjusted EBITDA
In addition to our results calculated under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), and to provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we have disclosed in the table below and elsewhere in this Report, Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net loss before other expense, net, interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted to exclude the effects of equity-based compensation expense, and certain non-routine items. We have provided below a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, financial measure.
We have included Adjusted EBITDA in this report because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans and make strategic decisions regarding the allocation of capital. In particular, the exclusion of certain expenses in calculating Adjusted EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparisons on a period-to-period basis and, in the case of exclusion of the impact of equity-based compensation, excludes an item that we do not consider to be indicative of our core operating performance. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and board of directors.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not consider the potentially dilutive impact of equity-based compensation;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect certain non-routine items that may represent a reduction in cash available to us; and
● Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss and our other GAAP results.
Our financial results include certain items that we consider non-routine and not reflective of the underlying trends in our core business operations. Non-routine items in 2021 primarily related to the forgiveness of a loan by the U.S. Small Business Association. Although we believe this income to be non-routine in nature, we cannot guarantee that this type of income will not be incurred again in the future.
A reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA is as follows:
Shipped Items
We define shipped items as the total number of items shipped in a given period to our customers through our active subscription, amazon and online website sales.
We believe the increase in subscription shipments for fiscal 2021 versus 2020, as shown in the table above, was the result of our continued investment in product expansion and consumer marketing.
Average Shipment Keep Rate
Average shipment keep rate is calculated as the total number of items kept by our customers divided by total number of shipped items in a given period.
Factors Affecting Our Future Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us, but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.”
Overall Economic Trends
The overall economic environment and related changes in consumer behavior have a significant impact on our business. In general, positive conditions in the broader economy promote customer spending on our sites, while economic weakness, which generally results in a reduction of customer spending, may have a more pronounced negative effect on spending on our sites. Macroeconomic factors that can affect customer spending patterns, and thereby our results of operations, include employment rates, inflation, business conditions, changes in the housing market, the availability of credit, interest rates and fuel and energy costs. In addition, during periods of low unemployment, we generally experience higher labor costs.
Growth in Brand Awareness and Site Visits
We intend to continue investing in our brand marketing efforts. Since 2016 we have made significant investments to strengthen the “kidpik” brand through expansion of our social media presence. If we fail to cost-effectively promote our brand or convert impressions into new customers, our net sales growth and profitability would be adversely affected.
Acquisition of New Subscriptions
Our ability to attract new subscriptions through marketing and the development of our brand is a key factor for our future growth. If we are unable to acquire sufficient new subscriptions in the future, our revenue might decline. New subscriptions could be negatively impacted if our marketing efforts are less effective in the future. Increases in advertising rates could also negatively impact our ability to acquire new subscriptions cost effectively. Consumer tastes, preferences, and sentiment for our brand may also change and result in decreased demand for our products and services. Laws and regulations relating to privacy, data protection, marketing and advertising, and consumer protection are evolving and subject to potentially differing interpretations. These requirements may be interpreted and applied in a manner that is inconsistent from one jurisdiction to another or may conflict with other rules or our practices and procedures.
Social networks are important as a source of new clients and as a means by which to connect with current clients, and their importance may be increasing. We may be unable to effectively maintain a presence within these networks, which could lead to lower than anticipated brand affinity and awareness, and in turn could adversely affect our operating results. Further, mobile operating system and web browser providers, such as Apple and Google, have implemented product changes to limit the ability of advertisers to collect and use data to target and measure advertising. For example, Apple made a change in iOS 14 that required apps to get a user’s opt-in permission before tracking or sharing the user’s data across apps or websites owned by companies other than the app’s owner. Google intends to further restrict the use of third-party cookies in its Chrome browser in 2023, consistent with similar actions taken by the owners of other browsers, such as Apple in its Safari browser, and Mozilla in its Firefox browser. These changes have reduced and will continue to reduce our ability to efficiently target and measure advertising, in particular through online social networks, making our advertising less cost effective and successful. We expect to continue to be impacted by these changes.
Retention of Existing Subscribers
Our ability to retain subscribers is a also key factor in our ability to generate revenue growth. Most of our current subscribers purchase products through subscription-based plans, where subscribers are billed and sent products on a recurring basis. The recurring nature of this revenue provides us with a certain amount of predictability for future revenue. If customer behavior changes, and customer retention decreases in the future, then future revenue will be negatively impacted.
Inventory Management
To ensure sufficient availability of merchandise, we generally enter into purchase orders well in advance and frequently before apparel trends are confirmed by client purchases. As a result, we are vulnerable to demand and pricing shifts and to suboptimal selection and timing of merchandise purchases. We incur inventory write-offs and changes in inventory reserves that impact our gross margins. Because our merchandise assortment directly correlates to client success, we may at times optimize our inventory to prioritize long-term client success over short-term gross margin impact. Moreover, our inventory investments will fluctuate with the needs of our business. For example, entering new categories or adding new fulfillment centers will require additional investments in inventory.
Investments in Growth
We expect to continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in product offerings and the kids and parent experience. We expect to make significant investments in marketing to acquire new subscribers and customers. Additionally, we intend to continue to invest in our fulfillment and operating capabilities. In the short term, we expect these investments to increase our operating expenses in the future and cannot be certain that these efforts will grow our customer base or be cost-effective; however, in the long term, we anticipate that these investments will positively impact our results of operations.
Components of Results of Operations
Note that our classification of the various items making up cost of goods sold, shipping and handling, payroll and related costs and general and administrative costs may vary from other companies in our industry and as such, may not be comparable to a competitor’s.
Revenue
We generate revenue in two categories: 1) the sale items in our subscription boxes, and 2) the sale of one-time purchases via shop.kidpik.com, and other marketplaces. We refer to these revenue classification as “Subscription boxes” and “one-time purchases”. Net revenue is revenue less promotional discounts, actual customer credits and refunds as well as customer credits and refunds expected to be issued, and sales tax. When we use the term revenue in this Report, we are referring to net revenue, unless otherwise stated. We also recognize revenue resulting upon the use of gift cards. Customers who decide to return some or all of the merchandise they receive in each kidpik box, may return such items within 10 days of receipt of the box. Customers are charged for subscription merchandise which is not returned, or which is accepted and are charged for general merchandise (non-subscription) when they purchase such merchandise; however, they are able to receive a refund on returned merchandise.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists of the costs of manufacturing merchandise and the expenses of shipping and importing (duty payments) such merchandise to our warehouse for distribution, and inventory write-offs, offset by the recoverable cost of merchandise estimated to be returned.
Shipping and Handling
Shipping and handling, includes the costs of shipping merchandise to our customers, and back to us, as well as the cost of fulfillment and return processing, and the materials used for packing.
Payroll and Related Costs
Payroll and related costs represent employee salaries, taxes, benefits and fees to our payroll provider.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of marketing, professional fees, Amazon seller fees, bad debt expense and credit card fees, among others.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist of depreciation expense for leasehold improvements and equipment.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense associated with our lines of credit, outstanding notes payable, and amortization of deferred expense related to our line of credit.
Other Non-Operating Income
Other non-operating income relates to the forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Loan.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists of an estimate of federal and state income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, and changes in the valuation allowance of our net federal and state deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the infectious disease known as COVID-19, was reported in Wuhan, China. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” on January 30, 2020 and a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. In March and April 2020, many U.S. states and local jurisdictions began issuing ‘stay-at-home’ orders. The U.S. has recently seen decreases in total new COVID-19 infections; however, it is unknown whether such decreases will continue, new strains of the virus will cause numbers to increase, currently projected vaccine efficacy numbers will hold, or new strains of the virus will become dominate in the future, and/or whether jurisdictions in which we operate, will issue new or expanded stay-at-home orders, or how those orders, or others, may affect our operations.
During the majority of March and April 2020, we closed our California warehouse due to stay-at-home orders which were issued in the State of California. We resumed shipping April 17, 2020, following safety protocols and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines, which we strictly adhered to. On aggregate basis we lost about two weeks of potential revenue during this period where we were unable to ship products. For the months of March and April 2020, our new member acquisitions were reduced dramatically. Beginning in early May 2020, through the month of June 2020, our new member acquisitions grew significantly, most likely due to stay-at-home orders when consumers shifted to shopping online, before leveling off to expected growth numbers. The full extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations currently cannot be estimated and will depend on a number of factors including the scope and duration of the global pandemic.
Since the start of the pandemic, we have taken steps to prioritize the health and safety of our employees. Some of our employees continue to work remotely as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Currently we believe that we have sufficient cash on hand, and will generate sufficient cash through operations, to support our operations for the near term; however, we will continue to evaluate our business operations based on new information as it becomes available and will make changes that we consider necessary in light of any new developments regarding the ongoing pandemic.
Although COVID-19 has had a major impact on businesses around the world, to date, other than in March and April 2020, during which period, as described above, our warehouse was shut down, the pandemic has not had a significant negative impact on our business. Since then, our warehouse returned to working at full capacity; however, the full extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact us depends on future unknowable developments, including the duration and spread of the virus, as well as potential new seasonal outbreaks, virus mutations, the efficacy of vaccines, and the willingness of individuals to take such vaccines, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
We launched our toddler collection in the first quarter of 2021, introducing sizes 2T and 3T apparel sizes, and added size 7 and 8 toddler shoes for boys and girls which we began to ship in April 2021. We also introduced an “add-on” for all members pursuant to which they can add additional pieces of their choosing to their next box order. We plan to increase the number of add-on item selections offered in an effort to increase the box transaction size and gross margin per box.
Revenue
Revenue increased by $4.9 million or 28.9% for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to the year ended January 2, 2021. The revenue breakdown by channel is summarized in the tables below:
The revenue from subscription boxes for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, was generated from active subscriptions recurring boxes and new subscriptions first box revenue, is summarized in the tables below:
The increase in revenue was primarily driven by the introduction of our boys’ and toddlers’ collections, and an increase in our customer base. The revenue breakdown by product line for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to the year ended January 2, 2021, are summarized in the tables below:
The number of items shipped to our customers increased by 24.9%, from approximately 1,727,000 for the fiscal year 2020, to approximately 2,157,000 for the fiscal year 2021. The average shipment keep rate increased to 69.0% in the fiscal year 2021, compared to 66.1% in the fiscal year 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased by $1.8 million or 25.4% for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to the year ended January 2, 2021, which increase was a direct result of the increase in our subscription box sales.
Gross Profit and Gross Profit as a Percentage of Net Sales
We had gross profit of $13.0 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to gross profit of $9.9 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, which increase was a result of the increase in revenue.
Our gross profit as a percentage of sales was 59.5% for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to 58.4% for the year ended January 2, 2021.
Operating Expenses
The $5.1 million or 37.7% increase in total expenses was mainly due to an increase of $2.0 million or 31.2% in general and administrative expenses, due mainly to an increase in Amazon.com seller fees of $0.49 million, an increase in marketing expenses of $0.51 million and an increase in occupancy expense of $0.40 million, professional fees $0.30 million, as well as increases of $1.9 million in shipping and handling. Bad debt is defined as revenue we are unable to collect from our members for items they kept and must send to a collection agency. We also had a $1.3 million increase in payroll and related costs due to a combination of salary increases, new hires, increased cost associated with benefits and non-cash compensation in amount of $0.3 million,
Payroll and related costs as a percentage of revenue increased by approximately 2.0% for the 2021 fiscal year (20.3%) compared to the 2020 fiscal year (18.3%). Shipping and handling expenses as a percentage of revenue increased by 3.0% for the 2021 fiscal year (27.9%) compared to 2020 fiscal year (24.9%), due to increase shipments and continued COVID-19 related fees imposed by the Company’s shipping partner, as well as increased costs associated with warehouse related expenses. Within selling, general and administrative expenses, marketing expense as a percentage of revenue decreased by 1.2% of revenue for the 2021 fiscal year (14.4%) compared to 2020 fiscal year 2020 (15.6%). Amazon.com seller fees increased from 5.2% of revenue in 2020, compared to 6.3% of revenue in 2021, due to an increase of 69.6% in Amazon.com revenue over the same period. Bad debt increased by 4.5% from 2020 to 2021.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations increased to $5,663,286 for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $3,665,811 for the year ended January 2, 2021.
The increase in loss from operations was largely due to increase operating expenses and increase cost of goods sold offset by increase in revenue.
Other (Income) Expenses
Other expenses for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 included primarily interest. Interest expense increased due to an increase in the debt we carried during the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to the year ended January 2, 2021. Interest expense as a percentage of sales increased from 3.0% to 3.3% of sales, for the year ended January 1, 2022. The other income in 2021 included the forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Loan in amount of $442,352.
Provision for Income Taxes
We had a nominal provision for income taxes during both the year ended January 1, 2022 and the year ended January 2, 2021.
Net Loss
We had a net loss of $5.9 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to a net loss of $4.2 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, an increase of $1.7 million or 42.0% compared to the prior period. The increase in net loss was mainly due to increase operating expenses and increase cost of goods sold offset by increase in revenue.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
* Line of credit, loan payable and long-term debt.
On January 1, 2022, we had $8,415,797 of cash on-hand compared to the $133,484 of cash on hand we had at January 2, 2021.
As of January 1, 2022, we had $22,107,887 in total current assets, $7,407,196 in total current liabilities, working capital of $14,700,691 and a total accumulated deficit of $33,919,184.
The Company has total current liabilities of $7,407,196, consisting mainly of accounts payable of $2,560,361, accounts payable to related party of $913,708, accrued expenses of $800,972, advance payable of $932,155 (discussed below), and short-term debt from related party of $2,200,000 (discussed below).
Through November 10, 2021, we mainly relied on loans from Ezra Dabah, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman, and his family (which have all, other than $2,200,000, been converted into equity on May 11, 2021), notes payable (including from Nina Footwear Corp. which is 86.36% owned by Ezra Dabah and his family (including Moshe Dabah), and which entity Ezra. Dabah serves as Chief Executive Officer and member of the Board of Directors of (“Nina Footwear”, a related party) and our line of credit (repaid as of January 1, 2022), and Cash Advance Agreements (each discussed below), as well as revenue generated through our operations, to support our operations since inception. We have primarily used our available cash to pay operating expenses (salaries and other expenses), and for merchandise inventory costs, shipping costs and marketing expenditures. We do not have any material commitments for capital expenditures. Following the closing of the IPO in November 2021, we have also relied on the funds raised in the IPO to support our operations.
We have experienced recurring net losses since inception and negative operating cash flows. We believe that we will continue to incur substantial operating expenses in the foreseeable future as we continue to invest to attract new customers, expand the product offerings and enhance technology and infrastructure. These efforts may prove more expensive than we anticipate, and we may not succeed in increasing the net revenue and margins sufficiently to offset these expenses. Accordingly, we may not be able to achieve profitability, and we may incur significant losses for the foreseeable future.
To support our existing operations or any future expansion of business, including the ability to execute our growth strategy, we must have sufficient capital to continue to make investments and fund operations. We have plans to pursue a growth strategy for the expansion of operations through increased marketing to attract new members and refine the marketing strategy to strategically prioritize customer acquisition channels that we believe will be more successful at attracting new customers and members. We plan to launch new divisions and product lines to help attract new members and retaining existing members. We launched a new boys’ apparel division in the summer of 2020 and a toddler division at the end of March 2021. We have plans to make husky/plus and slim sizes available for the fall 2022 season and also increase our size assortment to include sizes 12 months and 18 months. We also have plans to increase efficiency in distribution and fulfillment capabilities to reduce costs associated with subscription box sales.
In November 2021, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 2,117,647 shares of authorized common stock for $8.50 per share, for net proceeds of $16.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, and offering costs.
We have used the net proceeds from the IPO to repay debt, and plan to continue to use such net proceeds to increase our capitalization and financial flexibility, and create a public market for our common stock, and facilitate our future access to the capital markets. We also plan to use a portion of the net proceeds for marketing expenses and for working capital. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the offering to pay all or a portion of our debt outstanding as of October 28, 2021, which included (i) the repayment of amounts owed to Crossroads totaling approximately $3.2 million (which amount was repaid in full, together with accrued interest and a termination fee in the amount of $24,498, on November 15, 2021); (ii) amounts owed under a short-term, unsecured promissory note, with Nina Footwear in the amount of $0.4 million, which is noninterest-bearing and due on December 31, 2021 (of which $0.4 million was paid on November 16, 2021); (iii) amounts owed to related party in the amount of $1.3 million (which do not have a stated maturity date and which do no accrue interest) (of which $0.4 million was paid as of January 1, 2022); (iv) amounts owed in connection with vendor payables of approximately $1.2 million (of which $0.3 million was settled as of January 1, 2022); and (v) amounts due under unsecured promissory notes with Ezra Dabah, our Chief Executive Officer and other related party stockholders, which are trusts controlled by family members of Ezra Dabah in the amount of $2.8 million, (of which $0.6 million was paid as of March 31, 2022), which do not accrue interest.
We expect to continue to generate net losses for the foreseeable future as we make investments to grow our business. We believe that the existing balances of cash and cash equivalents following the IPO will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least twelve months from the date that these financial statements are issued. However, should our current cash and cash equivalents not be sufficient to support the development of our business to the point at which it has positive cash flows from operations, we plan to meet our future needs for additional capital through equity financings, debt financings or other capital sources, including collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. Equity financings may include sales of common stock. Such financing may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all. The terms of any financing may adversely affect the holdings or rights of our stockholders. If we unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to it when required, our ability to continue to support our business growth, scale its infrastructure, and to respond to business challenges could be significantly impaired.
Net cash used in operating activities increased to $11,015,868 for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $3,550,328 of cash used in operating activities during the year ended January 2, 2021. The increase in our cash used in operating activities of approximately $7.5 million was primarily due to an increase in net loss in the amount of approximately $1.8 million, as discussed in greater detail above, adjusted for the non-cash items totaling $0.1 million and the impact from changes in operating assets and liabilities in the amount of approximately $5.6 million, primarily investment in inventory.
Net cash used in investing activities was $45,394 during the year ended January 1, 2022, which was related to purchases of equipment, compared to $11,470 during the year ended January 2, 2021 was related to purchases of equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased to $18,796,466 for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $3,615,774 for the year ended January 2, 2021, mainly as a result of funds raised in the IPO, net of offering costs, of $16.1 million.
Line of Credit
On September 5, 2017, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (as amended, the “Loan Agreement”) with Crossroads Financial Group, LLC (“Crossroads”). The Loan Agreement had an initial term of two years, and renews thereafter for additional one-year periods automatically, unless Crossroads has provided the Company at least 30 days’ notice of its intent to not renew prior to such applicable automatic renewal date. The Loan Agreement allows the Company to request advances from Crossroads up to $3,200,000. The advances are limited to the lower of (i) 70% of the Company’s inventory cost at the time of request, or (ii) 75% of net orderly liquidation value, when applied to eligible inventory. The advances bear interest at a rate of 1.42% per month (17.04% per annum) and mature on November 20, 2021. The amounts owed under the Loan Agreement are personally guaranteed by Ezra Dabah, our Chief Executive Officer, President and Chairman, and his wife Renee. The amounts owed to Crossroads are also secured by a security interest in substantially all of our assets. The Loan Agreement includes an early termination fee equal to 5% of the maximum amount available if the agreement is terminated during the first year of the agreement and 3% thereafter, provided that such fee is waived if we sell equity in order to repay amounts owed under the Loan Agreement. The Loan Agreement includes customary covenants and events of default, including if Ezra Dabah, our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman, and his family cease being the direct or indirect beneficial owner of more than 50% of our voting stock, or if any other person or entity shall become the direct or indirect owner of over 45% of our voting stock or if Mr. Dabah or Adir Katzav our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer cease to be employed by the Company. On November 15, 2021, we paid off the loan and security agreement in amount of $3,200,000 and related outstanding interest and facility fee in amount of $24,498, with funds raised through the IPO.
As of January, 1, 2022 and January, 2, 2021, outstanding advances amounted to $0 and $2,065,568, respectively. Interest expense amounted to $395,080 and $318,941 for the years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Deferred financing costs, net of accumulated amortization, totaled $33,450 for both years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021. Amortization of these costs amounted to $53,397 and $44,086 for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively.
Cash Advance Agreements
From time to time, we have been party to cash advance agreements with financial institutions whereby such institutions purchased receivables or advanced cash for us to purchase inventory. Those include the following transactions:
On February 1, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution and was advanced cash totaling $360,000 to be used for the purchase of inventory. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay $381,600, plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7% per annum for the first 121 days and 12% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On March 10, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution and was advanced cash totaling $100,000 to be used for the purchase of inventory. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay the advanced cash plus $311,953 previously owed to the financial institution (totaling $411,953), plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender in total amount of $417,954. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7% per annum for the first 121 days and 12.50% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On March 10, 2021, the Company also entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $1,137,666 of receivables from the Company for $1,062,666, which included $437,666 owed under the previous agreement. The Company will deliver 12.5% of the future collections of receivables to the financial institution until $1,137,666 has been paid. In the event no event of default has occurred under the agreement and the Company remains in compliance with its terms, the financial institution will provide a 6% discount on the receivables purchased.
On May 7, 2021, the Company also entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $461,316 of receivables from the Company for $446,316, which included $196,316 owed under the previous agreement. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay $461,316, plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum for the first 121 days and 12% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On June 4, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution and was advanced cash totaling $125,000 to be used for the purchase of inventory. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay the advanced cash plus $355,598 previously owed to the financial institution (totaling $480,598), plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender in total amount of $488,098. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum for the first 121 days and 12.50% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On June 4, 2021, the Company also entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $1,196,055 of receivables from the Company for $1,124,055, which included $524,055 owed under the previous agreement. The Company will deliver 12.5% of the future collections of receivables to the financial institution until $1,196,055 has been paid. In the event no event of default has occurred under the agreement and the Company remains in compliance with its terms, the financial institution will provide a 6% discount on the receivables purchased.
On July 9, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $495,902 of receivables from the Company for $488,402, which included advanced cash totaling $125,000 to be used for the purchase of inventory and $363,402 owed under the previous agreement. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay $495,902, plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum for the first 121 days and 12.5% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On August 10, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution and was advanced cash totaling $185,000 to be used for the purchase of inventory. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay the advanced cash plus $390,169 previously owed to the financial institution (totaling $575,169), plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender in the total amount of $586,269. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum for the first 121 days and 12.50% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On August 10, 2021, the Company also entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $1,182,318 of receivables from the Company for $1,136,718, which included $756,718 owed under the previous agreement. The Company will deliver 12.5% of the future collections of receivables to the financial institution until $1,182,318 has been paid. In the event no event of default has occurred under the agreement and the Company remains in compliance with its terms, the financial institution will provide a 6% discount on the receivables purchased.
On October 22, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $863,847 of receivables from the Company for $857,847, which included $807,847 owed under the previous agreement. The Company will deliver 12.5% of the future collections of receivables to the financial institution until $863,847 has been paid. In the event no event of default has occurred under the agreement and the Company remains in compliance with its terms, the financial institution will provide a 6% discount on the receivables purchased.
On October 27, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution and was advanced cash totaling $300,000 to be used for the purchase of inventory. In accordance with the agreement, the Company agreed to repay the advanced cash plus $381,124 previously owed to the financial institution (totaling $681,124), plus interest, by depositing future receivables with the lender in the total amount of $699,124. The cash advance bears interest at a rate of 7.5% per annum for the first 121 days and 12.50% per annum thereafter until the advance is fully repaid.
On November 2, 2021, the Company entered into a new cash advance agreement with a financial institution. Pursuant to the agreement, the financial institution purchased $923,682 of receivables from the Company for $899,682, which included $699,682 owed under the previous agreement. The Company will deliver 12.5% of the future collections of receivables to the financial institution until $923,682 has been paid. In the event no event of default has occurred under the agreement and the Company remains in compliance with its terms, the financial institution will provide a 6% discount on the receivables purchased.
As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, the cash advance outstanding, including interest, amounted to $932,156 and $829,030, respectively. For 2021 and 2020, interest expense related to the advances totaled $81,193 and $117,127, respectively.
SBA Loan
As a response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Congress passed the CARES Act to aid businesses through the current economic conditions. The CARES Act provided businesses with loans from the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) based on a calculation provided by the SBA. In 2020, the Company received $442,352 in funding from these loans. The CARES Act provides a provision allowing all or a portion of the loan to be forgiven by the SBA based on certain criteria. Any unforgiven portion will be repaid over a two-year period with a ten-month deferral on payments yielding 1% interest. The Company applied for forgiveness of the loan and on August 2, 2021, notification and confirmation was received that our loan including related accrued interest had been forgiven in its entirety by the SBA. The forgiveness amount was recorded in other income.
Related Party Convertible Notes and Loans
In 2020 and 2019, the Company entered into unsecured convertible promissory notes with stockholders in the amount of $1,770,000 and $3,300,000, respectively. These notes were noninterest bearing. Prior to the maturity, the notes were converted to equity.
In January, February, and March 2021, the Company entered into various unsecured convertible promissory notes with stockholders in the aggregate amount of $2,000,000. Each of the convertible notes were payable on January 15, 2022 and were automatically convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to the per share price of the next equity funding completed by the Company in an amount of at least $2,000,000 and required the repayment of 110% of such convertible note amount upon a sale of the Company (including a change of 50% or more of the voting shares). In May 2021, prior to the maturity, the notes in the amount of $2,000,000 were converted to equity.
In April and June 2021, the Company entered into various short-term, unsecured promissory notes with an affiliated entity under common control in the amount of $400,000. The notes are noninterest-bearing and due on December 31, 2021. On November 16, 2021, the Company paid in full the outstanding loan amounts of $400,000. As of January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, there was $913,708 and $599,811 due to related party, respectively. During the first quarter of 2022, we paid an additional $0.3 million to a related party.
On June 28, 2021, the Company entered into four unsecured convertible promissory notes with stockholders in the aggregate amount of $100,000. Each of the convertible notes were payable on January 15, 2022 and were automatically convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to the per share price of the next equity funding completed by the Company in an amount of at least $2,000,000 and required the repayment of 110% of such convertible note amount upon a sale of the Company (including a change of 50% or more of the voting shares). On August 25, 2021, the parties agreed to amend the previously convertible notes to remove the conversion rights provided for therein and clarify that no interest accrues on the convertible notes. On December 27, 2021, the Company paid in full the outstanding loan amounts of $100,000.
On August 13, 2021, the Company entered into two unsecured convertible promissory notes with stockholders in the aggregate amount of $200,000. Each of the convertible notes were payable on demand and were automatically convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at a conversion price equal to the per share price of the next equity funding completed by the Company in an amount of at least $2,000,000 and requires the repayment of 110% of such convertible note amount upon a sale of the Company (including a change of 50% or more of the voting shares). On August 25, 2021, the parties agreed to amend the previously convertible notes to remove the conversion rights provided for therein and clarify that no interest accrues on the convertible notes.
In September, October and November 2021, the Company borrowed an aggregate of $2,500,000 from Ezra Dabah, who is our Chief Executive Officer and Chairman. The notes are unsecured, noninterest-bearing and the principal is fully due on demand, at the rate of 110% of such note amount upon a sale of the Company (including a change of 50% or more of the voting shares). On December 27, 2021, the Company paid $500,000 of the outstanding loan amounts.
Need for Future Funding
As discussed above, our current capital resources, combined with the net proceeds from the IPO in amount of $16.1 million, are expected to be sufficient for us to fund operations for the next 12 months. We may need funding in addition to the funding raised in this offering, to support our operations in the future. We may also seek to acquire additional businesses or assets in the future, which may require us to raise funding. We currently anticipate such funding, if required, being raised through the offering of debt or equity. Such additional financing, if required, may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. If debt financing is available and obtained, our interest expense may increase and we may be subject to the risk of default, depending on the terms of such financing. If equity financing is available and obtained it may result in our stockholders experiencing significant dilution. If such financing is unavailable, we may be forced to curtail our business plan, which may cause the value of our securities to decline in value.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of estimates: The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reporting values of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The more significant estimates and assumptions are those used in determining the inventory obsolescence. Accordingly, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Concentration of credit risk: Our financial instruments that are exposed to concentrations of credit risk consist primarily of cash, restricted cash and accounts receivable. We maintain our cash and restricted cash with high-quality financial institutions with investment-grade ratings. Although the Company’s cash balance held with a U.S. bank may exceed the amount of federal insurance provided on such deposits, the Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts. The Company is exposed to credit risk in the event of a default by the financial institution holding its cash for the amount reflected on the balance sheets.
Net loss per common share: The Company complies with the accounting and disclosure requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Revenue recognition: The Company recognizes revenue from three sources; its subscription box sales, Amazon business and online website sales. Revenue is gross billings net of promotional discounts, actual customer credits and refunds as well as customer credits and refunds expected to be issued, and sales tax. Customers are charged for subscription merchandise which is not returned, or which is accepted and are charged for general merchandise (non-subscription) when they purchase such merchandise. Customers can receive a refund on returned merchandise for which return shipping is a cost to the Company.
Revenue for subscription box sales is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred and accepted by the subscriber. Subscribers have a maximum of 10 days from the date the product is delivered to return any items in the delivery. Control is transferred either when a subscriber checks out or automatically ten days after the goods are delivered, whichever occurs first. Upon checkout or the 10-day period, the amount of the order not returned is recognized as revenue. Payment is due upon checkout or the end of the 10-day period after the goods are delivered, whichever occurs first. Starting on August 24, 2021 and ending January 6, 2022, we charged new subscribers an upfront styling fee before the box is shipped that is credited toward items purchased. The styling fees are included in deferred revenue until the time of client checkout or when the option to purchase the item expires.
Revenue from online website sales, which includes sales from our and Amazon online websites, are recognized when control of the promised goods are transferred to the Company’s customers, in an amount that depicts the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods. Control is transferred at the time of shipment. Upon shipment, the total amount of the order is recognized as revenue. Payment for online website sales are due upon time of order.
The provision for anticipated sales returns consists of both contractual return rights and discretionary authorized returns.
Estimates of discretionary authorized returns for sales other than subscription sales, discounts and claims are based on (1) historical rates, (2) specific identification of outstanding returns not yet received from customers and outstanding discounts and claims and (3) estimated returns, discounts and claims expected, but not yet finalized with customers. Actual returns, discounts and claims in any future period are inherently uncertain and thus may differ from estimates recorded. If actual or expected future returns, discounts or claims were significantly greater or lower than reserves established, a reduction or increase to net revenue would be recorded in the period in which such determination was made.
Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight fulfillment before control over a product has transferred to a customer are accounted for as a shipping and handling cost in the statement of operations.
Taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are both imposed on and concurrent with a specific revenue producing transaction and are collected by the Company from a customer are excluded from revenue and cost of goods sold in the statement of operations.
Restricted cash: Restricted cash balance consists of cash advanced received by the Company from the cash advance agreement described in Note 8 to the audited financial statements included at the end of this Annual Report. The cash advances can only be used for purchases of products and services necessary to operate the Company, as defined by the agreement.
Inventory: Inventory, consisting primarily of finished goods, is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value using the weighted average cost method. In addition, the Company capitalizes freight, duty and other supply chain costs in inventory. These costs are included in the cost of sales as inventory is sold.
Leasehold improvements and equipment: Leasehold improvements and equipment are recorded at cost. Depreciation for equipment is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the assets ranging from three to five years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the term of the lease or the life of the improvement on a straight-line method. Expenditures that extend the useful lives of the equipment are capitalized. Expenditure for the repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred. The gain or loss arising on the disposal or retirement of an asset is determined as the difference between the sales proceeds and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognized in operations.
Intangible assets: Intangible assets consist of capitalized website development costs and are being amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, ranging from one to three years. The Company periodically evaluates the reasonableness of the useful life of the intangible assets. Expenditures for repairs and maintenance are charged to expense as incurred.
Impairment of long-lived assets: The Company reviews its long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In performing a review for impairment, the Company compares the carrying value of the assets with their estimated future undiscounted pre-tax cash flows. If it is determined that impairment has occurred, the loss would be recognized during that period. The impairment loss is calculated as the difference between the assets’ carrying value and the present value of estimated net cash flows or comparable market values, giving consideration to recent operating performance and pricing trends. As a result of its review, the Company does not believe that any material impairment currently exists related to its long-lived assets.
Deferred financing costs: Deferred financing costs, net of accumulated amortization, are reported as a direct deduction from the face amount of the line of credit to which such costs relate. Amortization of debt issuance costs is reported as a component of interest expenses and is computed using the straight-line method over the term of the agreement, which approximates the effective interest method.
Income taxes: The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized with respect to the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the tax bases of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts for financial statement purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rate is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
The Company applies generally accepted accounting principles on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes. If the Company considers that a tax position is more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, based solely on the technical merits of the position, it recognizes the tax benefit. The Company measures the tax benefit by determining the amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon settlement, presuming the tax position is examined by the appropriate taxing authority that has full knowledge of relevant information.
The Company has no unrecognized tax benefits at January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021. The Company’s federal, state and local income tax returns prior to fiscal years 2017 are closed and management continually evaluates expiring statutes of limitations, audits, proposed settlements, changes in tax law and new authoritative rulings.
The Company recognizes interest and penalties associated with tax matters, if any, as part of operating expenses and includes accrued interest and penalties with accrued expenses in the balance sheet.
Advertising costs: Direct advertising and promotion costs are expensed as incurred. Advertising and promotion expenses totaled $3,148,834 and $2,639,158 for the 2021 and 2020 fiscal years, respectively, and are included in general and administrative expenses.
Bad debt expense: Bad debt expense is recognized when a receivable is no longer collectible after a customer is unable to fulfill their obligation to pay an outstanding balance.
Equity-based compensation: We measure equity-based compensation expense associated with the awards granted based on their estimated fair values at the grant date. For awards with service condition only, equity-based compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period using the straight-line method. The grant-date fair value of stock options is estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur.
Segment Information: The Company has one operating segment and one reportable segment as its chief operating decision maker, who is its Chief Executive Officer, reviews financial information on a consolidated basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating financial performance. All long-lived assets are located in the United States.
JOBS Act and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act.
We have implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and may impact our financial statements and we do not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to “Note 2: Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.