ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including risks and uncertainties regarding the duration, scope and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our actual results could differ materially from these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” and “Note About Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview of 2021 Results
Our key financial and operating results as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021 are as follows:
•Revenue was $2,578.0 million, an increase of 52% compared to 2020.
•Monthly active users ("MAUs") were 431 million, a decrease of 6% compared to December 31, 2020.
•Share-based compensation expense was $415.4 million, an increase of $94.4 million compared to 2020.
•Total costs and expenses were $2,251.8 million.
•Income from operations was $326.2 million.
•Net income was $316.4 million.
•Adjusted EBITDA was $814.4 million.
•Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were $2,480.1 million.
•Headcount was 3,225.
Update on the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in authorities implementing numerous preventative measures to contain or mitigate the outbreak of the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, limitations on business activity, quarantines and shelter-in-place orders, continues to have an impact globally. These measures have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide. These measures initially positively impacted Pinner engagement and user growth in both the U.S. and international geographies as people spent more time at home and sought online inspiration for some of our core use cases. Starting in mid-March 2021, the easing of the restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic began to slow our global MAU growth and lowered Pinner engagement as compared to 2020 as Pinners began spending less time at home. This behavior reversed some of the MAU gains we saw during 2020, and, as a result, we saw a decline in global MAUs in the fourth quarter as compared to the same period in 2020.
Since the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations and overall financial performance remains unprecedented and unpredictable, our past results may not be indicative of our future performance. Given the uncertainty, we are unable to predict the extent and duration of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on advertiser demand, Pinner engagement, and our business, operations and financial results. See "Risk Factors" and "Note About Forward-Looking Statements” for additional details.
Trends in User Metrics
Monthly Active Users. We define a monthly active user as an authenticated Pinterest user who visits our website, opens our mobile application or interacts with Pinterest through one of our browser or site extensions, such as the Save button, at least once during the 30-day period ending on the date of measurement. We present MAUs based on the number of MAUs measured on the last day of the current period. We calculate average MAUs based on the average of the number of MAUs measured on the last day of the current period and the last day prior to the beginning of the current period. MAUs are the primary metric by which we measure the scale of our active user base.
Quarterly Monthly Active Users
(in millions)
Note: United States and International may not sum to Global due to rounding.
A portion of our MAUs visit Pinterest on a weekly basis. We define a weekly active user (“WAU”) as an authenticated Pinterest user who visits our website, opens our mobile application or interacts with Pinterest through one of our browser or site extensions, such as the Save button, at least once during the seven-day period ending on the date of measurement. We actively monitor the relationship of WAUs to MAUs, which has stayed relatively consistent over time. As of December 31, 2021, the proportion of WAUs to MAUs was 58%.
As of December 31, 2021, we have experienced a decline in our global MAUs as compared to December 31, 2020 due to the easing of the restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower search traffic driven by changes in search engine algorithms. As a result, we are unable to predict the extent to which we will be able to attract new Pinners, retain existing Pinners, recover past Pinners or maintain or increase the frequency and duration of Pinners' engagement as uncertainties around restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic continue.
Trends in Monetization Metrics
Revenue. We calculate revenue by user geography based on our estimate of the geographic location of our users when they perform a revenue-generating activity. The geography of our users affects our revenue and financial results because we currently only monetize certain countries and currencies and because we monetize different geographies at different average rates. Our revenue in the United States is higher primarily due to our decision to focus our earliest monetization efforts there and also due to the relative size and maturity of the U.S. digital advertising market.
Quarterly Revenue
(in millions)
Note: Revenue by geography in the charts above is geographically apportioned based on our estimate of the geographic location of our users when they perform a revenue-generating activity. This allocation differs from our disclosure of revenue disaggregated by geography in the notes to our consolidated financial statements where revenue is geographically apportioned based on our customers’ billing addresses. United States and International may not sum to Global and quarterly amounts may not sum to annual due to rounding.
Average Revenue per User (“ARPU”). We measure monetization of our platform through our average revenue per user metric. We define ARPU as our total revenue in a given geography during a period divided by average MAUs in that geography during the period. We calculate ARPU by geography based on our estimate of the geography in which revenue-generating activities occur. We present ARPU on a U.S. and international basis because we currently monetize users in different geographies at different average rates. U.S. ARPU is higher primarily due to our decision to focus our earliest monetization efforts there and also due to the relative size and maturity of the U.S. digital advertising market.
Quarterly Average Revenue per User
For the year ended December 31, 2021, global ARPU was $5.79, which represents an increase of 36% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, U.S. ARPU was $21.98 and international ARPU was $1.59, which represent increases of 43% and 80%, respectively, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
We use MAUs and ARPU to assess the growth and health of our overall business and believe that these metrics best reflect our ability to attract, retain, engage and monetize our users, and thereby drive revenue.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
To supplement our consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP, we consider Adjusted EBITDA, a financial measure which is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization expense, share-based compensation expense, interest income, interest expense and other income (expense), net, provision for income taxes, non-cash charitable contributions and, for the third quarter of 2020, a one-time payment for the termination of a future lease contract.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our operating results and for financial and operational decision-making purposes. We believe Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the income and expenses that it excludes. We also believe Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information about our operating results, enhances the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allows for greater transparency with respect to key metrics we use for financial and operational decision-making. We are presenting Adjusted EBITDA to assist investors in seeing our operating results through the eyes of management, and because we believe that this measure provides an additional tool for investors to use in comparing our core business operating results over multiple periods with other companies in our industry. However, our definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net income (loss), the nearest GAAP equivalent. For example, Adjusted EBITDA excludes:
•certain recurring, non-cash charges such as depreciation of fixed assets and amortization of acquired intangible assets, although these assets may have to be replaced in the future; and
•share-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense and an important part of our compensation strategy.
Because of these limitations, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including net income (loss) and our other financial results presented in accordance with GAAP. The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
(1)Non-cash charitable contributions of $2.7 million were not excluded from Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2020 as these were not material.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue. We generate revenue by delivering ads on our website and mobile application. Advertisers purchase ads directly with us or through their relationships with advertising agencies. We recognize revenue only after transferring control of promised goods or services to customers, which occurs when a user clicks on an ad contracted on a cost per click ("CPC") basis, views an ad contracted on a cost per thousand impressions ("CPM") basis or views a video ad contracted on a cost per view ("CPV") basis.
Cost of Revenue. Cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the delivery of our service, including the cost of hosting our website and mobile application. Cost of revenue also includes personnel-related expense, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for employees on our operations teams, payments associated with partner arrangements, credit card and other transaction processing fees, and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs.
Research and Development. Research and development consists primarily of personnel-related expense, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for our engineers and other employees engaged in the research and development of our products, and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing consists primarily of personnel-related expense, including salaries, commissions, benefits and share-based compensation for our employees engaged in sales, sales support, marketing, and customer service functions, advertising and promotional expenditures, professional services and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs. Our marketing efforts also include user- and advertiser-focused marketing expenditures.
General and Administrative. General and administrative consists primarily of personnel-related expense, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation for our employees engaged in finance, legal, human resources and other administrative functions, professional services, including outside legal and accounting services, charitable contributions and allocated facilities and other supporting overhead costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net. Other income (expense), net consists primarily of foreign currency exchange gains and losses and interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Provision for Income Taxes. Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in foreign jurisdictions and U.S. federal and state income taxes adjusted for discrete items.
Adjusted EBITDA. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization expense, share-based compensation expense, interest income, interest expense and other income (expense), net, provision for income taxes, non-cash charitable contributions and, for the third quarter of 2020, a one-time payment for the termination of a future lease contract. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for more information and for a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated statements of operations data (in thousands):
(1)Includes share-based compensation expense as follows (in thousands):
(2)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for more information and for a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data (as a percentage of revenue):
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $885.4 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenue growth was driven by a 36% increase in ARPU supported by a 12% increase in average MAUs for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These resulted in a 13% increase in the number of advertisements served and a 35% increase in the price of advertisements.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue based on our estimate of the geographic location of our users increased by 42% in the United States to $2,015.9 million driven by a 43% increase in U.S. ARPU offset by a 1% decrease in average U.S. MAUs. International revenue increased by 110% to $562.1 million driven by an 80% increase in international ARPU supported by a 16% increase in average international MAUs.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $80.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher absolute hosting costs due to user growth.
Research and Development
Research and development for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $174.1 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $91.0 million increase in share-based compensation expense, including $48.6 million relating to our Co-founder and Chief Design and Creative Officer's transition into a consulting role, a 14% increase in average headcount, which drove higher personnel expenses, as well as higher consulting expenses.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $198.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $85.9 million increase in marketing expenses, a 26% increase in average headcount, which drove higher personnel expenses, higher consulting expenses and a $17.0 million increase in share-based compensation expense.
General and Administrative
General and administrative for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $35.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a one-time payment of $89.5 million for the termination of a future lease contract in August 2020 and a $13.3 million decrease in share-based compensation, offset by a $42.6 million increase in non-cash charitable contributions and a 30% increase in average headcount, which drove higher personnel expenses.
Other Income (Expense, Net)
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $20.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower returns on our marketable securities as a result of lower interest rates and foreign currency exchange losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes was primarily due to income generated in our foreign jurisdictions and U.S. states for each of the periods presented.
Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EBITDA
Net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $316.4 million, as compared to $(128.3) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjusted EBITDA was $814.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $305.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the factors described above. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for more information and for a reconciliation of net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically financed our operations primarily through sales of our stock and payments received from our customers. Our primary uses of cash are personnel-related costs and the cost of hosting our website and mobile application. As of December 31, 2021, we had $2,480.1 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our cash equivalents and marketable securities are primarily invested in short-duration fixed income securities, including government and investment-grade corporate debt securities and money market funds. As of December 31, 2021, $95.9 million of our cash and cash equivalents was held by our foreign subsidiaries.
In November 2018, we entered into a five-year $500.0 million revolving credit facility with an accordion option which, if exercised, would allow us to increase the aggregate commitments by the greater of $100.0 million and 10% of our consolidated total assets, provided we are able to secure additional lender commitments and satisfy certain other conditions. Interest on any borrowings under the revolving credit facility accrues at either LIBOR plus 1.50% or at an alternative base rate plus 0.50%, at our election, and we are required to pay an annual commitment fee that accrues at 0.15% per annum on the unused portion of the aggregate commitments under the revolving credit facility.
The revolving credit facility also allows us to issue letters of credit, which reduce the amount we can borrow. We are required to pay a fee that accrues at 1.50% per annum on the average aggregate daily maximum amount available to be drawn under any outstanding letters of credit.
The revolving credit facility contains customary conditions to borrowing, events of default and covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to incur indebtedness, grant liens, make distributions to holders of our stock or the stock of our subsidiaries, make investments or engage in transactions with our affiliates. The revolving credit facility also contains two financial maintenance covenants: a consolidated total assets covenant and a minimum liquidity balance of $350.0 million, which includes any available borrowing capacity. The obligations under the revolving credit facility are secured by liens on substantially all of our domestic assets, including certain domestic intellectual property assets. We are in compliance with all covenants and there were no amounts outstanding under this facility as of December 31, 2021.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and amounts available under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next 12 months, though we may require additional capital resources in the future. We may elect to raise additional capital through the sale of additional equity to fund our future needs beyond the next 12 months.
Our material cash requirements include our $2,949.1 million commitment with Amazon Web Services, for which we are not subject to annual purchase commitments, and our $323.6 million of operating lease obligations, of which $57.9 million is due within the next 12 months.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our net cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities consist of our net income (loss) adjusted for certain non-cash reconciling items, such as share-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, non-cash charitable contributions and changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $724.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in our net income (loss) after adjusting for non-cash reconciling items and an increase in collections of accounts receivable.
Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities consist of capital expenditures for improvements to new and existing office spaces and acquisitions of businesses. We also actively manage our operating cash and cash equivalent balances and invest excess cash in short-duration marketable securities, sales and maturities of which we use to fund our ongoing working capital requirements. Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to decreased purchases of marketable securities, offset by a decrease in proceeds from maturities of marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities consist of net proceeds from our IPO, tax withholdings on release of RSUs and proceeds from the exercise of stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the absence of tax remittances on release of RSUs offset by a decrease in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. Preparing our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses as well as related disclosures. Because these estimates and judgments may change from period to period, actual results could differ materially, which may negatively affect our financial condition or results of operations. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other assumptions that we consider reasonable, and we evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We refer to such estimates and judgments, discussed further below, as critical accounting policies and estimates.
Refer to Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for further information on our other significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue by delivering ads on our website and mobile application. We recognize revenue only after transferring control of promised goods or services to customers, which occurs when a user clicks on an ad contracted on a CPC basis, views an ad contracted on a CPM basis or views a video ad contracted on a CPV basis. We typically bill customers on a CPC, CPM or CPV basis, and our payment terms vary by customer type and location. The term between billing and payment due dates is not significant.
We occasionally offer customers free ad inventory, and revenue is recognized only after satisfying our contractual performance obligations. When contracts with our customers contain multiple performance obligations, we allocate the overall transaction price, which is the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for promised goods or services, to each of the distinct performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the effective price charged per contracted click, impression or view, and we do not disclose the value of unsatisfied performance obligations because the original expected duration of our contracts is generally less than one year.
Leases and Operating Lease Incremental Borrowing Rate
We lease office space under operating leases with expiration dates through 2033. We determine whether an arrangement constitutes a lease at inception and record lease liabilities and right-of-use assets on our consolidated balance sheets at lease commencement. We measure lease liabilities based on the present value of the total lease payments not yet paid discounted based on the more readily determinable of the rate implicit in the lease or our incremental borrowing rate, which is the estimated rate we would be required to pay for a collateralized borrowing equal to the total lease payments over the term of the lease. We estimate our incremental borrowing rate based on an analysis of publicly traded debt securities of companies with credit and financial profiles similar to our own. We measure right-of-use assets based on the corresponding lease liability adjusted for (i) payments made to the lessor at or before the commencement date, (ii) initial direct costs we incur and (iii) tenant incentives under the lease. We begin recognizing rent expense when the lessor makes the underlying asset available to us, we do not assume renewals or early terminations unless we are reasonably certain to exercise these options at commencement, and we do not allocate consideration between lease and non-lease components.