Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company that discovers and develops Anticalin-based drugs to target validated disease pathways in unique and transformative ways. Our clinical pipeline includes an inhaled IL-4Rα antagonist Anticalin protein to treat uncontrolled asthma, an immuno-oncology, or IO, bispecific targeting HER2 and 4-1BB, and an IO bispecific targeting PD-L1 and 4-1BB. Proprietary to us, Anticalin proteins are a novel class of therapeutics validated in the clinic and through partnerships with leading pharmaceutical companies. In particular, we have alliances with AstraZeneca and Genentech to treat respiratory diseases, with Genentech also in ophthalmology and with Servier, Seagen, and Boston Pharmaceuticals in IO. Our discovery and development programs are in varying stages and include:
•PRS-060/AZD1402, our lead respiratory program partnered with AstraZeneca for the treatment of asthma, is a drug candidate that antagonizes IL-4Rα, thereby inhibiting the downstream action of IL-4 and IL-13, two cytokines known to be key mediators in the inflammatory cascade that drive the pathogenesis of asthma and other inflammatory diseases.
◦PRS-060/AZD1402 was tested in a nebulized formulation and an IV arm for pharmacokinetic, or PK, assessment in 54 healthy volunteers at nominal dose levels ranging from 0.25 mg to 400 mg in a phase 1 SAD, study. Data from that study were presented at the American Thoracic Society International Conference in May 2019 showing that PRS-060/AZD1402 was well-tolerated when given as single inhaled or intravenous doses to healthy volunteers and there was systemic target engagement (as measured by pSTAT6 inhibition). We presented interim data from the PRS-060/AZD1402 phase 1 MAD study at the European Respiratory Society International Congress in October 2019 and reported that PRS-060/AZD1402 was safe and well-tolerated at all doses, led to a statistically significant
reduction in FeNO, a validated biomarker for eosinophilic airway inflammation, and showed dose-dependent systemic target engagement in patients with mild asthma and elevated levels of FeNO (≥ 35ppb).
◦The phase 2a asthma study is ongoing in multiple sites globally. This phase 2a study is a two-part, multi-center, placebo-controlled clinical study of PRS-060/AZD1402 that will evaluate PRS-060/AZD1402 at up to three dose levels using a dry powder formulation administered twice daily. In part 1a (1 mg and 3 mg dose safety) of the study, 31 asthma patients, controlled on standard of care (medium dose inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) with long-acting beta agonists (LABA)), received PRS-060/AZD1402 twice daily over four weeks to establish the safety profile and pharmacokinetics of the dry powder formulation of PRS-060/AZD1402. A safety review following completion of part 1a included an evaluation, compared to placebo, of the incidence of adverse events, changes in laboratory markers (immuno-biomarkers, clinical chemistry, and hematology), and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). AstraZeneca began enrollment of part 2a (1 mg and 3 mg dose efficacy) of the study to evaluate efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of PRS-060/AZD1402 administered twice daily to asthma patients, uncontrolled on medium dose ICS LABA, that have a blood eosinophil count of ≥ 150 cells/μL and FeNO ≥ 25 ppb in the 1 mg and 3 mg arms and a placebo arm. Following a four-week run-in period, patients will be dosed and monitored over four weeks. FEV1 improvement compared to placebo will be the primary endpoint in this portion of the study. AstraZeneca began enrollment of part 1b (10 mg dose safety) of the study to evaluate the safety of the10 mg dose in asthma patients controlled on standard of care who will receive PRS-060/AZD1402 twice daily over four weeks. We expect to announce topline data from the phase 2a study this year, although we are actively evaluating the feasibility of study timelines in the current geopolitical environment and will update guidance in the orderly course of business, if needed. Upon receipt of the topline data and notice from AstraZeneca, including a product development plan and budget, the Company will have 30 days to opt into co-development of the program with AstraZeneca. The Company also retains a separate option to co-commercialize PRS-060/AZD1402 with AstraZeneca in the United States.
•Four discovery-stage respiratory programs were included in the AstraZeneca alliance beyond PRS-060/AZD1402, the targets and disease areas of which are undisclosed. In January2022, the Company and AstraZeneca jointly discontinued one of the four discovery-stage programs in the collaboration beyond PRS-060/AZD1402, for which they were not able to validate an exploratory target. Pieris retains co-development and co-commercialization options for two of the three remaining active discovery programs.
•Our lead fully proprietary respiratory asset, PRS-220, an oral inhaled Anticalin protein targeting connective tissue growth factor, or CTGF, is being developed as a local treatment for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, or IPF, and has passed the drug candidate nomination stage. We received a €14.2 million grant from the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs, Regional Development and Energy supporting research and development of the program for post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC) pulmonary fibrosis, or PASC-PF, also known as post-COVID-19 syndrome pulmonary fibrosis, or “long COVID”.
◦PRS-220 is currently in the IND-enabling stage. We presented initial preclinical data for PRS-220 at the European Respiratory Society International Congress 2021, or ERS, demonstrating a more potent and durable target engagement profile compared to a clinical-stage, systemically delivered anti-CTGF antibody benchmark. Additionally, the targeting of CTGF locally in the lung showed increased attenuation of fibrotic lung remodeling in vivo compared to the systemically delivered antibody. This outcome correlates with superior lung tissue exposure of PRS-220 compared to that of the systemically administered antibody in head-to-head studies, where intratracheally administered PRS-220 efficiently penetrates the fibrotic, interstitial lung tissue of mice. Clinical development for the program is expected to begin in 2022.
•We entered into a multi-program research collaboration and license agreement with Genentech, a member of the Roche Group, to discover, develop and commercialize locally delivered respiratory and ophthalmology therapies. We have initiated joint discovery activities in each of the two committed programs.
•Cinrebafusp alfa, our lead IO program, is a fusion protein, comprising a HER2-targeting antibody genetically linked to 4-1BB-targeting Anticalin proteins. Cinrebafusp alfa is designed to drive tumor localized T cell activation through tumor-targeted drug clustering mediated by HER2 expressed on tumor cells. This program was the first bispecific T cell co-stimulatory agonist to enter clinical development.
In January 2022, we dosed the first patient in our two-arm phase 2 study for cinrebafusp alfa in gastric cancer in the United States. Supported by additional data we presented from the phase 1 monotherapy study of cinrebafusp alfa in an oral presentation at the American Association for Cancer Research Virtual Congress, or AACR, in April 2021, the first arm of the phase 2 study includes the combination with ramucirumab and paclitaxel in HER2-high gastric cancer, while the second arm is in combination with tucatinib in HER2-low gastric cancer. Collaboration partners Lilly and Seagen are
supplying ramucirumab and tucatinib, respectively. The criteria for advancement of this program will evaluate a composite of measures, including a minimum target of 50% ORR in the HER2-high arm and a minimum target of 40% ORR in the HER2-low arm, duration of response, and safety. The Company expects to report initial data from the arm evaluating cinrebafusp alfa in combination with tucatinib in HER2-low gastric cancer in 2022 and expects to report data from the arm evaluating cinrebafusp alfa in combination with ramucirumab and paclitaxel in HER2-high gastric cancer in 2023. In June 2021, FDA granted orphan drug designation to cinrebafusp alfa for the treatment of HER2-high and HER2-low expressing gastric cancers.
◦The supporting data presented at AACR included an evaluation of 78 patients who had been enrolled in the monotherapy study as of the February 2021 cutoff date, including four additional patients enrolled in the active dose cohorts (≥2.5 mg/kg) since the data were presented at the ESMO Virtual Congress in September 2020. Out of 42 response-evaluable patients at the time of the data cutoff of February 25, 2021, according to RECIST 1.1, one patient with stage 4 rectal adenocarcinoma achieved a confirmed complete response at the 18 mg/kg Q2W dose (cohort 13b), four patients achieved a partial response (three at the 8 mg/kg Q2W dose (cohort 11b) and one at the 18 mg/kg Q2W dose (cohort 13b)), and stable disease was observed in 17 patients as best response out of 42 evaluable patients across the predicted active dose ranges (cohorts 9-13b), translating to an ORR of 12% and a DCR of 52%. Consistent with the mechanism of action of cinrebafusp alfa, dose-dependent immune activation was demonstrated by showing an increase in CD8+, T cell, NK cells and cytotoxic activity in the tumor microenvironment and an increase of soluble 4-1BB in the blood, indicating target engagement of 4-1BB and activation of immune cells. Cinrebafusp alfa demonstrated durable anti-tumor activity in a heavily pre-treated patient population. Additionally, clinical benefit was observed in patients with “cold” tumors as well as those with low HER2 expression who were enrolled into the study on the basis of archived HER2-status and were later re-assessed on the basis of a pre-treatment biopsy. Cinrebafusp alfa also showed an acceptable safety profile at all doses and schedules tested in the clinical study with no dose-limiting toxicities. The totality of response data generated in cohorts 11b (8 mg/kg Q2W) and 13b support the recommended phase 2 dose of a two-cycle loading dose of 18 mg/kg (Q2W), following by an 8 mg/kg dose (Q2W) in subsequent cycles.
◦The last update of the atezolizumab combination study of cinrebafusp alfa was presented at the ESMO Virtual Congress in September 2020. As of the July 2020 cutoff date, 41 patients had been enrolled and seven dose cohorts have been evaluated at a Q3W dosing schedule ranging from 0.05 mg/kg to 8 mg/kg in combination with a fixed 1200 mg dose of atezolizumab. In that trial, under RECIST 1.1, four patients achieved a confirmed partial response at active dose levels and an acceptable safety profile was observed at all doses and schedules tested in the clinical study.
•PRS-344/S095012, a bispecific Anticalin-antibody fusion protein comprising a PD-L1-targeting antibody genetically fused to Anticalin proteins specific for 4-1BB, is being developed as part of our IO collaboration with Servier. The first patient was dosed in the phase 1/2 study of PRS-344/S095012, a 4-1BB/PD-L1 bispecific, in November 2021.
•We are also developing additional IO drug candidates beyond cinrebafusp alfa and PRS-344/S095012 that are multi-specific Anticalin-based fusion proteins designed to engage immunomodulatory targets, comprising a variety of multifunctional biotherapeutics. Other IO drug candidates are being developed as part of our collaborations Servier, Seagen, and Boston Pharmaceuticals.
◦Servier has obtained in vivo proof of concept for PRS-352, an Anticalin-based bispecific beyond 4-1BB, triggering an undisclosed milestone payment to Pieris. Servier is responsible for further development of the program.
◦We achieved a key development milestone during 2020 for one of the programs in the Seagen collaboration, a bispecific tumor-targeted costimulatory agonist, triggering a $5.0 million milestone. We also handed the program over to Seagen, who is responsible for further advancement and funding of the asset. The program is one of up to three potential programs in the Seagen alliance, and we believe the achieved milestone further validates our approach and leadership in IO bispecifics, complementing the encouraging clinical data seen with cinrebafusp alfa. During the third quarter of 2021, we initiated the second program within the collaboration with Seagen. We retain a co-promotion option for one of the three programs in the Seagen collaboration in the United States.
◦We are supporting IND-readiness for PRS-342/BOS-342, a 4-1BB/GPC3 bispecific that we have exclusively licensed to Boston Pharmaceuticals, who will oversee future development of that asset.
Since inception, we have devoted nearly all of our efforts and resources to our research and development activities and have incurred significant net losses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we reported net losses of $45.7 million and
$37.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $257.1 million. We expect to continue incurring substantial losses for the next several years as we continue to develop our clinical and preclinical drug candidates and programs. Our operating expenses are comprised of research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses.
We have not generated any revenues from product sales to date, and we do not expect to generate revenues from product sales for the foreseeable future. Our revenues for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were from license and collaboration agreements with our partners.
A significant portion of our operations are conducted in countries other than the United States. Since we conduct our business in U.S. dollars, our main exposure, if any, results from changes in the exchange rates between the euro and the U.S. dollar. At each period end, we remeasure assets and liabilities to the functional currency of that entity (for example, U.S. dollar payables recorded by Pieris Pharmaceuticals GmbH). Remeasurement gains and losses are recorded in the statement of operations line item ‘Other income (expense), net’. All assets and liabilities denominated in euros are translated into U.S. dollars at the exchange rate on the balance sheet date. Revenues and expenses are translated at the weighted average rate during the period. Equity transactions are translated using historical exchange rates. All adjustments resulting from translating foreign currency financial statements into U.S. dollars are included in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Key Financial Terms and Metrics
The following discussion summarizes the key factors our management believes are necessary for an understanding of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenues
We have not generated any revenues from product sales to date and we do not expect to generate revenues from product sales for the foreseeable future. Our revenues for the last two years have been from the license and collaboration agreements with AstraZeneca, Servier, Seagen, Genentech and Boston Pharmaceuticals.
The revenues from AstraZeneca, Servier, Seagen, Genentech and Boston Pharmaceuticals. have been comprised primarily of upfront payments, research and development services and milestone payments. For additional information about our revenue recognition policy, see “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”.
Research and Development Expenses
The process of researching and developing drugs for human use is lengthy, unpredictable, and subject to many risks. We expect to continue incurring substantial expenses for the next several years as we continue to develop our clinical and preclinical drug candidates and programs. We are unable, with any certainty, to estimate either the costs or the timelines in which those expenses will be incurred. Our current development plans focus on the following programs: our lead respiratory program, PRS-060/AZD1402 and our proprietary respiratory program, PRS-220, our IO programs, currently comprised of cinrebafusp alfa as well as multiple additional proprietary and partnered programs, including PRS-344/S095012. These programs consume a large proportion of our current, as well as projected, resources.
Our research and development costs include costs that are directly attributable to the creation of certain of our Anticalin drug candidates and are comprised of:
•internal recurring costs, such as personnel-related costs (salaries, employee benefits, equity compensation and other costs), materials and supplies, facilities and maintenance costs attributable to research and development functions; and
•fees paid to external parties who provide us with contract services, such as preclinical testing, manufacturing and related testing and clinical trial activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, employee benefits, equity compensation, and other personnel-related costs associated with executive, administrative and other support staff. Other significant general and administrative expenses include the costs associated with professional fees for accounting, auditing, insurance costs, consulting and legal services, along with facility and maintenance costs attributable to general and administrative functions.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our revenues and operating expenses for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenues
The following table provides a comparison of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
•The $4.0 million increase in customer revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is driven by the following:
◦Higher revenue in the current year for the phase 2a milestone ($13.0 million) recognized for PRS-060/AZD1402 under the AstraZeneca collaboration, revenue attributed to two new collaboration agreements, Genentech ($2.0 million) and Boston Pharmaceuticals ($5.7 million) and the achievement of a preclinical milestone on PRS-352.
◦Lower Seagen revenue as there was an achievement of a $5.0 million milestone on the first collaboration program recorded in 2020 along with the impact of the execution of a contractual amendment (approximately $3.5 million) in the same year.
◦Lower Servier revenue as the prior year included recognition of amounts for a preclinical stage product that is not being pursued under the Servier collaboration.
•Collaboration revenue decreased by $1.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease relates to revenue recognized in the prior year on a preclinical stage product that Servier declined to pursue further, offset slightly by higher Servier cost-sharing revenue generated from higher levels of manufacturing costs incurred on PRS-344/S095012.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table provides a comparison of the research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
•The $10.8 million increase in our immuno-oncology program spending period-over-period is due primarily to an increase in clinical and manufacturing costs for cinrebafusp alfa and higher manufacturing costs for PRS-344/S095012, all partially offset by lower preclinical costs across a number of programs.
•The $7.5 million increase for our respiratory programs period-over-period is due to higher manufacturing costs for PRS-220, increased preclinical work on a number of early stage programs as well as higher license fees, offset partially by lower clinical and manufacturing costs with respect to activities for PRS-060/AZD1402.
•The $1.8 million increase in other research and development activities expenses is mainly due primarily to higher personnel and recruiting costs due to higher headcount, higher external consulting and higher license fees, offset slightly by lower lab consumable costs and lower facility costs due to the move to the new R&D facility in Hallbergmoos, Germany in the prior year.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses was $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The period-over-period decrease is due primarily to lower legal, accounting and project management costs, along with lower one-time office and building equipment costs related to the move to the new R&D facility in Hallbergmoos, Germany in the prior year. These reductions in cost were offset by higher fixed and variable compensation and higher insurance costs.
Other income (expense), net
Our other income was $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a other expense of $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This period-over-period increase was primarily due to $3.7 million of grant income recorded on PRS-220 as well as foreign exchange realized gains due to a strengthening U.S. dollar compared to the same period in the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We are subject to risks common to companies in the biotechnology industry, including but not limited to, the need for additional capital, risks of failure of preclinical studies and clinical trials, the need to obtain marketing approval and reimbursement for any drug product candidate that we may identify and develop, the need to successfully commercialize and gain market acceptance of our product candidates, dependence on key personnel, protection of proprietary technology, compliance with government regulations, development of technological innovations by competitors, reliance on third-party manufacturers and the ability to transition from pilot-scale production to large-scale manufacturing of products.
Through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations with $568.0 million of cash that has been obtained from the following main sources: $276.0 million from sales of equity; $270.6 million in total payments received under license and collaboration agreements, including $52.9 million for research and development services costs received from our collaboration partners; $14.8 million from government grants and $6.5 million from loans.
As of December 31, 2021, we had a total of $117.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. We have incurred losses in every period since inception including the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and have a total accumulated deficit of $257.1 million as of December 31, 2021. Net losses and negative cash flows have had, and will continue to have, an adverse effect on our stockholders’ equity and working capital. We expect to continue to incur operating losses for at least the next several years.
The following table provides a summary of operating, investing, and financing cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively (in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $7.7 million and $45.9 million, respectively. Lower operating cash used in 2021 was benefited by higher deferred revenue, primarily driven by the new collaboration agreement with Genentech, and higher accounts payable and accrued expenses, offset partially by higher accounts receivables and prepaid expenses. This compares to the impact of lower accounts payable, accrued expenses and deferred revenue, primarily driven by revenue recognized for the discontinued Servier programs and the satisfaction of a performance obligation under the Seagen agreements, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Offsetting the impact from changes in operating assets and liabilities was an increase in the net loss in 2021 compared to the same timeframe in 2020.
The change in net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by investing activities the same period in 2020 is mainly attributable to the impact of net investments changes (purchases and maturities of available-for-sale securities) for which there is no activity in the comparable current year period. Additionally, purchases of property and equipment were lower as the 2020 purchases primarily related to our move to a new R&D facility.
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 provided cash of $59.1 million and $10.1 million, respectively. The increase in 2021 compared to 2020 is driven by equity investments from both Seagen and AstraZeneca (see Note 3), higher sales activity under our ATM programs and higher proceeds received from warrant and option exercises. There was limited option exercise activity for the same period in 2020.
In August 2019, we entered into a sales agreement pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of its common stock, from time to time, up to an aggregate gross sales proceeds of $50.0 million through an “at the market offering” program, or the 2019 ATM Program, under a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-226725). In August 2021, the 2019 ATM Program expired.
In August 2021, we established a second ATM offering program, or the 2021 ATM Program, under the existing sales agreement with Jefferies LLC, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell shares of its common stock, from time to time, up to an aggregate amount of gross sales proceeds of $50.0 million. The 2021 ATM Program is offered under a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 that was filed with and declared effective by the SEC in August 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 8.2 million shares for gross proceeds of $39.7 million under both ATM programs at an average stock price of $4.85. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 3.6 million shares at a price of $2.80 per share resulting in gross proceeds of $10.0 million under the 2019 ATM Program only.
In March 2021, we amended our strategic collaboration agreement with Seagen which resulted in their purchase of $13.0 million of our common stock (See Note 3). In March 2021, we also earned a $13.0 million milestone from AstraZeneca related to the initiation of the phase 2a study for PRS-060/AZD1402 and AstraZeneca agreed to purchase $10.0 million of our common stock (See Note 3).
Our future success is dependent on our ability to identify and develop our product candidates, expand our corporate infrastructure and ultimately upon our ability to attain profitable operations. We have devoted substantially all of our financial resources and efforts to research and development and general and administrative expenses to support such research and development. We have several research and development programs underway in varying stages of development and we expect that these programs will continue to require increasing amounts of cash for development, conducting clinical trials, and testing and manufacturing of product material. Cash necessary to fund operations will increase significantly over the next several years as we continue to conduct these activities necessary to pursue governmental regulatory approval of clinical-stage programs and other product candidates.
Any requirements for additional capital will depend on many factors, including the following:
•the scope, rate of progress, results and cost of our clinical studies, preclinical testing and other related activities;
•the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies, and establishing commercial supplies, of our drug candidates and any products that we may develop;
•the number and characteristics of drug candidates that we pursue;
•the cost, timing and outcomes of regulatory approvals;
•the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
•the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales, profit sharing or royalties, if any, from our potential products;
•the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions; and
•the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the cost and timing of actions taken to contain it.
In addition, any unfavorable development or delay in the progress of our core clinical-stage programs including cinrebafusp alfa and PRS-060/AZD1402 could have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise additional capital.
We plan to raise additional capital to fulfill our operating and capital requirements through public or private equity financings, utilization of our ATM program, strategic collaborations, licensing arrangements, and/or the achievement of milestones under our collaborative agreements. The funding requirements of our operating plans, however, are based on estimates that are subject to risks and uncertainties and may change as a result of many factors currently unknown. Although we continue to pursue these funding plans, there is no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to us to fund continuing operations, if at all. Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, strategic partnerships and licensing arrangements. The terms of any future financing may adversely affect the holdings or the rights of our existing stockholders.
We believe that our currently available funds will be sufficient to fund our operations through at least the next twelve months from the issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our belief with respect to our ability to fund operations is based on estimates that are subject to risks and uncertainties. If actual results are different from our estimates, we may need to seek additional funding. If we are unable to obtain additional funding on acceptable terms when needed, we may be required to defer or limit some or all of our research, development, and/or clinical projects
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under applicable SEC rules.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. Management makes estimates and exercises judgment in revenue recognition, accrued and prepaid clinical trial expenses, share-based payments and income taxes. Judgments must also be made about the disclosure of contingent liabilities, and these estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from those estimates and under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we have identified the following accounting policies that we believe require application of management’s most subjective judgments, often requiring the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our actual results could differ from these estimates and such differences could be material.
Revenue Recognition
Pieris has entered into several licensing agreements with collaboration partners for the development of Anticalin therapeutics against a variety of targets. The terms of these agreements provide for the transfer of multiple goods or services which may include: (i) licenses, or options to obtain licenses, to Pieris’ Anticalin technology and/or specific programs and (ii) research and development activities to be performed on behalf of or with a collaborative partner. Payments to Pieris under these agreements may include upfront fees (which include license and option fees), payments for research and development activities, payments
based upon the achievement of certain milestones, and royalties on product sales. There are no performance, cancellation, termination or refund provisions in any of the arrangements that could result in material financial consequences to Pieris.
The Company accounts for revenue recognition pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 606, Revenue Recognition, or ASC 606. The standard requires a company to recognize revenue when it transfers goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the company expects to receive for those goods or services.
Collaborative Arrangements
We consider the nature and contractual terms of an arrangement and assess whether the arrangement involves a joint operating activity pursuant to which we are an active participant and are exposed to significant risks and rewards with respect to the arrangement. If we are an active participant and are exposed to the significant risks and rewards with respect to the arrangement, we account for these arrangements pursuant to ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements, or ASC 808, and apply a systematic and rational approach to recognize revenue. We classify payments received as revenue and payments made as a reduction of revenue in the period in which they are earned.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for these goods and services. To achieve this core principle, we apply the following five steps: 1) identify the customer contract; 2) identify the contract’s performance obligations; 3) determine the transaction price; 4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and 5) recognize revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
We evaluate all promised goods and services within a customer contract and determines which of such goods and services are separate performance obligations. This evaluation includes an assessment of whether the good or service is capable of being distinct and whether the good or service is separable from other promises in the contract. In assessing whether promised goods or services are distinct, we consider factors such as the stage of development of the underlying intellectual property and the capabilities of the customer to develop the intellectual property on their own or whether the required expertise is readily available.
Licensing arrangements are analyzed to determine whether the promised goods or services, which often include licenses, research and development services and governance committee services, are distinct or whether they must be accounted for as part of a combined performance obligation. If the license is considered not to be distinct, the license would then be combined with other promised goods or services as a combined performance obligation. If we are involved in a governance committee, we assess whether our involvement constitutes a separate performance obligation. When governance committee services are determined to be separate performance obligations, we determine the fair value to be allocated to this promised service.
Certain contracts contain optional and additional items, which are considered marketing offers and are accounted for as separate contracts with the customer if such option is elected by the customer, unless the option provides a material right which would not be provided without entering into the contract. An option that is considered a material right is accounted for as a separate performance obligation.
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. A contract may contain variable consideration, including potential payments for both milestone and research and development services. For certain potential milestone payments, we estimate the amount of variable consideration by using the most likely amount method. In making this assessment, we evaluate factors such as the clinical, regulatory, commercial and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the milestone. Each reporting period we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such variable consideration and any related constraints. We will include variable consideration, without constraint, in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. For potential research and development service payments, we estimate the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method, including any approved budget updates arising from additional research or development services.
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price among the performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis unless a portion of the transaction price is variable and meets the criteria to be allocated entirely to a performance obligation or to a distinct good or service that forms part of a single performance obligation.
We allocate the transaction price based on the estimated standalone selling price of the underlying performance obligations or in the case of certain variable consideration to one or more performance obligations. We must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We utilize key assumptions to determine the stand-alone selling price, which may include other comparable transactions, pricing considered in negotiating the transaction and the estimated costs to complete the respective performance obligation. Certain variable consideration is allocated specifically to one or more performance obligations in a contract when the terms of the variable consideration relate to the satisfaction of the performance obligation and the resulting amounts allocated to each performance obligation are consistent with the amount we would expect to receive for each performance obligation.
When a performance obligation is satisfied, revenue is recognized for the amount of the transaction price, excluding estimates of variable consideration that are constrained, that is allocated to that performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. Significant management judgment is required in determining the level of effort required under an arrangement and the period over which we are expected to complete its performance obligations under an arrangement.
For performance obligations consisting of licenses and other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non- refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we will recognize revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license.
Milestones and Royalties
We aggregate milestones into four categories: (i) research milestones, (ii) development milestones, (iii) commercial milestones, and (iv) sales milestones. Research milestones are typically achieved upon reaching certain success criteria as defined in each agreement related to developing an Anticalin protein against the specified target. Development milestones are typically reached when a compound reaches a defined phase of clinical research or passes such phase or upon gaining regulatory approvals. Commercial milestones are typically achieved when an approved pharmaceutical product reaches the status for commercial sale, including regulatory approval. Sales milestones are certain defined levels of net sales by the licensee, such as when a product first achieves global sales or annual sales of a specified amount.
There is uncertainty that the events to obtain the research and development milestones will be achieved given the nature of clinical development and the stage of our technology. We have thus determined that all research and development milestones will be constrained until it is deemed probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur. For revenues from research and development milestones, payments will be recognized consistent with the recognition pattern of the performance obligation to which they relate.
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). Commercial milestones and sales royalties are determined by sales or usage-based thresholds and will be accounted for under the royalty recognition constraint as constrained variable consideration.
Contract Balances
We recognize a contract asset when we transfer goods or services to a customer before the customer pays consideration or before payment is due, excluding any amounts presented as a receivable (i.e., accounts receivable). A contract asset is an entity’s right to consideration in exchange for goods or services that the entity has transferred to a customer. The contract liabilities (i.e., deferred revenue) primarily relate to contracts where we have received payment but has not yet satisfied the related performance obligations.
Contingencies
Accruals are recorded for loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the related loss can be reasonably estimated. We evaluate, on a quarterly basis, developments in legal proceedings and other matters that could cause an increase or decrease in the amount of the liability that has been accrued previously. Considering facts known at the time of the assessment, we determine whether potential losses are considered reasonably possible or probable and whether
they are estimable. Based upon this assessment, we carry out an evaluation of disclosure requirements and consider possible accruals in the financial statements.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred in performing research and development activities. Research and development expenses are comprised of costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including salaries and benefits, facilities costs, pre-clinical and clinical costs, contract services, consulting, depreciation and amortization expense, and other related costs. Costs associated with acquired technology, in the form of upfront fees or milestone payments, are charged to research and development expense as incurred.
Income Taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and operating losses and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted statutory tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the jurisdictions and years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We evaluate the realizability of our net deferred tax assets, including considering the level of historical operating results and projections of taxable income for the future. We record a full valuation allowance to reduce our net deferred tax assets when it is determined that it is more likely than not that our net deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We recognize, measure, present and disclose in our financial statements any uncertain tax positions that we have taken or expect to take on a tax return. We operate in multiple jurisdictions, both within and outside the United States, and may be subject to audits from various tax authorities. Management’s judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, liabilities for uncertain tax positions, and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We will monitor the extent to which our deferred tax assets may be realized and adjust the valuation allowance accordingly.
Our policy is to classify interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We review new accounting standards to determine the expected financial impact, if any, that the adoption of each standard will have. For the recently issued accounting standards that we believe may have an impact on our consolidated financial statements, see “Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our consolidated financial statements.
Smaller Reporting Company Status
Currently, we qualify as a smaller reporting company.
As a smaller reporting company, we are eligible and have taken advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are not available to public reporting companies that do not qualify for this classification, including, but not limited to:
•An opportunity for reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic and annual reports, including without limitation exemption from the requirement to provide a compensation discussion and analysis describing compensation practices and procedures,
•An opportunity for reduced financial statement disclosure in registration statements and in annual reports on Form 10-K, which only requires two years of audited financial statements rather than the three years of audited financial statements that are required for other public companies,
•An opportunity for reduced audit and other compliance expenses as we are not subject to the requirement to obtain an auditor’s report on internal control over financial reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and
•An opportunity to utilize the non-accelerated filer time-line requirements beginning with our annual report for the year ending December 31, 2020 and quarterly filings thereafter.
For as long as we continue to be a smaller reporting company, we expect that we will take advantage of both the reduced internal control audit requirements and the disclosure obligations available to us as a result of this classification.