ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with PJT Partners Inc.’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business
PJT Partners is a premier global advisory-focused investment bank. We offer a unique portfolio of advisory services designed to help our clients achieve their strategic objectives. Our team of senior professionals delivers a range of strategic advisory, capital markets advisory, restructuring and special situations and shareholder advisory services to corporations, financial sponsors, institutional investors and governments around the world. We also provide private fund advisory and fundraising services for alternative investment strategies, including private equity, real estate, hedge funds and private credit.
Further information regarding our business is provided in “Part I. Item 1. Business” of this filing.
Business Environment
Economic and global financial conditions, including a global pandemic such as COVID-19, can materially affect our operational and financial performance. See “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this filing for a discussion of some of the factors that can affect our performance.
M&A is a cyclical business that is impacted by macroeconomic conditions. Worldwide M&A announced volumes during 2021 were up significantly compared with 2020. While the pace of activity may not remain at these levels, we expect corporate boards and management teams to continue to use M&A as a strategic tool.
Global restructuring activity in 2021 slowed from elevated 2020 levels driven by a robust global economic recovery. Exuberant capital markets and refinancing activities fueled by a low interest rate environment resulted in historically low default rates. However, while some companies addressed near-term liquidity issues, many companies continue to deal with the long-term impact of severe business dislocations caused by COVID-19. These companies will need to address their long-term capital structures as financing markets become more difficult, supply chain disruptions continue and inflationary pressures cause fundamental business challenges. Therefore, we continue to believe that the medium- to long-term demand for such advisory services will improve.
While many limited partners are actively allocating capital, investors remain focused on existing relationships with fund managers. As a result, the bar for fund managers to attract new investors remains high as investors continue to demand highly successful and tenured firms and a flight to quality persists. Managers are continuing to deploy capital at a very rapid pace resulting in many returning to the market for their next fundraise in extremely short periods of time with much larger fund sizes. As it relates to secondary activity, the number of high quality sponsors accessing the secondary market through continuation vehicles continues to increase.
Key Financial Measures
Revenues
Substantially all of our revenues are derived from contracts with clients to provide advisory and placement services. This revenue is primarily a function of the number of active engagements we have, the size of each of those engagements and the fees we charge for our services.
We provide a range of strategic advisory, capital markets advisory, restructuring and special situations and shareholder advisory services to corporations, financial sponsors, institutional investors and governments around the world. In conjunction with providing restructuring advice, we may also assist with raising various forms of financing, including debt and equity. Our secondary advisory services include providing solutions to investing clients seeking portfolio liquidity, unfunded commitment relief and investments in secondary markets. Our fund placement services primarily serve alternative investment strategies, including private equity, real estate, hedge funds and private credit. We advise on all aspects of the fundraising process including competitive positioning and market assessment, marketing materials and related documentation and partnership terms and conditions most prevalent in the current environment. We also provide public and private placement fundraising services to our corporate clients and recognize placement and underwriting fees based on the successful completion of the transaction.
The amount and timing of the fees paid vary by the type of engagement and are typically based on retainers, completion of a transaction or a capital raise. Fees earned for services provided to alternative asset managers are typically recognized upon acceptance by a fund of capital or capital commitments (referred to as a “closing”), in accordance with terms set forth in individual agreements. For commitment based fees, revenue is recognized over time as commitments are accepted. Fees for such closed-end fund arrangements are generally paid in installments over three or four years and interest is charged to the outstanding balance at an agreed upon rate, such as the London Interbank Offered Rate or an alternate reference rate, plus a market-based margin. For funds with multiple closings, the constraint on variable consideration is lifted upon each closing. For open-end fund structures, placement fees are typically calculated as a percentage of a placed investor’s month-end net asset value. Typically, we earn fees for such open-end fund structures over a 48 month period. For these arrangements, revenue is recognized over time as the constraint over variable consideration is lifted. We may receive non-refundable up-front fees in our contracts with customers, which are recorded as revenues in the period over which services are estimated to be provided.
A transaction can fail to be completed for many reasons, including global and/or regional economic conditions, failure of parties to agree upon final terms, to secure necessary board or shareholder approvals, to secure necessary financing or to achieve necessary regulatory approvals. In the case of bankruptcy engagements, fees are subject to approval of the court.
Interest Income and Other - Interest Income and Other represents interest typically earned on Cash and Cash Equivalents, investments in Treasury securities and outstanding placement fees receivable; miscellaneous income; foreign exchange gains and losses arising from transactions denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars; sublease income; and the amount of expense reimbursement invoiced to clients related to out-of-pocket expenses. Interest on placement fees receivable is earned from the time revenue is recognized and is calculated as mutually agreed upon with the receivable counterparty. Interest receivable is included in Accounts Receivable, Net in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Expenses
Compensation and Benefits - Compensation and Benefits expense includes salaries, cash bonuses, benefits, employer taxes and equity-based compensation associated with the grants of equity-based awards to partners and employees. Changes in this expense are driven by fluctuations in the number of employees, business performance, compensation adjustments in relation to market movements, changes in rates for employer taxes and other cost increases affecting benefit plans. In addition, this expense is affected by the composition of our work force. The expense associated with our bonus and equity plans can also have a significant impact on this expense category and may vary from year to year.
We maintain compensation programs, including salaries, annual incentive compensation (that may include components of cash, restricted cash and/or equity-based awards) and benefits programs. We manage compensation to estimates of competitive levels based on market conditions and performance. Our level of compensation reflects our plan to maintain competitive compensation levels to retain key personnel and it reflects the impact of newly-hired senior professionals, including related grants of equity awards that are generally valued at their grant date fair value.
Increasing the number of high-caliber, experienced senior level employees is critical to our growth efforts. In our advisory businesses, these hires generally do not begin to generate significant revenue in the year they are hired.
Our remaining expenses are the other costs typical to operating our business, which generally consist of:
•
Occupancy and Related - consisting primarily of costs related to leased property, including rent, maintenance, real estate taxes, utilities and other related costs. Our company headquarters are located in New York, New York, and we maintain additional offices in the U.S. and throughout the world;
•
Travel and Related - consisting of costs for our partners and employees to render services where our clients are located;
•
Professional Fees - consisting primarily of consulting, audit and tax, recruiting and legal and other professional services;
•
Communications and Information Services - consisting primarily of costs for our technology infrastructure and telecommunications costs;
•
Depreciation and Amortization - consisting of depreciation and amortization on our furniture, equipment, leasehold improvements and intangible assets; and
•
Other Expenses - consisting primarily of provision for credit losses, regulatory fees, insurance, fees paid for access to external market data, advertising and other general operating expenses.
Income Taxes - PJT Partners Inc. is a corporation subject to U.S. federal, state and local income taxes in jurisdictions where it does business. Our businesses generally operate as partnerships for U.S. federal and state purposes and as corporate entities in non-U.S. jurisdictions. In the U.S. federal and state jurisdictions, taxes related to income earned by these entities generally represent obligations of the individual members and partners.
The operating entities have generally been subject to New York City Unincorporated Business Tax and to entity-level income taxes imposed by non-U.S. jurisdictions, as applicable. These taxes have been reflected in our consolidated financial statements.
PJT Partners Inc. is subject to U.S. corporate federal, state and local income tax on its allocable share of results of operations from the operating partnership (PJT Partners Holdings LP).
Non-Controlling Interests
PJT Partners Inc. is a holding company and its only material asset is its controlling equity interest in PJT Partners Holdings LP, and certain cash and cash equivalents it may hold from time to time. As the sole general partner of PJT Partners Holdings LP, PJT Partners Inc. operates and controls all of the business and affairs and consolidates the financial results of PJT Partners Holdings LP and its operating subsidiaries.
The portion of net income attributable to the non-controlling interests is presented separately in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Revenues
The following table provides revenue statistics for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
There were no clients representing greater than 10% of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Total Revenues were $991.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $1,052.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a 6% decrease. Advisory Fees were $762.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $109.6 million compared with $872.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. A significant decrease in restructuring revenues from the prior year’s record levels was mostly offset by record-setting strategic advisory performance in 2021. Placement Fees were $216.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $54.5 million compared with $162.2 million for the year ended December 31,
2020. The increase in Placement Fees was driven by a significant increase in corporate placements as well as increased fund placement activity.
Expenses
Expenses were $772.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $31.8 million compared with $804.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in expenses was primarily driven by a decrease of $43.4 million in Compensation and Benefits and partially offset by increases in Professional Fees, Communications and Information Services and Travel and Related of $4.2 million, $3.4 million and $1.7 million, respectively. The decrease in Compensation and Benefits reflects a lower compensation accrual rate in 2021 compared with 2020. Professional Fees increased primarily due to higher senior advisor and recruiting expenses. The increase in Communications and Information Services was primarily driven by investments in technology infrastructure. Travel and Related increased during the current year due to increased levels of activity compared with the prior year, although such activity remains below pre-COVID levels.
Provision for Taxes
The Company’s Provision for Taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.5 million compared with $35.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This resulted in an effective tax rate of 13.4% and 14.3%, respectively, based on our Income Before Provision for Taxes of $219.4 million and $248.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a decrease in permanent differences related to equity-based compensation.
Non-Controlling Interests
Net Income Attributable to Non-Controlling Interests is derived from the Income Before Provision for Taxes and the percentage allocation of the income between the holders of Partnership Units and holders of Class A common stock of PJT Partners Inc. after considering any contractual arrangements that govern the allocation of income.
We have omitted the discussion of the earliest of the three years covered in the 2021 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Such discussion is included in “Part II. Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 26, 2021, and is incorporated herein by reference.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We regularly monitor our liquidity position, including cash and cash equivalents, investments, working capital assets and liabilities, any commitments and other liquidity requirements.
Our assets have been historically comprised of cash and cash equivalents, investments, receivables arising from advisory and placement engagements and operating lease right-of-use assets. Our liabilities primarily include accrued compensation and benefits, accounts payable and accrued expenses, taxes payable and operating lease liabilities. We expect to pay a significant amount of incentive compensation toward the end of each year or during the beginning of the next calendar year with respect to the prior year’s results. A portion of annual compensation may be awarded with equity-based compensation and thus requires less cash. We expect levels of cash to decline at the end of the year or during the first quarter of each year after incentive compensation is paid to our employees. We then expect cash to gradually build throughout the remainder of the year.
On February 1, 2021, PJT Partners Holdings LP, as borrower (the “Borrower”), entered into a Renewal and Modification Agreement (the “Renewal Agreement”) and related documents with First Republic Bank, as lender (the “Lender”), amending the terms of the Borrower’s revolving credit facility with the Lender under the Amended and Restated Loan Agreement dated October 1, 2018 (the “Amended and Restated Loan Agreement”). Further information regarding the Renewal Agreement and Amended and Restated Loan Agreement can be found in Note 14. “Commitments and Contingencies-Commitments, Line of Credit” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we were in compliance with the debt covenants under the Renewal Agreement and Amended and Restated Loan Agreement, respectively. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no borrowings outstanding under the revolving credit facility.
We evaluate our cash needs on a regular basis in light of current market conditions. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $200.5 million after paying a special dividend in October 2021 of $3.00 per share to Class A common stockholders for an aggregate payment of $73.0 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $437.4 million.
Our liquidity is highly dependent upon cash receipts from clients, which are generally dependent upon the successful completion of transactions as well as the timing of receivable collections. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, total accounts receivable, net of allowance for credit losses, were $289.3 million and $233.2 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the allowance for credit losses was $1.9 million and $1.3 million, respectively. Included in Accounts Receivable, Net are long-term receivables of $104.6 million and $83.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to placement fees that are generally paid in installments over a period of three to four years.
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Our primary cash needs are for working capital, paying operating expenses, including cash compensation to our employees, funding the cash redemption of Partnership Units, repurchasing shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, paying income taxes, making distributions to our shareholders in accordance with our dividend policy, capital expenditures, making payments pursuant to the tax receivable agreement, commitments and strategic investments. We expect to fund these liquidity requirements through cash flows from operations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our ability to fund these needs through cash flows from operations will depend, in part, on our ability to generate or raise cash in the future. This depends on our future financial results, which are subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and regulatory factors.
Additionally, our ability to generate positive cash flow from operations will be impacted by global economic conditions. If our cash flows from operations are significantly reduced, we may need to incur debt, issue additional equity or borrow from our revolving credit facility. Although we believe that the arrangements we have in place will permit us to finance our operations on acceptable terms and conditions for the foreseeable future, our access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms and conditions in the future will be impacted by many factors, including: (a) our credit ratings or absence of a credit rating, (b) the liquidity of the overall capital markets, and (c) the current state of the economy. We cannot provide any assurance that such financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or that such financing will be available at all. We believe that our future cash from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility, together with our access to funds on hand, will provide adequate resources to fund our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital needs.
Regulatory Capital
We actively monitor our regulatory capital base. We are subject to regulatory requirements in the U.S. and certain international jurisdictions to ensure general financial soundness and liquidity. This requires, among other things, that we comply with certain minimum capital requirements, recordkeeping, reporting procedures, experience and training requirements for employees and certain other requirements and procedures. These regulatory requirements may restrict the flow of funds to and from affiliates. See Note 15. “Regulated Entities” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing for further information. The licenses under which we operate are meant to be appropriate to conduct our business. We believe that we provide each of these entities with sufficient capital and liquidity, consistent with their business and regulatory requirements.
Our activities may also be subject to regulation, including regulatory capital requirements, by various other foreign jurisdictions and self-regulatory organizations.
We do not anticipate that compliance with any and all such requirements will materially adversely impact the availability of funds for domestic and parent-level purposes.
Exchange Agreement
Subject to the terms and conditions of the exchange agreement between us and certain of the holders of Partnership Units (other than PJT Partners Inc.), Partnership Units are exchangeable at the option of the holder for cash or, at our election, for shares of our Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis. Depending on our liquidity and capital resources, market conditions, the timing and concentration of exchange requests and other considerations, we may choose to fund exchanges of Partnership Units with available cash, borrowings or new issuances of Class A common stock or to settle exchanges by issuing Class A common stock to the exchanging Partnership Unitholder.
See Note 13. “Transactions with Related Parties-Exchange Agreement” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing for further information.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 1, 2021, our Board authorized a $150 million increase to the Company’s Class A common stock repurchase program, which is in addition to the previous authorizations, of which $83.1 million was remaining as of December 31, 2021. Under the repurchase program, shares of the Company’s Class A common stock may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions, in privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. The timing and the actual number of shares repurchased depend on a variety of factors, including legal requirements, price and economic and market conditions. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time and does not have a specified expiration date.
See Note 11. “Stockholders’ Equity-Treasury Stock” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing for further information.
Commitments and Contingencies
Litigation
With respect to our litigation matters, including the litigation discussed under the caption “Legal Proceedings” elsewhere in this report, we are not currently able to estimate the possible loss or range of loss until developments in such matters have provided sufficient information to support such an assessment, including quantification of a damage demand from plaintiffs, discovery from other parties and investigation of factual allegations, rulings by courts on motions or appeals, analysis by experts or the status of any settlement negotiations. While the ultimate outcome and the costs associated with litigation are inherently uncertain and difficult to predict, we believe, based on current knowledge and after consultation with counsel, that we are not currently party to any material pending proceedings, individually or in the aggregate, the resolution of which would have a material effect on the Company.
Guarantee
We provide a guarantee to a lending institution for certain loans held by employees for investment in funds of our former Parent, which are secured by the underlying investments in those funds. The amount guaranteed was $4.1 million and $6.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In connection with this guarantee, we currently expect any associated risk of loss to be insignificant.
Indemnifications
We have entered and may continue to enter into contracts that contain a variety of indemnification obligations. Our maximum exposure under these arrangements is not known; however, we currently expect any associated risk of loss to be insignificant. In connection with these matters, we have incurred and may continue to incur legal expenses, which are expensed as incurred.
Contractual Obligations
We have entered into operating leases, primarily with respect to office space in our various locations. Further disclosure regarding our leases is provided in Note 12. “Leases” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an amount due of $31.1 million pursuant to the tax receivable agreement, which represents management’s best estimate of the amounts currently expected to be owed under the tax receivable agreement. Actual payments may differ significantly from estimated payments. Further disclosure regarding the tax receivable agreement is presented in Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Amount Due Pursuant to Tax Receivable Agreement” and Note 13. “Transactions with Related Parties-Tax Receivable Agreement” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.
Estimating the amount of payments that may be made under the tax receivable agreement entered into with the holders of Partnership Units (other than PJT Partners Inc.) is by its nature imprecise, insofar as the calculation of amounts payable depends on a variety of factors. While the actual increase in tax basis, as well as the amount and timing of any payments under the tax receivable agreement, will vary depending upon a number of factors, including the timing of exchanges, the price of shares of our Class A common stock at the time of the exchange, the extent to which such exchanges are taxable and the amount and timing of our income, we expect that as a result of the size of the transfers and increases in the tax basis of the tangible and intangible assets of PJT Partners Holdings LP, the payments that PJT Partners Inc. may make under the tax receivable agreement will be substantial. There may be a material negative effect on our liquidity if, as a result of timing discrepancies or otherwise, the payments under the tax receivable agreement exceed the actual cash tax savings that PJT Partners Inc. realizes in respect of the tax attributes subject to the tax receivable agreement and/or distributions to PJT Partners Inc. by PJT Partners Holdings LP are not sufficient to permit PJT Partners Inc. to make payments under the tax receivable agreement after it has paid taxes. Late payments under the tax receivable agreement generally will accrue interest at an uncapped rate equal to LIBOR plus 500 basis points. The payments under the tax receivable agreement are not conditioned upon continued ownership of us by holders of Partnership Units.
Pursuant to the employee matters agreement entered into with Blackstone, we have agreed to pay Blackstone the net realized cash benefit resulting from certain compensation-related tax deductions. Amounts are payable annually (for periods in which a cash benefit is realized) within nine months of the end of the relevant tax period. The amount of the tax benefit liability was $2.6 million as of December 31, 2021. Further disclosure regarding this liability is provided in Note 14. “Commitments and Contingencies-Transactions and Agreements with Blackstone, Employee Matters Agreement” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.
Other
See Notes 8, 10, 12 and 14 in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing for further information in connection with income taxes, equity-based and other deferred compensation plans, leasing arrangements and commitments, respectively.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In applying many of these accounting principles, we need to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, which are often subjective. Actual results may be affected negatively based on changing circumstances. If actual amounts are ultimately different from our estimates, the revisions are included in our results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known. We believe the following comprise the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and could potentially produce materially different results if we were to change underlying assumptions, estimates and/or judgments.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
At contract inception, we assess the services promised in our contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a service (or a bundle of services) that is distinct. To identify the performance obligations, we consider all of the services promised in the contract regardless of whether they are explicitly stated or are implied by customary business practices. Additionally, we allocate the transaction price to the respective performance obligation(s) by estimating the amount of consideration in which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised services to the customer.
For performance obligations that are satisfied over time, determining a measure of progress requires management to make judgments that affect the timing of revenue recognized.
For performance obligations that are satisfied at a point in time, we have determined that the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits from, the output of the service at the time it is provided to the client. Additionally, at that point we have a present right to payment, we have transferred the output of the service and the customer has significant risks and rewards of ownership.
Compensation and Benefits
Compensation and Benefits includes salaries, cash bonuses, benefits, employer taxes and equity-based compensation associated with the grants of equity-based awards to partners and employees. Compensation cost relating to the issuance of equity-based awards with a requisite service period to partners and employees is measured at fair value at the grant date, taking into consideration expected forfeitures, and expensed over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. Equity-based awards that do not require future service are expensed immediately.
In certain instances, we may grant equity-based awards containing both a service and a market condition. The effect of the market condition is reflected in the grant date fair value of the award. Compensation cost is recognized for an award with a market condition over the requisite service period, provided that the requisite service period is completed, irrespective of whether the market condition is satisfied. If a recipient terminates employment before completion of the requisite service period, any compensation cost previously recognized is reversed unless the market condition has been satisfied prior to termination. If the market condition has been satisfied during the vesting period, the remaining unrecognized compensation cost is accelerated. If the market condition has not been satisfied during the vesting period, the remaining unrecognized compensation cost will continue to be recognized over the requisite service period.
At our discretion, we may provide compensation to certain employees with repayment obligations and/or service provisions. Such payments are recorded in Compensation and Benefits in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. We assess the potential risk of forfeiture and likelihood of recouping amounts paid, and if deemed necessary, record a provision for forfeitures in the financial statements.
Recent Accounting Developments
Information regarding recent accounting developments and their impact on PJT Partners can be found in Note 2. “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Developments” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in “-Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this filing.