Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Ignyte Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination.
We leverage the more than nine decades of combined operational and financial experience of our management team and board of directors who are both established e-commerce entrepreneurs and sophisticated investors. We believe our extensive industry experience and proven ability to source, acquire, grow and revitalize companies will provide our management team with a robust and consistent flow of acquisition opportunities. Our management team and board’s broad relationships across multiple networks, including leading consumer and technology company founders, executives of private and public companies, leading M&A investment banks and private equity firms, as well as their ability to engage early with founder-led businesses represents a differentiated advantage to successfully source transaction opportunities. Our team has been immersed in the same ecosystem as the current founders of private companies who are making decisions on how to build currency for future growth and monetization.
While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any business, industry or geographical location, we are focusing our search primarily within the consumer-facing e-commerce sector. We are capitalizing on the ability of our management team to identify, acquire and operate a business or businesses that can benefit from our management team and board’s established relationships and operating experience. Our management team has extensive experience in identifying and executing strategic investments and has done so successfully in several sectors, particularly in digital consumer-facing businesses. Over time, we believe that all companies will need to deploy an omni-commerce strategy to succeed, and we will leverage our management team and board’s unique experience to successfully develop our business target’s omni-commerce.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, our initial public offering and, since the closing of our initial public offering, a search for a business combination candidate. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $487,989, which consisted of $969,288 in formation and operating costs, offset by $475,000 in unrealized gain on change in fair value of warrants and $6,299 in interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account.
For the period from August 6, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $310, which consisted of $310 in formation and operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $329,192 in its operating bank account, and working capital of $125,317.
Prior to the completion of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from the Sponsor of $25,000 (see Note 5) for the Founder Shares to cover certain offering costs, the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $80,000, and the net proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (see Note 5). To date, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
We anticipate that the $329,192 outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the financial statements, assuming that a Business Combination is not consummated during that time. On March 21, 2022, our Sponsor signed an agreement to provide a Working Capital Loan of $300,000 to us as required. The promissory note evidencing the Working Capital Loan of $300,000 provided to us by our Sponsor is filed herewith as Exhibit 10.17.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until November 2, 2022 to consummate the proposed business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate the proposed business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after November 2, 2022. We intend to complete the proposed business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that we will be able to consummate any business combination by November 2, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of the audited financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the audited financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants, as either equity or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the Warrants and the applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging ASC 815. The assessment considers whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to our own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, was conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and will continue as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of liability-classified warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock feature certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss Per Common Stock
Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted net loss per common stock does not include warrants since the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Our statements of operations includes a presentation of loss per share for common stock subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of loss per common stock. Net loss per common stock, basic and diluted, for redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the interest income earned on the Trust Account, by the weighted average number of redeemable common stock outstanding since original issuance. Net loss per common stock, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net loss, adjusted for income (loss) attributable to redeemable common stock, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the periods. Non-redeemable common stock includes the founder shares as these common stocks do not have any redemption features and do not participate in the income earned on the Trust Account.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.