Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below .
As used herein, “we”, “us”, “our”, the “Company” and “Playboy” refer to Playboy Enterprises, Inc. and its subsidiaries prior to the consummation of the Business Combination (defined below) and PLBY Group Inc. and its subsidiaries following the consummation of the Business Combination.
Business Overview
We are a large, global consumer lifestyle company marketing its brands through a wide range of direct-to-consumer products, licensing initiatives, digital subscriptions and content, and location-based entertainment. We reach millions of consumers worldwide with products across four key market categories: Sexual Wellness, including lingerie and intimacy products; Style and Apparel, including a variety of apparel and accessories products for men and women; Gaming and Lifestyle, such as digital gaming, hospitality and spirits; and, Beauty and Grooming, including fragrance, skincare, grooming and cosmetics for women and men.
We have three reportable segments: Licensing, Direct-to-Consumer, and Digital Subscriptions and Content. The Licensing segment derives revenue from trademark licenses for third-party consumer products and location-based entertainment businesses. The Direct-to-Consumer segment derives its revenue from sales of consumer products sold directly to consumers through our own online channels or through third-party retailers. The Digital Subscriptions and Content segment derives revenue from the subscription of Playboy programming, which is distributed through various channels, including websites and domestic and international TV, from trademark licenses for online gaming and from sales of tokenized digital art and collectibles.
Merger with MCAC
On September 30, 2020, Playboy Enterprises, Inc. (“Legacy Playboy”) entered into an agreement and plan of merger (“Merger Agreement”), with our predecessor, Mountain Crest Acquisition Corp, a publicly-traded special purpose acquisition company incorporated in Delaware (“MCAC”), MCAC Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of MCAC (“Merger Sub”), and Dr. Suying Liu, the Chief Executive Officer of MCAC. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, at the closing of the transactions contemplated thereby, Merger Sub would merge with and into Legacy Playboy (the “Merger”) with Legacy Playboy surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of MCAC (the “Business Combination”). Under the Merger Agreement, MCAC acquired all of the outstanding shares of Legacy Playboy common stock for approximately $381.3 million in aggregate consideration, comprised of (i) 23,920,000 shares of MCAC common stock, based on a price of $10.00 per share, subject to adjustment, and (ii) the assumption of no more than $142.1 million of Legacy Playboy net debt (the “Net Debt Target”). The number of shares issued at closing was subject to adjustment at a rate of one share of MCAC common stock for each $10.00 increment that the Net Debt (as defined in the Merger Agreement) is greater than (in which case the number of shares would be reduced) or less than (in which case the number of shares would be increased) the Net Debt Target. The Business Combination closed on February 10, 2021.
Legacy Playboy’s options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) that were outstanding as of immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, but not the Pre-Closing Option granted to our Chief Executive Officer in January 2021, were accelerated and fully vested. Each outstanding option was assumed by MCAC and automatically converted into an option to purchase such number of shares of our common stock equal to the product of (x) the merger consideration and (y) the option holder’s respective percentage of the merger consideration. All RSUs that were then outstanding were terminated and shall be subsequently paid, in settlement, in shares of common stock equal to the product of (x) the merger consideration, and (y) the terminated RSU holder’s respective percentage of the merger consideration.
In connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement, Legacy Playboy, Sunlight Global Investment LLC (“Sponsor”), and Dr. Suying Liu entered into a stock purchase agreement pursuant to which Legacy Playboy purchased 700,000 shares of MCAC’s common stock (the “Initial Shares”) from Sponsor. The Sponsor transferred the Initial Shares to Legacy Playboy upon the closing of the Merger and the Initial Shares were recorded as treasury stock on the consolidated balance sheet.
In connection with the Merger, MCAC also entered into subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”) and registration rights agreements (the “PIPE Registration Rights Agreements”), each dated as of September 30, 2020, with certain institutional and accredited investors, pursuant to which, among other things, MCAC agreed to issue and sell, in a private placement immediately prior to the closing of the Business Combination, an aggregate of 5,000,000 shares of common stock for $10.00 per share (the “PIPE Investment”). The PIPE Investment was consummated substantially concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination for net proceeds of $46.8 million.
On February 10, 2021, the Business Combination was consummated and MCAC (i) issued an aggregate of 20,916,812 shares of its common stock to existing stockholders of Legacy Playboy, (ii) assumed Legacy Playboy options exercisable for an aggregate of 3,560,541 shares of MCAC common stock at a weighted-average exercise price of $5.61 and (iii) assumed the obligation to issue shares in respect of terminated Legacy Playboy RSUs for an aggregate of 2,045,634 shares of MCAC common stock to be settled one year following the closing date. In addition, in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination, MCAC was renamed “PLBY Group, Inc.” and started trading on the Nasdaq on February 11, 2021.
The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization whereby MCAC, who is the legal acquirer, was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes and Legacy Playboy was treated as the accounting acquirer. This determination was primarily based on Legacy Playboy having a majority of the voting power of the post-combination company, Legacy Playboy’s senior management comprising substantially all of the senior management of the post-combination company, the relative size of Legacy Playboy compared to MCAC, and Legacy Playboy’s operations comprising the ongoing operations of the post-combination company. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of a capital transaction in which Legacy Playboy was issued stock for the net assets of MCAC. The net assets of MCAC are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Operations prior to the Business Combination are those of Legacy Playboy.
Acquisition of TLA
On March 1, 2021, we completed the acquisition of 100% of the equity of TLA Acquisition Corp ("TLA"). for $24.9 million in cash consideration. TLA is the parent company of the Lovers family of stores, a leading omni-channel online and brick and mortar sexual wellness chain, with 41 stores in five states (40 stores as of December 31, 2021). The primary drivers for the acquisition were to leverage TLA’s brick-and-mortar presence, e-commerce capabilities, attractive brand positioning and customer database. TLA’s operating results are consolidated with our results beginning on March 1, 2021. Therefore, the consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 may not be comparable to the same period in 2020.
Acquisition of Honey Birdette
On June 28, 2021, we entered into a Share Purchase Agreement to acquire Honey Birdette (Aust) Pty Limited ("Honey Birdette"), a company organized under the laws of Australia. Aggregate consideration for the acquisition of $327.7 million as of the Contract Date consisted of approximately $235.0 million in cash (based on an exchange rate of 0.7391 U.S. dollars per Australian dollars) and 2,155,849 shares of Company common stock, valued at $92.7 million as of the Contract Date, based on a Contract Date per share price of $43.02. Pursuant to the SPA, on August 9, 2021, the Company acquired all of the capital stock of Honey Birdette. The Closing Date per share price of $26.57 per share of Company common stock resulted in total consideration transferred of $288.8 million. On August 11, 2021, in connection with the acquisition of Honey Birdette, we amended the New Term Loan (as defined below) to borrow an additional $70.0 million. On August 19, 2021, an additional 4,412 shares of Company common stock were issued to the Honey Birdette sellers pursuant to the terms of a true-up under the SPA. The acquisition of the luxury lingerie brand Honey Birdette expands our brand portfolio with a new high-end franchise, and provides us with product design, sourcing and direct-to-consumer capabilities that we believe can be leveraged to accelerate the growth of our core apparel and sexual wellness businesses. Honey Birdette’s operating results are consolidated with our results beginning on August 9, 2021. Therefore, the consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 may not be comparable to the same period in 2020.
Acquisition of GlowUp Digital Inc.
On October 22, 2021, we completed the acquisition of GlowUp Digital Inc. ("GlowUp"), a Delaware corporation, pursuant to that certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 15, 2021, by and among the Company, PB Global Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, GlowUp and Michael Dow, solely in his capacity as representative of the holders of the outstanding shares of GlowUp’s common stock and of the holders of the outstanding Simple Agreements for Future Equity ("SAFEs") issued by GlowUp (the "GlowUp Merger"). At the effective time of the GlowUp Merger, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased, and GlowUp survived the GlowUp Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company under the name “Centerfold Digital Inc” ("Centerfold").
At the closing of the GlowUp Merger, in accordance with the terms of the GlowUp Agreement, including certain adjustments to the GlowUp Merger consideration determined as of the closing, (i) holders of GlowUp’s equity securities that are accredited investors became entitled to receive, in the aggregate, 548,034 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and (ii) holders of GlowUp equity securities that are nonaccredited investors became entitled to receive, in the aggregate, $342,308 in cash. Pursuant to the GlowUp Agreement, the number of GlowUp Merger consideration shares was determined based on a price per share of $23.4624, which was the volume weighted average closing price per share of the Company’s common stock on the Nasdaq Global Market over the 10 consecutive trading day period ending on (and including) the trading day immediately preceding the execution of the GlowUp Agreement (i.e., October 14, 2021), representing aggregate closing consideration of approximately $13.2 million. In addition, $0.8 million in transaction expenses were paid by the Company on behalf of the sellers as of closing. Contingent consideration of up to an additional 664,311 shares of our stock and $0.4 million in cash in the aggregate may be issued or paid (as applicable) to GlowUp’s equity holders upon the release of the portion thereof held back in respect of indemnification obligations or the satisfaction of performance criteria, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of the GlowUp Agreement. The fair value of contingent consideration at closing was $18.1 million, $9.2 million of which was classified as equity and $8.9 million was recorded in current liabilities. The closing date per share price of the Company’s common stock of $27.60 resulted in total consideration transferred valued at $34.4 million at closing. The acquisition enabled the Company to acquire the technology foundation for the launch of Playboy’s new creator-led social content platform. Centerfold’s operating results are consolidated with our results beginning on October 22, 2021. Therefore, our consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 may not be comparable to the same period in 2020.
Debt Refinancing
On May 25, 2021, we entered into a Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “New Credit Agreement”) with Acquiom Agency Services LLC, as the administrative agent and collateral agent. We obtained a $160 million senior secured term loan (the “New Term Loan”), which was fully funded at the closing of the transactions contemplated by the New Credit Agreement (the “Refinancing”). The New Term Loan has a final maturity date of May 25, 2027 and will accrue interest at LIBOR plus 5.75%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.50%. The Refinancing replaced and repaid in full all borrowings under our existing credit facility for which DBD Credit Funding LLC served as administrative agent and a lender. The existing credit facility consisted of a term loan (as amended, the “2014 Term Loan”) that was scheduled to expire on December 31, 2023.
We entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated as of August 11, 2021 (the “First Amendment”), to the New Credit Agreement, by and among PLBY, Playboy Enterprises, Inc., the subsidiary guarantors party thereto, the lenders party thereto, and Acquiom Agency Services LLC, as the administrative agent and the collateral agent, to, among other things: (a) obtain a $70 million incremental term loan (the “Incremental Term Loan”), thereby increasing the aggregate principal amount of term loan indebtedness outstanding under the New Credit Agreement to $230 million, and (b) amend the terms of the New Credit Agreement to, among other things, permit Honey Birdette and certain of its subsidiaries to guaranty the obligations under the New Credit Agreement.
Aircraft Term Loan
In May 2021, we borrowed $9.0 million under a five-year term loan maturing in May 2026 to fund the purchase of an aircraft. The stated interest rate was 6.25% as of December 31, 2021. The Aircraft Term Loan requires monthly amortization payments of approximately $0.1 million, commencing on July 1, 2021.
Public Offering
In June 2021, we completed a public offering in which 4,720,000 shares of our common stock were sold at a price of $46 per share. The underwriters were also granted an option to purchase up to an additional 708,000 shares of our common stock from us at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. Such option expired unexercised. We incurred approximately $13.2 million of underwriting commissions and $1.0 million of public offering related fees, which were netted against the proceeds. The net proceeds received from the public offering were $202.9 million.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting Our Business
We believe that our performance and future success depends on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below.
Expanding the Consumer Products Business through Owned and Operated Products and Channels
We are accelerating our growth in company-owned and branded consumer products in attractive and expanding markets in which we have a proven history of brand affinity and consumer spend. Additionally, we have acquired and launched our own direct-to-consumer online sales channels, yandy.com, honeybirdette.com, loversstores.com and pleasureforall.com, in addition to playboy.com, to further accelerate the sales of these products. However, our new product and new distribution strategies are in their early stages and will take time to fully develop.
Reduced Reliance on China Licensing Revenues
We have enjoyed substantial success in licensing our trademarks in China where we are a leading men’s apparel brand, and where licensing revenues have consistently grown year-over-year. However, as a result of this success, the percentage of total net revenue attributable to China licensing had become 48% of our total revenue by the end of 2019. With the acquisition of Yandy in December 2019, TLA in March 2021 and Honey Birdette in August 2021, and the ramp up of North American consumer product sales, that percentage reduced to 17.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, despite higher China licensing revenues, and we expect it will continue to become a smaller percentage of total net revenue in the future as North American consumer product sales, largely through direct-to-consumer channels, accelerate.
Seasonality of Our Consumer Product Sales Results in Stronger Fourth Quarter Revenues
A combination of online Halloween costume sales and holiday sales toward the end of the year typically result in higher revenues and profit in our fourth quarter, particularly at Yandy. Historically, October sales of costumes have resulted in significantly higher revenues than in other months but are also coming under increasing pressure from competition in this category. We expect investment and growth in expanding the consumer products category and distribution will likely accelerate the strong fourth quarter seasonality of the business in the future.
Attractive Merger and Acquisition Opportunities are Increasing
Building on our successful acquisition and integration of Yandy in late 2019 and TLA in March of 2021, we continue to identify and assess potentially advantageous merger, acquisition and investment opportunities. On August 9, 2021, pursuant to the SPA, we acquired Honey Birdette. Honey Birdette is a fast-growing luxury lifestyle brand, which we believe will help accelerate our high-end brand growth in new regions. On October 22, 2021, we acquired GlowUp Digital Inc. We will continue focusing on potential tuck-in opportunities to complement our organic growth with potential for larger, strategic mergers and acquisitions initiatives over the long-term. We believe our mergers and acquisitions strategy will be supported by our operating cash flow and balance sheet flexibility.
COVID-19
In March 2020, COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Since that time, we have focused on protecting our employees, customers and vendors to minimize potential disruptions while managing through this pandemic, including taking the following actions during 2020 and 2021:
•Temporarily closed our offices in Los Angeles, CA and Phoenix, AZ;
•Implemented social distancing measures, required the wearing of masks and increased sanitization practices in our warehousing and fulfillment facilities, Lovers retail stores and corporate offices;
•Established ongoing work at home accommodations for all office employees, and limited company-related travel;
•Amended our credit facility to defer amortization payments for the quarters ended June 30, 2020 and September 30, 2020, to 2021 and eliminated excess cash flow (principal) payments during those two quarters;
•Deferred payroll taxes to 2021/2022 under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act of 2020;
•Offered curbside pickup at our Lovers stores;
•Temporarily closed certain Honey Birdette retail stores in Australia subsequent to its acquisition; and
•Required employees at our offices in Los Angeles, CA to be vaccinated before returning to the office.
Nonetheless, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt and delay global supply chains, affect production and sales across a range of industries and result in legal restrictions requiring businesses to close and consumers to stay at home for days-to-months at a time. These disruptions have impacted our business, including by:
•Slowing product development processes and the launch of new products;
•Causing certain products sold by Yandy to be out-of-stock;
•Hindering new licensing and collaboration deals;
•Temporarily closing retail stores of Honey Birdette and certain of our licensees; and
•Closing the London Playboy Club and certain other Playboy-branded live gaming operations.
As a result of such disruptions, licensing revenues from certain gaming and retail licensees declined in 2020 and 2021, as compared to royalties from such sources during pre-pandemic periods.
As of the date of this Annual Report, our business as a whole has not suffered any material adverse consequences to date from the COVID-19 pandemic, as negative impacts have thus far been offset by an increase in online direct-to-consumer sales and higher royalties from licensing collaborations in the United States.
The extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our future operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the further duration and spread of the outbreak and its impact on employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the date of these consolidated financial statements, the full extent to which COVID-19 may impact our future financial condition or results of operations is uncertain.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of the business are revenues, salaries and benefits, and selling and administrative expenses. To help assess performance with these key indicators, we use Adjusted EBITDA as a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe this non-GAAP measure provides useful information to investors and expanded insight to measure revenue and cost performance as a supplement to the GAAP consolidated financial statements. See the “EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA” section below for reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the closest GAAP measure.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate revenue from trademark licenses for third-party consumer products, online gaming and location-based entertainment businesses, sales of our tokenized digital art and collectibles, and sales of creator offerings to consumers on centerfold.com, our creator-led platform launched in December 2021, in addition to sales of consumer products sold through third-party retailers or online direct-to-customer and from the subscription of our programming which is distributed through various channels, including websites and domestic and international television.
Trademark Licensing
We license trademarks under multi-year arrangements to consumer products, online gaming and location-based entertainment businesses. Typically, the initial contract term ranges between one to ten years. Renewals are separately negotiated through amendments. Under these arrangements, we generally receive an annual non-refundable minimum guarantee that is recoupable against a sales-based royalty generated during the license year. Earned royalties received in excess of the minimum guarantee (“Excess Royalties”) are typically payable quarterly. We recognize revenue for the total minimum guarantee specified in the agreement on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement and recognizes Excess Royalties only when the annual minimum guarantee is exceeded. Generally, Excess Royalties are recognized when they are earned.
Consumer Products
Revenue from sales of online apparel and accessories, including sales through third-party sellers, is recognized upon delivery of the goods to the customer. Revenue is recognized net of incentives and estimated returns. We periodically offer promotional incentives to customers, which include basket promotional code discounts and other credits, which are recorded as a reduction of revenue.
Magazine and Digital Subscriptions
Digital subscription revenue is derived from subscription sales of playboyplus.com and playboy.tv, which are online content platforms. We receive fixed consideration shortly before the start of the subscription periods from these contracts, which are primarily sold in monthly, annual, or lifetime subscriptions. Revenues from lifetime subscriptions are recognized ratably over a five-year period, representing the estimated period during which the customer accesses the platforms. Revenues from Playboy magazine and digital subscriptions are recognized ratably over the subscription period. We discontinued publishing Playboy magazine in the first quarter of 2020.
Revenues generated from the sales of creator offerings to consumers on centerfold.com, our creator-led platform launched in December 2021, are recognized at the point in time when the sale is processed. Revenues generated from centerfold.com subscriptions are recognized ratably over the subscription period.
Revenue from sales of our tokenized digital art and collectibles is recognized at the point in time when the sale is processed.
TV and Cable Programming
We license programming content to certain cable television operators and direct-to-home satellite television operators who pay royalties based on monthly subscriber counts and pay-per-view and video-on-demand buys for the right to distribute our programming under the terms of affiliation agreements. Royalties are generally collected monthly and recognized as revenue as earned.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales primarily consist of merchandise costs, warehousing and fulfillment, agency fees, personnel and editorial content costs for Playboy magazine (through March 31, 2020), websites, and Playboy Television, branding events and paper, printing, postage and freight costs associated with Playboy magazine (through March 31, 2020).
Selling and Administrative
Selling and administrative expenses primarily consist of corporate office and retail store occupancy costs, personnel costs including stock-based compensation, and contractor fees for accounting/finance, legal, human resources, information technology and other administrative functions, general marketing and promotional activities and insurance.
Related Party Expenses
Related party expenses consist of management fees paid to an affiliate of one of our stockholders for management and consulting services.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses primarily consist of impairment of digital assets recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Nonoperating (Expense) Income
Investment Income
Investment income primarily consists of interest received on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our long-term debt and the amortization of deferred financing costs.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
On May 25, 2021, we completed a refinancing of our term loan. As a result, in the second quarter of 2021, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.2 million, which is comprised of $1.0 million of fees expensed as incurred in connection with the refinancing, as well as the write-off of $0.2 million of unamortized debt discount and deferred financing fees as a result of such refinancing.
Other, Net
Other, net consists primarily of other miscellaneous nonoperating items, such as bank charges and foreign exchange gains or losses as well as non-recurring transaction fees.
The provision for income taxes consists of an estimate for U.S. federal, state, and foreign income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in the tax law. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against the definite-lived U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes key components of Playboy’s results of operations for the periods indicated (in thousands):
* Not meaningful
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Net Revenues
Net revenues increased by $98.9 million, or 67%, due to higher direct-to-consumer revenue of $83.7 million primarily from the acquisition of TLA and Honey Birdette, and the continued growth of direct-to-consumer revenue on Playboy.com.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales increased by $39.8 million, or 53%, primarily due to increased direct-to-consumer revenue and the amortization of TLA and Honey Birdette inventory step-ups resulting from purchase accounting.
Selling and Administrative Expenses
Selling and administrative expenses increased by $141.4 million, or 241%, due to higher stock-based compensation expense, increased direct-to-consumer costs primarily as a result of the acquisition of TLA and Honey Birdette, acquisition related costs and expenses associated with being a newly public company.
Related Party Expenses
Related party expenses decreased by $0.8 million, or 75% due to termination of our management agreement with an affiliate of one of our stockholders for management and consulting services in the first quarter of 2021 upon consummation of the Business Combination.
Other Operating Expenses
Other operating expenses increased by $1.0 million, or 100% due to impairment of digital assets recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Nonoperating (Expense) Income
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.2 million, or 1%, primarily due to a lower interest rate obtained pursuant to the Refinancing.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt increased by $1.2 million, due to the Refinancing.
Gain from Settlement of Convertible Note
Gain from settlement of convertible promissory note was $0.7 million and $1.5 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due to the settlement of the convertible promissory notes payable to United Talent Agency and GBG International Holding Company Limited at a 20% discount, respectively.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income, net increased by $2.0 million, primarily due to income recognized from litigation settlements.
Benefit (expense) from Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes decreased from $7.1 million of tax expense during 2020 to $2.8 million of tax benefit during 2021. The change was primarily due to the offset of deferred tax liabilities on indefinite-lived intangibles by indefinite-lived net operating losses generated in 2021, and deferred tax liabilities assumed in connection with the acquisition of Honey Birdette and GlowUp, resulting in the release of valuation allowance. There was also an increase in the foreign income tax expense related to Honey Birdette’s foreign operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as net income or loss before interest, income tax expense or benefit, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for stock-based compensation and other special items determined by management. Adjusted EBITDA is intended as a supplemental measure of our performance that is neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing our financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, investors should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
In addition to adjusting for non-cash stock-based compensation, we typically adjust for nonoperating expenses and income, such as management fees paid to our largest stockholder, merger related bonus payments, non-recurring special projects including the implementation of internal controls, non-cash charges for the remeasurement of the fair value of contingent consideration resulting from our acquisitions, expenses associated with financing activities, acquisition related inventory step-up amortization and costs, the expense associated with digital asset impairment, reorganization and severance resulting in the elimination or rightsizing of specific business activities or operations as we transform from a print and digital media business to a commerce centric business.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
•Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2021 are primarily related to bonus payments in connection with the Business Combination, as well as consulting, advisory and other costs relating to other costs related to special projects, including, the implementation of internal controls over financial reporting, and executive search costs.
•Amortization of inventory valuation step-up adjustment for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to amortization of a non-cash inventory valuation step-up as part of the purchase accounting resulting from the acquisition of TLA and Honey Birdette.
•Contingent consideration fair value remeasurement for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to non-cash charges for the remeasurement of the fair value of contingent consideration resulting from the acquisition of Honey Birdette and GlowUp.
•Digital assets impairment for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to impairment of digital assets recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021.
•Acquisition related costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 include consulting and advisory costs related to acquisition activities.
•Reduction in force-related expense adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2020 include severance expense related to lay-offs associated with a reorganization of the television and digital subscription businesses, as part of an overall rightsizing and consolidation of those activities as the business transforms from a print and digital media business to primarily a commerce business.
•Adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2020 represent consulting support related to the Business Combination.
•Amortization of inventory valuation step-up adjustment for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to amortization of a non-cash inventory valuation step-up as part of the purchase accounting resulting from the acquisition of Yandy.
•Management fees and expenses adjustments for both periods represent fees paid to one of our stockholders.
•Nonoperating expense adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2020 include investment income and other miscellaneous items.
Segments
Our Chief Executive Officer is our Chief Operating Decision Maker (“CODM”). Our segment disclosure is based on its intention to provide the users of our consolidated financial statements with a view of the business from our perspective. We operate our business in three primary operating and reportable segments: Licensing, Direct-to-Consumer, and Digital Subscriptions and Content. Licensing operations include the licensing of one or more of our trademarks and/or images for consumer products and location-based entertainment businesses. Direct-to-Consumer operations include consumer products sold through third-party retailers or online direct-to-customer. Digital Subscriptions and Content operations include the licensing of one or more of our trademarks and/or images for online gaming and the production, marketing and sales of programming under the Playboy brand name, which is distributed through various channels, including domestic and international television and sales of tokenized digital art and collectibles.
The following are our results of financial performance by segment for each of the years presented (in thousands):
Licensing
Net revenues increased by $2.9 million, or 5%, during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to higher royalties from licensing collaborations in the U.S.
Operating income increased by $3.0 million, or 7%, during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increased revenues.
Direct-to-Consumer
Net revenues increased by $83.7 million, or 131%, during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to revenue from the acquisition of TLA in the first quarter of 2021 and revenue from the acquisition of Honey Birdette in the third quarter of 2021, combined with higher e-commerce revenues.
Operating loss increased by $2.1 million, or 277%, during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increased direct-to-consumer expenses and higher amortization of the inventory valuation step-up from purchase accounting related to the Honey Birdette and TLA acquisitions.
Digital Subscriptions and Content
Net revenues increased by $12.8 million, or 61%, during 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increased revenue from sales of our tokenized digital art and collectibles.
Operating income decreased by $1.6 million, or 17%, during 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the expenses related to the launch of Centerfold.
All Other
Net revenues decreased by $0.5 million, or 36%, during 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the cessation of publishing the magazine in the first quarter of 2020 and production revenue in the second quarter of 2020, partly offset by the recognized revenues related to the fulfillment of magazine subscription obligations in 2021.
Operating income increased by $1.7 million, or 152%, during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to lower operating and severance costs related to the cessation of publishing the magazine in the first quarter of 2020 and recognized revenue related to the fulfillment of magazine subscription obligations in 2021.
Corporate
Corporate expenses increased by $83.5 million, or 217%, during 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to increased stock-based compensation, acquisition related costs, expenses related to the Business Combination and costs associated with our transition to a public company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Our main source of liquidity is cash generated from operating and financing activities, which primarily includes cash derived from revenue generating activities, in addition to proceeds from our recent public offering and issuance of debt, including term loans.
In June 2021, we completed a public offering in which 4,720,000 shares of our common stock were sold at a price of $46 per share. The underwriters were also granted an option to purchase up to an additional 708,000 shares of our common stock from us at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. Such option expired unexercised. We incurred approximately $13.2 million of underwriting commissions and $1.0 million of public offering related fees, which were netted against the proceeds. The net proceeds received from the public offering were $202.9 million.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was our cash in the amount of $69.2 million which is primarily held in operating and deposit accounts. Although consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting economic uncertainty could adversely affect our liquidity and capital resources in the future, and cash requirements may fluctuate based on the timing and extent of many factors, such as those discussed above, we believe our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our operations, including lease obligations, debt service requirements, capital expenditures and working capital obligations for at least the next 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report. We may seek additional equity or debt financing in the future to satisfy capital requirements, respond to adverse developments such as the COVID-19 pandemic, changes in our circumstances or unforeseen events or conditions, or fund organic or inorganic growth opportunities. In the event that additional financing is required from third-party sources, we may not be able to raise it on acceptable terms or at all.
Debt
2014 Term Loan
In June 2014, we borrowed $150.0 million under a four-and-one-half-year term loan maturing on December 31, 2018, at an effective rate of 7.0% from DBD Credit Funding LLC pursuant to a credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”). In December 2019, the term loan was amended to borrow an additional $12.0 million. Our debt bore interest at a rate per annum equal to the Eurodollar Rate for the interest period in effect plus the applicable margin in effect from time to time. The Eurodollar Rate is the greater of (a) an interest rate per annum (rounded upward, if necessary, to the next 1/100th of 1%) determined by the administrative agent divided by 1 minus the statutory reserves (if any) and (b) 1.25% per annum. From 2016 to 2020, the term loan was amended multiple times to increase the commitment amount, extend the maturity date to December 31, 2023, set up a debt reserve account and excess cash account, and to revise the quarterly principal payments and applicable margin rates, among other amendments.
In March 2020, the term loan was amended to establish new quarterly principal payment amounts among other amendments. The amendment was assessed and was accounted for as a modification. We incurred additional financing costs of $0.1 million related to this amendment that were capitalized.
In January 2021, the term loan was amended to defer the excess cash flow payment due in January 2021 to April 2021 among other amendments. The terms of the modified term loan were not considered substantially different and the amendment was accounted for as a modification. On May 25, 2021, the Credit Agreement was repaid in full and terminated upon completion of the refinancing described below.
New Term Loan
On May 25, 2021, we borrowed $160.0 million under a term loan maturing on May 25, 2027 (the “New Term Loan”), at an effective rate of LIBOR plus 5.75%, with a LIBOR floor of 0.50%. The New Term Loan replaced the 2014 Term Loan. The interest rate applicable to borrowings under the New Term Loan may subsequently be adjusted on periodic measurement dates provided for under the New Credit Agreement based on the type of loans borrowed by us and our total leverage ratio at such time. At our option, we may borrow loans which accrue interest at (i) a base rate (with a floor of 1.50%) or (ii) at LIBOR, in each case plus an applicable per annum margin. The per annum applicable margin for base rate loans is 4.25% or 4.75%, with the lower rate applying when the total leverage ratio as of the applicable measurement date is 3.00 to 1.00 or less, and the per annum applicable margin for LIBOR loans is 5.25% or 5.75%, with the lower rate applying when the total leverage ratio as of the applicable measurement date is 3.00 to 1.00 or less. The New Term Loan requires quarterly amortization payments of $0.4 million, commencing on September 30, 2021, with the balance becoming due at maturity. The interest rate on the New Term Loan was 6.25% as of December 31, 2021.
Our obligations pursuant to the New Credit Agreement are guaranteed by us and any of our current and future wholly-owned, domestic subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions. In connection with the New Credit Agreement, the Company and the other guarantor subsidiaries of the Company entered into a Pledge and Security Agreement with the collateral agent, pursuant to which we granted a senior security interest to the agent in substantially all of our assets (including the stock of certain of our subsidiaries) in order to secure our obligations under the New Credit Agreement.
We entered into Amendment No. 1 to the New Credit Agreement, dated as of August 11, 2021, by and among PLBY, Playboy Enterprises, Inc., the subsidiary guarantors party thereto, the lenders party thereto, and Acquiom Agency Services LLC, as the administrative agent and the collateral agent, to, among other things: (a) obtain a $70 million incremental term loan, thereby increasing the aggregate principal amount of term loan indebtedness outstanding under the New Credit Agreement to $230 million, and (b) amend the terms of the New Credit Agreement to, among other things, permit Honey Birdette and certain of its subsidiaries to guaranty the obligations under the New Credit Agreement.
The Incremental Term Loan was incurred on materially the same terms as the New Term Loan. The New Credit Agreement, as amended by the First Amendment, requires quarterly amortization payments of $0.6 million, commencing on September 30, 2021. The Incremental Term Loan, together with cash on hand, was used to finance the acquisition of Honey Birdette and to pay fees and expenses incurred in connection with the Incremental Term Loan and such acquisition.
As was the case with the 2014 Credit Agreement, the terms of the New Credit Agreement limit or prohibit, among other things, our ability to: incur liens, incur additional indebtedness, make investments, transfer, sell or acquire assets, pay dividends and change the business we conduct. Acquiom Agency Services LLC has a lien on all our assets as stated in the New Credit Agreement. The New Credit Agreement contains a financial covenant which requires the Company to maintain a maximum total gross leverage ratio (calculated as a ratio of consolidated gross funded debt to consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the New Credit Agreement), in accordance with the terms of the New Credit Agreement). The Company was in compliance with the financial covenants under the New Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
Aircraft Term Loan
In May 2021, we borrowed $9.0 million under a five-year term loan maturing in May 2026 to fund the purchase of an aircraft. The stated interest rate was 6.25% as of September 30, 2021. The Aircraft Term Loan requires monthly amortization payments of approximately $0.1 million, commencing on July 1, 2021. We incurred $0.1 million of financing costs related to the Aircraft Term Loan as of December 31, 2021, which were capitalized.
Promissory Notes - Creative Artists Agency and Global Brands Group
In August 2018, a convertible promissory note was issued to CAA Brand Management, LLC (“CAA”) for $2.7 million and a convertible promissory note was issued to GBG International Holding Company Limited (“GBG”) for $7.3 million. These notes were non-interest bearing and were convertible into shares of our common stock no later than October 31, 2020, which was extended to December 31, 2020. The terms of these notes were subject to negotiation in December 2020, and in December 2020, we settled the outstanding GBG note at a 20% discount for $5.8 million, resulting in a gain from settlement of $1.5 million. In January 2021, the outstanding note with CAA was converted into 51,857 shares of Legacy Playboy’s common stock, which was exchanged for 290,563 shares of our common stock upon the closing of the Business Combination in February 2021.
Convertible Promissory Notes - United Talent Agency
In March and June 2018, we issued convertible promissory notes to UTA for an aggregate principal amount of $3.5 million. These notes were non-interest bearing and were convertible into shares of our common stock no later than October 31, 2020, which was extended to December 31, 2020. In January 2021, the settlement terms of the outstanding notes were amended to extend the term to the one-month anniversary of the termination or expiration of the Merger Agreement. In February 2021, we repaid the outstanding principal balance of the notes at a 20% discount resulting in a gain on settlement of $0.7 million.
Leases
Our principal lease commitments are for office space and operations under several noncancelable operating leases with contractual terms expiring from 2021 to 2031. Some of these leases contain renewal options and rent escalations. As of December 31, 2021, our fixed lease were $25.4 million of which $3.4 million are due in the next 12 months. For further information on our lease obligations, refer to Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $36.7 million, including a net loss of $77.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net loss was adjusted for non-cash charges of $70.2 million, primarily attributable to stock-based compensation expense of $58.4 million, loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.2 million, $7.3 million of depreciation and amortization expense and $6.5 million of amortization of right of use assets, partially offset by deferred income taxes of $6.7 million. Other changes in assets and liabilities represent items that had a current period cash flow impact, such as changes in working capital. Net cash outflows from changes in working capital of $29.3 million were primarily associated with an increase in contract assets, receivables, inventories and in prepaid expenses and other assets, and a decrease in operating lease liabilities and accrued salaries, wages, and employee benefits, offset by an increase in accounts payable largely associated with infrastructure development costs incurred as part of our transition to a public company.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $0.8 million, including a net loss of $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net loss was adjusted for non-cash charges of $7.6 million, primarily attributable to stock-based compensation expense of $3.0 million and $2.3 million of depreciation and amortization expense. Other changes in assets and liabilities represent items that had a current period cash flow impact, such as changes in working capital. Net cash outflows from changes in working capital of $1.5 million were primarily associated with an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets, a decrease in other liabilities and accrued expenses, offset by an increase in deferred revenues.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $273.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to the acquisition of TLA and Honey Birdette as well as purchase of an aircraft.
Net cash used in investing activities was $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to the purchase of shares of MCAC’s common stock in connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $370.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to net proceeds from our June 2021 public offering, as well as issuance of long-term debt, net cash acquired from the Business Combination and PIPE Investment, partially offset by the repayment of borrowings and the payment of financing costs.
Net cash used in financing activities was $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to the repayment of borrowings.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are, by their nature, uncertain and unpredictable, and depend upon, among other things, many factors outside of our control, such as demand for our products, economic conditions and other current and future events, such as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the accounting policies below are most critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. This is determined by following a five-step process which includes (1) identifying the contract with a customer, (2) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determining the transaction price, (4) allocating the transaction price, and (5) recognizing revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. We apply judgment to determine the nature of the promises within a revenue contract and whether those promises represent distinct performance obligations. In determining the transaction price, we do not include amounts subject to uncertainties unless it is probable that there will be no significant reversal of cumulative revenue when the uncertainty is resolved. We evaluate the nature of the license as to whether it provides a right to access or right to use the intellectual property (“IP”), which then determines whether the revenue is recognized over time or at a point in time. Sales or usage-based royalties received in exchange for licenses of IP are recognized at the later of when (1) the subsequent sale or usage occurs or (2) the performance obligation to which some or all of the sales or usage-based royalty has been allocated is satisfied.
Trademark Licensing
We license trademarks under multi-year arrangements with consumer products, online gaming and location-based entertainment businesses. Typically, the initial contract term ranges between one to ten years. Renewals are separately negotiated through amendments. Under these arrangements, we generally receive an annual nonrefundable minimum guarantee that is recoupable against a sales-based royalty generated during the license year. Annual minimum guarantee amounts are billed quarterly, semi-annually, or annually in advance and these payments do not include a significant financing component. Excess royalties are payable quarterly. The performance obligation is a license of symbolic IP that provides the customer with a right to access the IP, which represents a stand-ready obligation that is satisfied over time. We recognize revenue for the total minimum guarantee specified in the agreement on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement and recognize Excess Royalties only when the annual minimum guarantee is exceeded. Generally, Excess Royalties are recognized when they are earned. As the sales reports from licensees are typically not received until after the close of the reporting period, we follow the variable consideration framework and constraint guidance to estimate the underlying sales volume to recognize Excess Royalties based on historical experience and general economic trends. Historical adjustments to recorded estimates have not been material.
Consumer Products
We generate revenue from the sale of intimate and other apparel, Halloween costumes and accessories, primarily through our direct-to-consumer channels (e-commerce sites and brick-and-mortar retail stores). We recognize e-commerce revenue upon delivery of the purchased goods to the buyers as our performance obligation, consisting of the sale of goods, is satisfied at this point in time when control is transferred. We recognize retail store revenue at a point in time when a store satisfies a performance obligation and transfers control of the product to the customer. Our revenues are recognized net of incentives and estimated returns. We periodically offer promotional incentives to customers, including basket promotional code discounts and other credits, that are treated as a reduction of revenue.
A portion of consumer product sales is generated through third-party sellers, who list the product on their websites. These sales are either fulfilled by us or through the third-party seller’s fulfillment services. We recognize the fees retained by the third-party sellers as expenses in cost of sales for inventory provided through drop-shipment arrangements.
We charge shipping fees to customers. Since control transfers to the customer after the shipping and handling activities, we account for these activities as fulfillment activities. All outbound shipping and handling costs are accounted for as fulfillment costs in cost of sales at the time revenue is recognized.
Magazine and Digital Subscriptions
Digital subscription revenue is derived from subscription sales of PlayboyPlus.com and Playboy.tv, which are online content platforms. Digital subscriptions represent a stand-ready obligation to provide continuous access to the platform, which is satisfied ratably over the term of the subscription. We receive fixed consideration shortly before the start of the subscription periods from these contracts, which are primarily sold in monthly, annual, or lifetime subscriptions. Revenues from lifetime subscriptions are recognized ratably over a five-year period, representing the estimated period during which the customer accesses the platforms. Revenues from Playboy magazine and digital subscriptions are recognized ratably over the subscription period. We discontinued publishing Playboy magazine in the first quarter of 2020.
Revenues generated from the sales of creator offerings to consumers on centerfold.com, our creator-led platform launched in December 2021, are recognized at the point in time when the sale is processed. Revenues generated from centerfold.com subscriptions are recognized ratably over the subscription period.
Tokenized Digital Art and Collectibles
We record revenue from sales of our tokenized digital art and collectibles at the point in time when the sale is processed on a gross basis. We are primarily responsible for fulfillment of the promise, have inventory risk, and have the latitude in establishing pricing and selecting suppliers, among other factors. We determined that we are the principal in these transactions as we have custody and control of our digital assets prior to the sale to the customer, and discretion and latitude in establishing the price.
TV and Cable Programming
We license our programming content to certain cable television operators and direct-to-home satellite television operators who pay royalties based on monthly subscriber counts and pay-per-view and video-on-demand buys for the right to distribute our programming under the terms of affiliation agreements. The distinct performance obligations under such affiliation agreements include (i) a continuous transmission service to deliver live linear feeds and (ii) licenses to our functional IP that are provided over the contract term that provide the operators the right to use our content library as it exists at a point in time. For both performance obligations, our IP is the predominant or sole item to which the royalties relate. Royalties are generally collected monthly and revenue is recognized as earned. The amount of royalties due to us is reported by operators based on actual subscriber and transaction levels. Such information is generally not received until after the close of the reporting period. In these cases, we follow the variable consideration framework and constraint guidance to estimate the number of subscribers and transactions to recognize royalty amounts based on historical experience. Historical adjustments to recorded estimates have not been material. We offer sales incentives through various programs, consisting primarily of co-op marketing. We record advertising with customers as a reduction to revenue unless we receive a distinct benefit in exchange for credits claimed by the customer and can reasonably estimate the fair value of the distinct benefit received, in which case we record it as a marketing expense.
Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. We record a receivable when we have an unconditional right to consideration which will become due solely due to the passage of time. We record a contract asset when revenue is recognized prior to invoicing or payment is contingent upon transfer of control of an unsatisfied performance obligation. We record a contract liability (deferred revenue) when revenue is recognized subsequent to cash collection. For long-term non-cancelable contracts whereby we have begun satisfying the performance obligation, we will record contract assets for the unbilled consideration which is contingent upon our future performance. Contract assets and contract liabilities are netted on a contract-by-contract basis.
Unredeemed Site Credits
Site credits consist of gift cards issued and credits for returned merchandise. Revenue from the issuance of site credits is recognized when the site credit is redeemed by the customer. We also recognize revenue for the breakage related to unredeemed site credits.
Practical Expedients
Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type; however, our terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 days if not paid in advance. We elected the practical expedient to not assess whether a significant financing component exists if the period between when we transfer a promised good or service to a customer and when the customer pays for that good or service is one year or less.
Additionally, we have applied the practical expedient to not capitalize incremental costs of obtaining a contract if the amortization would be less than 12 months.
Sales Taxes
Sales taxes collected from customers and remitted to various governmental authorities are excluded from the measurement of the transaction price and presented on a net basis in our consolidated statements of operations.
Business Combinations, Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets, Net
We allocate the consideration transferred to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the consideration transferred over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. The excess of fair value of the identifiable assets and liabilities over the consideration transferred is recorded as a gain in the consolidated statement of operations. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
We perform annual impairment test on goodwill in the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or when events occur or circumstances change that would, more likely than not, reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. We may first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, an impairment test is unnecessary. If an impairment test is necessary, we will estimate the fair value of a related reporting unit. Based on the annual impairment test, we determined there were no impairment charges to goodwill to be recognized during the periods presented.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including property and equipment, stores, acquired intangible assets and right-of-use operating lease assets are periodically reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of these assets may not be recoverable or that the useful life is shorter than originally estimated. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate over its remaining life. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to the fair value.
If the useful life is shorter than originally estimated, we amortize the remaining carrying value over the revised shorter useful life. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. For the periods presented, we had recorded no impairment charges of long-lived assets.
Inventory
Inventories consist primarily of finished goods and are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value, using the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method.
Digital Assets
Digital assets, including non-fungible tokens and cryptocurrencies, are included in indefinite-lived intangible assets in the consolidated balance sheets. We have ownership of and control over our digital assets and may use third party custodial services to secure them. Digital assets are initially recorded at cost and are subsequently remeasured at cost, net of any impairment losses on our consolidated balance sheets. We assign costs to digital asset transactions on a first-in, first-out basis. Gains or losses are not recorded until realized upon sale(s).
We determine the fair value of our digital assets on a nonrecurring basis, based on quoted prices on the active exchange(s) that we have determined is the principal market for such assets (Level 1 inputs). We perform a quarterly, or more frequent. review to identify whether events or changes in circumstances, principally decreases in the quoted prices on active exchanges on any day during the quarter, indicate that it is more likely than not that our digital assets are impaired. The cost basis of digital assets will not be adjusted upward for subsequent increases in fair value. Such impairment in the value of digital assets is recorded as a component of other operating expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. We recorded an impairment loss of approximately $1.0 million related to digital assets during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards, including stock options, restricted stock units and performance stock units granted to employees, directors, and nonemployees, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. Compensation expense is recognized ratably in earnings, generally over the period during which the recipient is required to provide service. We adjust compensation expense based on actual forfeitures, as necessary.
Our stock options vest ratably over the contractual vesting period, which is generally three to four years, and the fair value of the awards is estimated on the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. Our restricted stock units vest ratably over the contractual vesting period and the fair value of the awards is estimated on the date of grant as the underlying value of the award. Awards with graded vesting features are recognized over the requisite service period for the entire award. Our performance-based restricted stock units ("PSUs") vest upon achieving each of certain PLBY's stock price milestones during the contractual vesting period. For milestones that have not been achieved, such PSUs vest over the derived requisite service period and the fair value of such awards is estimated on the grant date using Monte Carlo simulations. The determination of the grant date fair value of PSUs issued is affected by a number of variables and subjective assumptions, including (i) the fair value of PLBY’s common stock, (ii) the expected common stock price volatility over the expected life of the award, (iii) the expected term of the award, (iv) risk-free interest rates, (v) the exercise price, and (vi) the expected dividend yield. Forfeitures are recognized when they occur.
Income Taxes
We record income taxes under the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and attributable to operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The carrying amounts of deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on available evidence, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. Accordingly, the need to establish valuation allowances for deferred tax assets is assessed periodically based on the more-likely-than-not realization threshold. This assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency, and severity of current and cumulative losses, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, and tax planning alternatives. Playboy uses a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals and litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the largest amount of tax benefit as the largest amount that is more likely than not to be realized upon settlement. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and results of operations.