Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References in this report (the “Quarterly Report”) to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to Plum Acquisition Corp. I. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, and references to the “Sponsor” refer to Plum Partners, LLC. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the condensed financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Quarterly Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q
includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-Q
including statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are
intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on January 11, 2021 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to consummate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on March 18, 2021 (the “Closing Date”) and the Private Placement, and from additional issuances of, if any, our equity and our debt, or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
Results of Operations
For the period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a loss from operations of $2,916,919. In addition to the loss from operations, we recognized other income of $9,510,936 consisting of an unrealized gain on our warrant liabilities of $9,177,618, gain on our over-allotment liabilities of $881,755, and interest income of $16,264 partially offset by transaction costs related to our IPO of $564,701. Through December 31, 2021, our efforts have been limited to organizational activities, activities relating to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates and activities relating to general corporate matters. We have not generated any realized income, other than interest income. The unrealized gain on the warrant liabilities resulted from the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities and had no impact on cash. As of December 31, 2021, $319,232,602 was held in the Trust Account. We had cash outside of trust of $107,224 at December 31, 2021 and $1,055,936 accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021.
Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to us to pay taxes, if any, the proceeds in the Trust will not be released from the Trust Account (1) to us, until the completion of our initial Business Combination, or (2) to the Public Shareholders, until the earliest of (i) the completion of our initial Business Combination, and then only in connection with those Class A ordinary shares that such shareholders properly elected to redeem, subject to the limitations, (ii) the redemption of any public shares properly tendered in connection with a shareholder vote to amend our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association (A) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to provide holders of our Class A ordinary shares the right to have their shares redeemed in connection with our initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of the public shares if we do not complete an initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO (the “Combination Period”) or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to the rights of holders of the Class A ordinary shares, and (iii) the redemption of the public shares if we have not consummated a Business Combination within the Combination Period, subject to applicable law.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside our Trust Account of $107,224 available for working capital needs. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
In March and April 2021, we sold 31,921,634 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $319,216,340.
Additionally, we sold 6,256,218 warrants (the “Private Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $9,384,327.
Following the sale of our Units and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $319,216,340 ($10.00 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $18,336,269 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $6,384,327 of underwriting fees, $11,172,572 of deferred underwriting discount and $779,370 of other costs with $564,701 which was allocated to the Public Warrants and Private Warrants, included in the statement of operations and $17,771,568 included in temporary equity.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $319,232,602 (including $16,262 of income) consisting of money market funds. Income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our taxes.
For the period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $2,138,406. Net income of $6,594,017 was primarily offset by an unrealized gain on the change in the fair value of our warrant liabilities of $9,177,618, gain on the change in fair value of our over-allotment liabilities of $881,755, and payments generating prepaid assets of $392,425. Partially offsetting the net income was $564,701 from IPO related transaction costs. Other operational activities include an increase in payables of $1,055,936 and amounts due to related parties of $115, 000.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates have committed to loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, or converted upon consummation of a business combination into additional Private Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Warrant. As of December 31, 2021, no Working Capital Loans have been issued.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern”, management has determined that the Company has and will continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of its acquisition plans which raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Accounts. In addition, following our initial Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Further, management has determined that if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by March 18, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution as well as the Company’s working capital deficit raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after the Combination Period. The Company intends to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial
agreements involving assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accompanying financial statements of the Company are presented in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the Warrants and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the Warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the Warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares and whether the holders of the Warrants could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the Warrants are
outstanding. For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in
capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, liability-classified warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of such warrants are recognized as a non-cash
gain or loss on the statements of operations. We account for the Public and Private warrants in accordance with guidance contained in ASC 815-40.
Such guidance provides that because the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, each warrant must be recorded as a liability.
Redeemable Shares of Class A Ordinary shares
All of the 31,921,634 shares of Class A ordinary shares included in the Units sold as part of the Public Offering contain a redemption feature as described in the prospectus for the Public Offering. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. The Charter provides a minimum net tangible asset threshold of $5,000,001. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and will adjust the carrying value of the security at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares will be affected by charges against additional paid-in
capital.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The potential ordinary shares for outstanding warrants to purchase the Company’s shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income per common share is the same as basic net income per common share for the periods.
Recent accounting standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06,
Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)
(“ASU 2020-06”)
to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06
eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06
amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06
is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06
effective January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06
did not have an impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.