Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included in Item 8 under the heading “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including statements regarding our expected financial results in future periods. The words “anticipates,” “believes,” “could,” “estimates,” “expects,” “intends,” “may,” “might,” “plans,” “projects,” “will,” “would,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. We may not actually achieve the plans, intentions or expectations disclosed in our forward-looking statements and you should not place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. Actual results or events could differ materially from the plans, intentions and expectations disclosed in the forward-looking statements that we make. You should read the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a novel bioelectric medicine company committed to health innovation using an entirely new and proprietary energy modality. The CellFX System is the first commercial product to harness the distinctive advantages of our proprietary Nano-Pulse Stimulation technology. The CellFX System delivers nano second duration pulses of electrical energy, each less than a millionth of a second long, to non-thermally clear targeted cells while sparing adjacent non-cellular tissue, to treat a variety of medical conditions for which an optimal solution remains unfulfilled.
In January 2021, we received CE marking approval for the CellFX System, which allows us to market the system in the European Union and, in June 2021, we received Health Canada approval for the CellFX System, which allows for marketing of the system in Canada. The CE mark and Health Canada approvals allow us to market the CellFX System for use in dermatological procedures requiring ablation and resurfacing of the skin for the reduction, removal, and/or clearance of cellular-based benign lesions, including SH, SK, and cutaneous non-genital warts. In February 2021, we received 510(k) clearance from the FDA for the CellFX System for dermatologic procedures requiring ablation and resurfacing of the skin.
In February 2021, we initiated controlled launch programs in the United States and the European Union and in June 2021 we initiated a controlled launch program in Canada (collectively, our “Controlled Launch”). Under the Controlled Launch program, the physicians and their patients complete evaluation surveys about their experiences with the CellFX System and provide other information helpful to defining best practices for the introduction of the CellFX System into the clinic practice. As of December 31, 2021, we onboarded a total of seventy CellFX Controlled Launch Program participants across the United States, Europe, and Canada, completing program enrollment. In August 2021, we began to convert Controlled Launch Program participants into sales agreements, triggering revenue recognition. As of December 31, 2021, twenty-nine Controlled Launch Program participants opted to purchase their CellFX System and six clinics opted out of the program. An objective of the Controlled Launch program is to turn participating clinics into high utilization commercial customers that will serve as important reference clinics for future commercial customers.
We initially expected clinics to complete the program requirements within three to five months. However, the average time for clinics that have completed the Controlled Launch program has been seven months. We continue to gain valuable information from the Controlled Launch process. While the real-world delivery of NPS technology through the CellFX System has proven to clear benign lesions in clinical studies, we have learned that the market development for benign lesions and the integration of this procedure into the practice workflow will require a higher touch model to generate the system utilization we are expecting. We now expect clinics to continue to move through the program throughout 2022, as they complete the program requirements.
Controlled Launch participants that have opted to purchase the CellFX System for commercial use have performed CellFX procedures since becoming commercial users and, in the aggregate, have increased the number of treatment sessions per month. Currently, our commercial clinics are averaging ten patient treatment sessions per month wither their CellFX System. Our goal for the end of 2022 is to increase utilization to forty patient treatment sessions per month at our current commercial clinics. To drive this increased utilization and emphasis on education, training and marketing at our current accounts, we have implemented changes to our commercial leadership, restructured our commercial field organization and modified our strategy in support of our utilization focus and reduced emphasis on new system sales in the near-term. In February 2022, we appointed Kevin Danahy as Chief Commercial Officer. Mr. Danahy has a proven track record of building exceptional commercial teams and implementing strategies to drive market penetration and significant growth with disruptive medical technologies across a variety of medical disciplines. Under Mr. Danahy’s leadership, the near-term focus of our commercial team’s efforts will be to increase utilization at our commercial clinics.
We completed the first two commercial sales of CellFX Systems in the fourth quarter of 2021. The majority of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was recognized on a non-cash basis when Controlled Launch Program participants applied their earned credits towards the purchase of a CellFX System. See Note 8 for additional details of the Controlled Launch Program and Note 9 for additional details of the revenue transactions.
We are pursuing specific indications for the CellFX System in the United States similar to the regulatory clearances we have received in Europe and Canada, requiring additional 510(k) submissions, and likely based on comparative clinical data. In December 2021, we submitted a 510(k) to add the treatment of SH to the CellFX System’s indications for use in the United States. In February 2022 we received an AI letter from the FDA in response to the 510(k) submitted. In the AI letter, the FDA stated it did not believe the Company provided sufficient clinical evidence at this time to support the expanded indication for use, and that the Company had not met the primary endpoints of the SH FDA-approved IDE study. The Company anticipates meeting with the FDA to discuss the contents of the AI letter and potential next steps, which may require additional clinical data and potentially a new 510(k) submission.
We have incurred substantial operating losses and have used cash in our operating activities since inception. Based on our current operating plan, we believe we do not have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand to support current operations for the twelve months following the filing of this Annual Report. Therefore, to finance our ongoing operations, we will need to raise additional capital or enter into a revenue-generating collaboration, which cannot be assured. We plan to seek to raise capital from time to time through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, our at-the-market equity offering program, or to enter into collaborations with third parties, to fund our future operations. Meanwhile, over the past few years, Mr. Duggan, our majority stockholder, has made significant investments in our Company to fund its operations. Mr. Duggan may elect to participate in any number of our future fundraisings, as described above, and he may choose to invest more than his current pro rata share in any of these fundraisings, or alternatively he may offer to provide debt financing as may be needed in order to maintain the Company as a going concern.
The source, timing and availability of any future financing will depend largely upon market conditions and perceived progress in the CellFX commercial program, as well as future clinical and regulatory developments concerning the CellFX System and our other NPS-based technologies. Funding may not be available when needed, at all or on terms acceptable to us. Lack of necessary funds may require us to, among other things, delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our commercial activities, reduce headcount, trim research and product development programs, discontinue clinical trials, stop all or some of our manufacturing operations, defer capital expenditures, deregister from being a publicly traded company and delist from Nasdaq, or license our potential products or technologies to third parties, possibly on terms that cannot sustain our current business. In addition, the recent decline in economic activity caused by the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine and by the COVID pandemic, together with the deterioration of the credit and capital markets, could have an adverse impact on potential sources of future financing.
Plan of Operation
We plan to establish ourselves as a medical therapy company with a local, nonthermal, and drug-free treatment platform that initiates cell death in targeted tissue by a process of cell signaling. In order to accomplish this, we plan to:
Improve our technology by continuing our research and product development efforts. We expect to develop interchangeable tissue applicators to target different tissue types that will leverage the novel characteristics of our NPS technology platform.
‎
Further explore and understand the benefits of our NPS technology platform with the objectives of broadening the currently planned cosmetic and therapeutic applications, while also identifying new applications. We anticipate that results of our clinical studies will enable us to recognize certain unmet medical needs that may be addressed by our technology.
Continue to protect and expand our intellectual property portfolio with respect to NPS technology, which we expect will increase our ability to deter competitors and position our Company for favorable licensing and partnering opportunities.
Partner with medical or biomedical device companies for certain applications which we anticipate may accelerate product development and acceptance into target market areas and allow us to gain the sales and marketing advantages of one or more established distribution infrastructures.
COVID-19 Pandemic
Our clinical trials may be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Site initiation and patient enrollment may be delayed, for example, due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic, travel restrictions imposed by governments, and the inability to access sites for initiation and monitoring. Also, it is possible that delivery from some of our suppliers of certain materials used in the production of our product candidates could be delayed due to COVID-19 which could affect our ability to obtain sufficient materials for our product candidates. COVID-19 has adversely affected global economies and financial markets and will likely continue to do so, resulting in an economic downturn that could affect demand for our product candidates and impact our operating results. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may continue to experience an adverse impact to our business as a result of the continued global economic impact of the pandemic. We cannot anticipate all of the ways in which health epidemics such as COVID-19 could adversely impact our business. Although we are continuing to monitor and assess the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or a similar health epidemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. See the Risk Factors section for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments
The discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations of the SEC. Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of the Company’s control. As a result, these issues are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, future business plans and the projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, trends in the industry and information available from other outside sources.
We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received 510(k) clearance, CE marking approval, and Health Canada clearance for the CellFX System and began to capitalize inventory in preparation of commercialization. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company entered into sales contracts with customers and began to recognize revenue.
Valuation of Inventory
Inventory is stated at lower of cost or net realizable value. We established the inventory basis by determining the cost based on standard costs approximating the purchase costs on a first-in, first-out basis. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of our business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. The cost basis of our inventory will be reduced for any products that are considered excessive or obsolete based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. At December 31, 2021, there is no reduction to the balance of inventory for excessive and obsolete inventory.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
We recognize revenue at a point in time as we satisfy performance obligations by transferring control of promised goods to our customers. The amount of revenue recognized is equal to the consideration which we are entitled to in exchange for the promised goods, excluding any amounts assessed by government authorities for taxes which might be collected from a customer. Sales contracts often involve the sale and delivery of multiple products, each of which typically represent a separate performance obligation in the contract. While we sell these products on a stand-alone basis at a particular stand-alone selling price (“SSP”), initial customer contracts will likely involve the bundling of products which will be delivered concurrently to the customer and have the same pattern of transfer. In such instances, the full consideration of the contract will be recognized upon delivery of the products. We include a standard warranty on our products which provides assurances that the products comply with agreed-upon specifications.
Product Warranty
The Company provides a standard warranty on eligible products which provides the customer assurances that the products comply with the agreed-upon specifications. The standard warranty does not provide any services in addition to those assurances. The Company accrues a warranty reserve for products sold based upon the best estimate of the nature, frequency, and costs of future claims. These estimates are inherently uncertain given the short history of sales, and changes to the historical or projected warranty experience may cause material changes to the warranty reserve in the future. The warranty reserve is included within Accrued expenses on the consolidated balance sheets. Warranty expense is recorded as a component of Cost of Revenues in the consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We periodically issue stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to officers, directors, employees and consultants for services rendered. Such issuances vest and expire according to terms established at the issuance date. Stock-based payments to officers, directors and employees, including grants of employee stock options, are recognized in the financial statements based on their fair values. Stock option grants, which are generally time vested, are measured at the grant date fair value and charged to operations on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions which determine the fair value of stock-based awards. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates. These estimates are complex, involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management’s judgment, so that they are inherently subjective. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liability account balances are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and are measured using the enacted rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse.
We provide a valuation allowance to reduce its deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. If we determine that we would be able to realize deferred tax assets in the future in excess of the recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be credited to operations in the period such determination was made. Likewise, should we determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of its deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to operations in the period such determination was made.
We account for uncertainties in income tax law under a comprehensive model for the financial statement recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in income tax returns as prescribed by Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740-10- Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. The tax effects of a position are recognized only if it is “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained by the taxing authority as of the reporting date. If the tax position is not considered “more-likely-than-not” to be sustained, then no benefits of the position are recognized.
We are subject to U.S. federal income taxes and income taxes in California. As our net operating losses have yet to be utilized, previous tax years remain open to examination by federal authorities and other jurisdictions in which we currently operate or have operated in the past. We are not currently under examination by any tax authority.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our consolidated statements of operations as discussed herein are presented below:
* Certain 2020 amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation. Sales and marketing expenses have been reclassified out of general and administrative and presented as a separate line item. Amortization of intangible assets have been reclassified to general and administrative expenses.
Revenues
Revenues increased by $1.4 million to $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from zero during the same period in 2020. We commenced sales agreement activity in August 2021, triggering the recognition of revenue.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $2.0 million to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from zero during the same period in 2020. Prior to commercialization in August 2021, all uncapitalized manufacturing related overhead costs were recorded as research and development expenses. Upon commercialization, these costs are recorded as cost of revenues.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of salaries and related expenses for research and development personnel, clinical trials, professional fees and consulting costs related to the design, development and enhancement of our current and potential future products, engineering prototypes and pre-commercial manufacturing supplies. Research and development expenses increased by $2.2 million to $28.6 million in 2021 from $26.4 million in 2020 due to $1.4 million of increased clinical trial and other outside research costs, $1.2 million of increased stock-based compensation, and $1.0 million of increased compensation and other employee related expenses. These increases were partially offset by decreases of $1.0 million in expensed equipment and supplies and $0.7 million of manufacturing absorption related to inventory production previously expensed to research and development prior to commercialization. Compensation costs increased primarily due to headcount growth, while consulting and outside services increased primarily due to new application development, medical research and studies.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of compensation and other related employee expenses for sales and marketing personnel, expenses associated with advertising and training, and marketing studies including our Controlled Launch program. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $7.5 million to $14.8 million in 2021 from $7.3 million in 2020 due to $3.0 million of increased compensation and other employee related expenses as a result of increased headcount, $1.6 million increased stock-based compensation, $1.8 million of non-cash Controlled Launch expenses, and $0.5 million of increased paid services. The increases in sales and marketing expenses are attributable to commercialization activities of the CellFX System subsequent to receiving FDA clearance, CE marking approval, and Health Canada clearance.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of compensation and other related employee expenses for executives, finance, legal, human resources, information technology and administrative personnel, professional fees, patent fees and costs, insurance costs, public company costs, and other general corporate expenses. General and administrative expenses increased by $2.8 million to $19.1 million in 2021 from $16.3 million in 2020 due to $1.2 million of increased compensation and other employee related expenses and $1.6 million of increased stock-based compensation, both primarily related to headcount growth.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense increased by $0.7 million to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from zero during the same period in 2020 due to the Loan Agreement entered into in March 2021 and Insurance Loan Agreement entered into in May 2021. Interest income decreased by $0.1 million primarily due to decreased investment activity.
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019
Refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed on March 12, 2021, for the discussion of the comparison of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, the earliest of the three fiscal years presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have not generated significant revenues from product sales. Since inception, we have funded our business primarily through the issuance of equity securities and debt. Over the next few years, we intend to invest in research and development to develop new applications for existing products and additional commercially viable products and to assess the feasibility of potential future products. Additionally, we expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to incur incremental costs associated with being a public company and our sales and marketing expenses will increase as we continue to commercialize the CellFX System.
In June 2020, we completed a rights offering pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 4,279,600 shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and 641,571 warrants, for net proceeds of $29.4 million. On December 31, 2020, the Company met the requirements for redemption of these warrants. Pursuant to the redemption, the Company redeemed 5,139 warrants at a redemption price of $0.01 per warrant. 636,432 warrants were exercised, generating approximately $4.5 million of additional net proceeds to the Company.
On February 4, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement with Stifel as sales agent, pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Stifel, up to $60.0 million in shares of our common stock, by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415 promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. We have no obligation to make any sales of our common stock pursuant to such Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued and sold 288,490 shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement. The shares were sold at a weighted average price of $27.73 per share for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $7.4 million, after deducting sales commissions and offering costs payable by us.
In March 2021 we entered into a Loan Agreement with Robert W. Duggan, our Board Chairman, in connection with Mr. Duggan lending the principal sum of $41.0 million to the Company. The Loan Agreement had a maturity date of June 11, 2022. Under the Loan Agreement, Mr. Duggan provided us, subject to certain conditions, an unsecured term loan facility in an original aggregate principal amount of $41.0 million. The Loan Agreement bore interest at a rate per annum equal to 5.0%, payable quarterly commencing on July 1, 2021. The Loan Agreement contained certain covenants and Events of Default.
On June 30, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Mr. Duggan, pursuant to which the Company issued and sold to Mr. Duggan 3,048,780 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, in a private placement, at a price per share of $16.40. The shares were paid for through (i) the conversion of the $41 million aggregate principal amount, together with all accrued and unpaid interest outstanding, pursuant to the Loan Agreement by and between the Company and Mr. Duggan (Note 13), and (ii) additional cash in the amount of approximately $8.4 million. Upon closing of this Private Placement and satisfaction of the outstanding debt, the Loan Agreement was terminated, without early termination fees or penalties being owed by the Company, and no additional amounts were owed to Mr. Duggan under the Loan Agreement. The cash proceeds of approximately $8.4 million were received by the Company in July 2021.
Our consolidated statements of cash flows as discussed herein are presented below:
To date, we have generated limited revenue and used cash in our operating activities. As a result, we have incurred significant operating losses in each year since our inception and we may continue to incur additional losses for the next several years. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $236.2 million, cash outflows from operations of $54.1 million for the year then ended, cash and cash equivalents of $28.6 million and a net loss of $63.7 million. These factors, combined with the Company’s forecast of cash required to fund operations for a period of at least twelve months from the date of issuance of the accompanying consolidated financial statements, raise substantial doubt under ASC 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. We plan to raise additional capital in the future to fund our operations through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, or our at-the-market equity offering program, or by entering into revenue-generating collaborations. Mr. Duggan, our majority stockholder, may elect to participate in any number of our future financings, or alternatively he may offer to provide debt financing as may be needed in order to maintain the Company as a going concern. We can give no assurance, at this time, that additional financing or a collaboration will be available when needed on terms acceptable to us, however.
These expectations are based on our current operating and financing plans which are subject to change. Until we are able to generate sustainable product revenues at profitable levels, we expect to finance our future cash needs through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, our at-the-market equity offering program, and/or potential new collaborations. Such additional funds may not be available on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we raise funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of some or all of our stockholders will be diluted, and the holders of new equity securities may have priority rights over our existing stockholders. If adequate funds are not available, we may be required to curtail operations significantly or obtain funds by entering into agreements on unattractive terms. Our inability to raise capital could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. For example, lack of necessary funds may require us to, among other things, delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our commercial activities, reduce headcount, trim research and product development programs, discontinue clinical trials, stop all or some of our manufacturing operations, defer capital expenditures, deregister from being a publicly traded company and delist from Nasdaq, or license our potential products or technologies to third parties, possibly on terms that cannot sustain our current business. In addition, the recent decline in economic activity caused by the armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine and by the COVID pandemic, together with the deterioration of the credit and capital markets, could have an adverse impact on potential sources of future financing.
Operating Activities
During 2021, we used cash of $54.1 million in operating activities. The difference between cash used in operating activities and net loss consisted primarily of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, accounts payable and accrued expenses, and right-of-use assets, partially offset by increases in prepaid expenses and inventory.
During 2020, we used cash of $35.4 million in operating activities. The difference between cash used in operating activities and net loss consisted primarily of stock-based compensation, accrued expenses, depreciation and amortization, and right-of-use assets, partially offset by decreases in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Investing Activities
Our investing activities consist primarily of investment purchases, sales and maturities and capital expenditures.
During 2021, cash provided from investing activities was $7.6 million, of which $8.0 million was provided from the maturities of investments, partially offset by the purchase of property and equipment.
During 2020, cash provided from investing activities was $10.0 million, of which $39.5 million was provided from the maturities and sales of investments, offset by $29.5 million for the purchase of investments and property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During 2021, cash provided from financing activities was $62.7 million, primarily due to $49.3 million net cash received from our Loan Agreement and Private Placement, $7.4 million net cash received from our at-the-market equity offering, $5.0 million received from stock option and warrant exercises, $0.4 million received, net of payments made to date, from the Insurance Loan Agreement and $0.8 million received from the sale of stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
During 2020, cash provided from financing activities was $30.9 million, of which $29.4 million was received from the rights offering, $1.0 million received from the exercise of stock options and warrants, and $0.5 million received from the sale of our stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2020, and 2019
Refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed on March 12, 2021, for the discussion of the comparison of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019, the earliest of the three fiscal years presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Contractual Obligations
Frank Reidy Research Center Agreement
As provided for in the license agreement with Old Dominion University Research Foundation (“ODURF”) and Eastern Virginia Medical School (“EVMS”), effective on November 6, 2014, we sponsored certain approved research activities at ODURF’s Frank Reidy Research Center under a sponsored research agreement (“SRA”). In August 2018, we agreed to sponsor a task order for research in the amount of $0.8 million and in September 2019, we agreed to sponsor an additional task order for research in the amount of $0.8 million each to be performed during their respective subsequent 12-month periods. In March 2021, we agreed to sponsor a task order for research in the amount of $0.3 million and in May 2021 we sponsored an additional task order for $0.3 million each to be performed during their respective subsequent 12-month periods. These sponsored researches are funded through monthly payments made upon ODURF certifying, to our reasonable satisfaction, that ODURF has met its obligations pursuant to the specified task order and statement of work. The principal investigator may transfer funds within the budget as needed with our approval so long as the obligations of ODURF under the task order and statement of work remain unchanged and unimpaired. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, we incurred costs relating to the SRA equal to $0.3 million, $0.6 million and $0.9 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, there is a $0.3 million balance payable under this research agreement.
Operating Lease
We currently lease approximately 50,300 square feet of premises located in Hayward, California, which is used for our corporate headquarters and principal operating facility. The term of the original lease included approximately 15,700 square feet for 62 months and commenced on July 1, 2017. In May 2019, we entered into an amendment which enabled us to expand the lease by approximately 34,600 additional square feet, for a total of approximately 50,300 square feet. The amendment also included an option to extend the term of the lease. Approximately 13,300 square feet of the additional space was occupied in November 2019 as part of the first phase, and the remaining approximately 21,300 square feet was occupied in May 2020 as part of the second phase. The term of the total lease was extended through October 2029.
Under the original lease agreement, the landlord provided a $2.1 million allowance for tenant improvements, which was recorded as deferred rent at the inception of the lease term. Future minimum lease payments are net of amortization of tenant improvement allowance. The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or cash flows.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
Through the end of 2021, we were an emerging growth company as defined by the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, we were given the option to delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we were subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
Research and development of new technologies are, by their nature, unpredictable. Although we undertake development efforts with commercially reasonable diligence, there can be no assurance that the net proceeds from our financings will be sufficient to enable us to develop our technology to the extent needed to generate future sales to sustain our operations. If we do not continue to have enough funds to sustain our operations, we will consider other options to continue the commercialization of the CellFX System, including, but not limited to, additional financing through follow-on stock offerings, debt financings, or co-development agreements and /or other alternatives.
We cannot assure investors that our technology will be adopted or that we will ever achieve sustainable revenues sufficient to support our operations. Even if we are able to generate revenues, there can be no assurances that we will be able to achieve profitability or positive operating cash flows. There can be no assurances that we will be able to secure additional financing in the future on acceptable terms or at all. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy our ongoing cash needs, we would be required to scale back or discontinue our technology and product development programs, or obtain funds, if available, although there can be no assurances, through the sale, licensing or strategic alliances that could require us to relinquish rights to our technology and intellectual property, or to curtail, suspend or discontinue our operations entirely.
See the section entitled “COVID-19 Pandemic” above and elsewhere in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for a discussion of the current and potential future impact of COVID-19 on our business, financial condition and results of operation.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Annual Report, we are not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on our financial condition.
‎