Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements that are included elsewhere in this Report. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements because of several factors, including those set forth under the Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors and Business sections in this Report, and our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. In addition, any statements that refer to projections of our future financial performance, our anticipated growth and trends in our businesses, and other characterizations of future events or circumstances are forward-looking statements. Such statements are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risk factors described throughout this Report.
General
We are a Nevada corporation organized in 2008. Exactus, Inc. was our former name. We have pursued opportunities in hemp-based businesses, which we refer to as “cannabinoids or CBD”. On June 30, 2021 Exactus acquired Panacea Life Sciences, Inc. (“Panacea” or “PLS”), our subsidiary, and as a result became a seed-to-sale Cannabinoid company. The former Panacea stockholders have assumed majority control of us and all our operations are now operated through Panacea which because of the share exchange became our wholly owned subsidiary. Leslie Buttorff, became our Chief Executive Officer and a director upon the closing of the share exchange, also became our principal stockholder through common stock and Convertible Preferred Stock issued to her and entities she controls.
Panacea was founded by Leslie Buttorff in 2017 as a woman-owned business with a focus on CBD products and technology. Through Panacea, we are dedicated to developing and producing the highest-quality, most medically relevant, legal, hemp-derived cannabinoid products for consumers and pets. Beginning at a farm, XXII owns and of which we have the right to own a 10-acre parcel, located in Needle Rock, Colorado and leases laboratory space located within a 51,000 square foot, state-of-the-art, cGMP, extraction, manufacturing, testing and fulfillment center located in Golden, Colorado, Panacea operates in every aspect of the CBD product value chain. From cultivation to finished goods, Panacea ensures its products with stringent testing protocols employed at every stage of the supply chain. Panacea endeavors to offer pure natural remedies within product lines for every aspect of life: PANA Life®, PANA Beauty®, PANA Sport™, PANA Pet®, PANA PURE™ and PANA Health™.
We believe we are well positioned to develop novel hemp extracts as dietary supplements and topical applications. Our biotechnology plans focus on our research at Colorado State University where we are involved in several health-related research studies.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenues
We are principally engaged in the business of producing and selling products made from industrial hemp. Revenue consists of sales of our six category of brand products, white label and contract manufacturing sales to other CBD companies, raw material sales (distillate and isolate), and tolling arrangements. We have also engaged in the sale of personal protective equipment (PPE).
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $6,958,093, or 77%, to $2,059,627 as compared to $9,017,720 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in sales in 2021 was due primarily to the decrease of PPE related sales and the continued impact COVID has had on the CBD business. In 2021, we continued to see many of our CBD customers go out of business, which continued to impact our white label and contract manufacturing contracts. We expect the decrease in sales activity to continue due to limited capital resources until we consummate a financing. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated $2.06 million in revenue compared to $9.018 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in sales is attributed to less PPE items being sold in 2021 and the continued impact COVID has had on the CBD business. Revenues related to the sale of PPE items were $0.066 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.793 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $5,501,174, or 78%, to $1,519,049 as compared to $7,020,223 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cost of sales was due primarily to decrease in sales as well as the effect of COVID-19 on the materials supply chain. The primary components of cost of sales include the cost of manufacturing the CBD products and PPE. The decrease in costs corresponds to the decrease in PPE sales.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $577,593, or 8%, to $6,677,746 as compared to $7,255,339 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was primarily due to a decrease in general and administrative expenses of $1,087,339, partially offset by an increase in production related operating expenses of $509,746.
The decrease in general and administrative expenses of $1,087,339 or 39% to $1,718,687 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $2,806,026 for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to decreases in sales commissions, sales and marketing activities as well as general activities, partially offset by an increase in professional fees relating the various transactions relating to the merger.
The increase in production related operating expenses of $509,746 or 11% to $4,959,059 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $4,449,313 for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to increases in payroll and related expenses of $193,000 stock-based compensation of $223,000 legal and professional fees of $633,000 and insurance of $169,000.
Within the total G&A category of expenses, sales and marketing expenses decreased from $1.505 million to $0.378 million for the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the 12 months ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to sales commissions paid for PPE sales, the Panacea brand development, advertising fees for the Facebook program and the new Panacea website.
Also, within the total G&A category of expenses, professional, legal, and consulting fees were $0.779 million for the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 when compared to $0.312 million the 12 months ended December 31, 2020. In 2020, legal expenses were attributed to the farm acquisition and the XXII investment. In 2021, legal fees were related to the XXII farm sale and investment restructuring, the Panacea reverse merger and fees related to obtaining a trademarks and registrations for our brand.
Other income (expense)
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1,361,823, or 5,235%, to 1,387,835 as compared to $26,012 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Summary of Cash Flows
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $3,922,090 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $7,646,723 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in 2021 was due primarily to decreases in revenues as well as cost of sales and operating expenses as well as favorable changes to working capital. The largest source of operating cash is from our customers. A large majority of our customers purchase CBD on-line, so credit card payments are collected and paid within 1-2 business days. Other white label and contract manufacturing customers pay before the products are released. Some larger customers have either net 10-, 2%- or 30-day net terms. Net cash used in operating activities was $3.922 million and $7.647 million for 12 months ended December 31, for 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $522,533 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $3,080,388 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of cash provided in 2021 was due primarily to a significant decrease in fixed asset acquisitions as well as increases in proceeds from sales of fixed assets and marketable securities. Machinery and building retrofitting expenses and cash received in the acquisition were the investing activities for the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 and totaled $0.522 million and $3.08 million for December 31, 2020.
Cash flows from financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities totaled $3,334,953 which includes proceeds of $2,302,468 from related part notes, $1,000,000 from convertible notes, and $243,042 from a related party payroll protection loan partially offset by repayments of notes payable in the amount of $210,556.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities totaled $2,295,981 which includes of $5,984,226 from related party notes payable and $273,300 from other loans partially offset by the repayment of $3,961,545 of notes payable. Net cash provided by financing activities for the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 was $3.335 million. For the same period in 2020 the financing was $2.296 million. In 2021 the primary financing was cash provided by Company’s CEO.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 31, 2021, we had approximately $3.8 million of liquid marketable securities and $20,000 in cash. There have been no material changes as of the date of this Report. Our Chief Executive Officer holds the XXII shares pursuant to the pledge agreement and has the power at any time to permit us to sell the shares to provide working capital. We have borrowed substantial sums from Leslie Buttorff, our Chief Executive Officer, to meet its working capital obligations. On June 30, 2021 Panacea issued an affiliate of Ms. Buttorff a 12% demand promissory note for $4.063 million and issued Ms. Buttorff a 10% demand promissory note for $1.624 million secured by a pledge of certain XXII common stock owned by Panacea. Additionally, we have a line of credit with Ms. Buttorff through which it may borrow up to $1 million at a 10% annual interest rate.
We do not have sufficient cash resources to sustain our operations for the next 12 months. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern as we are dependent on obtaining financing from one or more debt or equity offerings or further loans from Ms. Buttorff assuming she agrees to advance further funds.
These consolidated financial statements are presented on the basis that we will continue as a going concern. The going concern concept contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. No adjustment has been made to the carrying amount and classification of our assets and the carrying amount of our liabilities based on the going concern uncertainty. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of 12 months from the date of this Report. Management cannot provide assurance that we will ultimately achieve profitable operations or become cash flow positive or raise additional debt and/or equity capital. In addition, due to insufficient revenue, we will need to obtain further funding through public or private equity offerings, debt financing, collaboration arrangements or other sources in order to maintain active business operations. We currently do not have sufficient cash flow to pay our ongoing financial obligations on a consistent basis. The issuance of any additional shares of common stock, preferred stock or convertible securities could be substantially dilutive to our stockholders. In addition, adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital, we will be forced to borrow additional sums from our Chief Executive Officer or delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs, we may not be able to continue as a going concern, and we may be forced to discontinue operations. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates and New Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires its management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures. Our management bases its estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. In addition, actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences could be material to our financial position and results of operations.
Critical accounting estimates are those that our management considers the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting estimates in relation to its consolidated financial statements include those related to:
● Goodwill and intangible assets
● Fair value of marketable securities
● Incremental Borrowing Rate used Right of Use Asset Calculations
● Business combinations
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangibles
We allocate the cost of acquired companies to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the remaining amount classified as goodwill. The identification and valuation of these intangible assets and the determination of the estimated useful lives at the time of acquisition, as well as the completion of impairment tests, require significant management judgments and estimates. These estimates are made based on, among other factors, review of projected future operating results and business plans, economic projections, anticipated highest and best use of future cash flows and the cost of capital. The use of alternative estimates and assumptions could increase or decrease the estimated fair value of goodwill and other intangible assets, and potentially result in a different impact to our results of operations. Further, changes in business strategy and/or market conditions may significantly impact these judgments and thereby impact the fair value of these assets, which could result in an impairment of the goodwill or intangible assets.
Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment annually and whenever events or circumstances change that indicate impairment may have occurred. We tested goodwill for impairment and determined there was no impairment and found not impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over our fair value.
Fair value of marketable securities
Marketable securities are recorded at fair value using the quoted market prices and changes in fair value are recorded as net realized gains or losses in comprehensive income. We monitor these investments for impairment and make appropriate reductions in carrying values as necessary.
Incremental Borrowing Rate used Right of Use Asset Calculations
We determine if a contract is a lease or contains a lease at the inception of the contract and reassess that conclusion if the contract is modified. All leases are assessed for classification as an operating lease or a finance lease. Operating lease right-of-use, or ROU, assets are included in non-current other assets on our consolidated balance sheet. Operating lease liabilities are separated into a current portion, included within other accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet, and a non-current portion, included within other long-term liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet. We do not have any finance lease ROU assets or liabilities. ROU assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. We do not obtain and control the right to use the identified asset until the lease commencement date.
Our lease liabilities are recognized at the applicable lease commencement date based on the present value of the lease payments required to be paid over the lease term. Because the interest rate implicit in the lease is not readily determinable, we generally use our incremental borrowing rate to discount the lease payments to present value. The estimated incremental borrowing rate is derived from information available at the lease commencement date. We factor in publicly available data for instruments with similar characteristics when calculating our incremental borrowing rates. Our ROU assets are also recognized at the applicable lease commencement date. The ROU asset equals the carrying amount of the related lease liability, adjusted for any lease payments made prior to lease commencement and lease incentives provided by the lessor. Variable lease payments are expensed as incurred and do not factor into the measurement of the applicable ROU asset or lease liability.
Business Combinations
We have applied significant estimates and judgments in order to determine the fair value of the identified assets acquired, liabilities assumed and goodwill recognized in connection with our business combinations to ensure the value of the assets and liabilities acquired are recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date. In measuring the fair value, we utilize valuation techniques consistent with the market approach, income approach, or cost approach.
The valuation of the identifiable assets and liabilities includes assumptions made in performing the valuation, such as projected revenue, weighted average cost of capital, discount rates, estimated useful lives, and other relevant assessments. These assessments can be significantly affected by our estimates, judgments, and assumptions. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates, judgments, or assumptions, or if additional or new information arises in the future that affects our fair value estimates, then adjustments to our initial fair value estimates may have a material impact to our purchase accounting or our results of operations. If actual results are not consistent with our estimates, judgments, or assumptions, or if additional or new information arises in the future, beyond our one-year measurement period, that affects our fair value estimates, then adjustments to our initial fair value estimates may have a material impact to our results of operations