Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis, particularly with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of recombinant therapeutic proteins primarily based on our proprietary ProCellEx® protein expression system. We developed our first commercial drug product, Elelyso®, using our ProCellEx system and we are now focused on utilizing the system to develop a pipeline of proprietary, clinically superior versions of complex recombinant therapeutic proteins that primarily target large, established pharmaceutical markets and that in most cases rely upon known biological mechanisms of action. With our experience to date, we believe ProCellEx will enable us to develop additional proprietary recombinant proteins that are therapeutically superior to existing recombinant proteins currently marketed for the same indications, including applying the unique properties of our ProCellEx system for the oral delivery of therapeutic proteins.
On August 25, 2021, we completed exchanges, or the Exchanges, of our outstanding 7.50% Senior Secured Convertible Notes due 2021, or the 2021 Notes, with institutional note holders of a substantial majority of the 2021 Notes. The Exchanges involved the exchange of an aggregate of $54.65 million principal amount of our outstanding 2021 Notes for an aggregate of $28.75 million principal amount of newly issued 7.50% Senior Secured Convertible Notes due 2024, or the 2024 Notes, $25.90 million in cash, and approximately $1.1 million in cash representing accrued and unpaid interest through the closing date. The initial conversion rate for the 2024 Notes is 563.2216 shares of Common Stock for each $1,000 principal amount of 2024 Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $1.7755 per share of the Common Stock), subject to adjustment in certain circumstances. This initial conversion price represents a premium of approximately 32.5% relative to the closing price of the Common Stock on the NYSE American on August 13, 2021.
Pegunigalsidase alfa (PRX-102), our proprietary plant cell culture expressed enzyme in development for the treatment of Fabry disease, is our most advanced product candidate. Our PRX-102 phase III clinical program of PRX-102 for the treatment of Fabry disease includes three separate studies: the BALANCE, BRIDGE and BRIGHT studies. The BRIDGE and BRIGHT studies have been completed, and the last patient in the BALANCE study received the final dose in the study in October 2021. The studies were designed to evaluate the potential superiority of PRX-102 over current therapies, demonstrate the potential for improved efficacy and better quality of life for patients with Fabry disease and demonstrate the safety of our drug/therapy. We are also evaluating the potential of a once-monthly treatment regimen with a higher dose of PRX-102. In addition, the phase III clinical program includes two extension studies in which subjects that participated in our phase I/II clinical trials and our phase III clinical trials may enroll and continue to be treated with PRX-102.
On February 7, 2022, an MAA for PRX-102 was submitted to, and subsequently validated by, the EMA. The submission was made after the October 8, 2021 meeting we held, together with Chiesi, with the Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur of the EMA regarding PRX-102. At the meeting, Chiesi and the Company discussed the scope of the then anticipated MAA submission for the European Union, and the Rapporteur and Co-Rapporteur were generally supportive of the planned MAA submission for PRX-102.
On April 28, 2021, we, together with our development and commercialization partner for PRX-102, Chiesi, announced the receipt of a CRL from the FDA regarding the PRX-102 BLA. The CRL did not report any concerns relating to the potential safety or efficacy of PRX-102 in the submitted data package. In the CRL, the FDA noted that an inspection of our manufacturing facility in Carmiel, Israel, including the FDA’s subsequent assessment of any related FDA findings, is required before the FDA can approve a resubmitted BLA. Due to travel restrictions, the FDA was unable to conduct the required inspection during the review cycle. The FDA explained in the letter that it will continue to monitor the public
health situation as well as travel restrictions, and is actively working to define an approach for scheduling outstanding inspections. With respect to the third-party facility in Europe at which fill and finish processes are performed for PRX-102, due to COVID-19, the FDA reviewed records under Section 704(a)(4) of the FFDCA in lieu of a pre-licensing inspection. In the CRL, the FDA stated that it will communicate remaining issues to the facility in order to seek prompt resolution of any pending items. In addition to the foregoing, in the CRL, the FDA noted that Fabrazyme (agalsidase beta), a therapy used to treat Fabry patients, was recently converted to full approval and is now an “available therapy,” which must be addressed in the context of any potential resubmission of a BLA for PRX-102.
We and Chiesi participated in a Type A (End of Review) meeting with the FDA on September 9, 2021. As part of the meeting minutes provided by the FDA, which included the preliminary comments and meeting discussion, the FDA, in principle, agreed that the data package proposed to the FDA for a BLA resubmission has the potential to support a traditional approval of PRX-102 for the treatment of Fabry disease. The planned data package for the BLA resubmission, given the changed regulatory landscape in the United States, will include the final two-year analyses of the BALANCE study. We intend to continue to work collaboratively with the FDA to resolve the issues noted in the CRL and provide a new, alternative drug to Fabry patients.
Our partnership with Chiesi is based on two agreements. On October 19, 2017, Protalix Ltd. and Chiesi entered into Chiesi Ex-US Agreement and on July 23, 2018, Protalix Ltd. and Chiesi entered into the Chiesi US Agreement. Under each of the Chiesi Agreements, Chiesi made an upfront payment to Protalix Ltd. of $25.0 million in connection with the execution of each agreement. In addition, the Chiesi Ex-US Agreement provided for additional payments to Protalix Ltd. of up to $25.0 million in pegunigalsidase alfa development costs, capped at $10.0 million per year, and up to $320.0 million, in the aggregate, in regulatory and commercial milestone payments. The Chiesi US Agreement provided for additional payments to Protalix Ltd. of up to a maximum of $20.0 million to cover development costs for pegunigalsidase alfa, subject to a maximum of $7.5 million per year, and to receive additional payments of up to a maximum of $760.0 million, in the aggregate, in regulatory and commercial milestone payments. To date, Protalix Ltd. has received the complete amount of development costs to which it is entitled under the Chiesi Agreements.
Under the terms of both of the Chiesi Agreements, Protalix Ltd. is required to manufacture all of the pegunigalsidase alfa needed under the agreements, subject to certain exceptions, and Chiesi is required to purchase pegunigalsidase alfa from Protalix, subject to certain terms and conditions. Under the Chiesi Ex-US Agreement, Chiesi is required to make tiered payments of 15% to 35% of its net sales, depending on the amount of annual sales outside of the United States, as consideration for product supply. Under the Chiesi US Agreement, Chiesi is required to make tiered payments of 15% to 40% of its net sales, depending on the amount of annual sales in the United States, as consideration for product supply.
On May 13, 2021, we signed a binding term sheet with Chiesi pursuant to which we and Chiesi amended the Chiesi Agreements in order to provide the Company with near-term capital. Chiesi agreed to make a $10.0 million payment to us before the end of the second quarter of 2021 in exchange for a $25.0 million reduction in a longer term regulatory milestone payment provided in the Chiesi EX-US Agreement. All other regulatory and commercial milestone payments remain unchanged. The Company received the payment in June 2021. The Company also agreed to negotiate certain manufacturing related matters.
On May 1, 2012, the FDA approved for sale our first commercial product, taliglucerase alfa for injection, an ERT for the long-term treatment of adult patients with a confirmed diagnosis of type 1 Gaucher disease. Subsequently, taliglucerase alfa was approved for marketing by the regulatory authorities of other countries. Taliglucerase alfa is marketed under the name BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil and certain other Latin American countries, and under the name Elelyso in other territories.
Since its approval by the FDA, taliglucerase alfa has been marketed by Pfizer, as provided in the Pfizer Agreement. In October 2015, we entered into the Amended Pfizer Agreement which amends and restates the Pfizer Agreement in its entirety. Pursuant to the Amended Pfizer Agreement, we sold to Pfizer our share in the collaboration created under the initial Pfizer Agreement for the commercialization of Elelyso in exchange for a cash payment equal to $36.0 million. Under the Amended Pfizer Agreement, Pfizer has an exclusive license to commercialize Elelyso worldwide other than Brazil; we maintain full rights to BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil. We will continue to manufacture drug substance for Pfizer, subject to certain terms and conditions. Under the Amended Pfizer Agreement, Pfizer is responsible
for 100% of expenses, and entitled to all revenues globally for Elelyso, excluding Brazil, where we are responsible for all expenses and retain all revenues.
On June 18, 2013, we entered into the Brazil Agreement with Fiocruz, an arm of the Brazilian MoH, for BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase. As Fiocruz has not satisfied certain purchase commitments under the agreement, we and Fiocruz continuously discuss potential steps to maximize sales of BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase to the Brazilian MoH. We are continuing to supply BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase to Fiocruz, and patients continue to be treated with BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil. We are discussing with Fiocruz potential actions that Fiocruz may take to comply with its purchase obligations and, based on such discussions, we will determine what we believe to be the course of action that is in our best interest.
In addition to PRX-102, our product pipeline currently includes, among other candidates:
1)alidornase alfa, or PRX-110, a proprietary plant cell recombinant human DNase, which has successfully completed a phase II efficacy and safety study; we are continuing to evaluate potential strategic marketing partnerships and collaboration programs with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies for this product candidate for various respiratory indications;
2)PRX-115, our plant cell-expressed recombinant PEGylated uricase (urate oxidase) - a chemically modified enzyme to treat refractory gout; and
3)PRX-119, our plant cell-expressed PEGylated recombinant human DNase I product candidate being designed to elongate half-life in the circulation for NETs-related diseases.
We have licensed the rights to commercialize taliglucerase alfa worldwide (other than Brazil) to Pfizer, and the rights to commercialize pegunigalsidase alfa worldwide to Chiesi. Otherwise, we hold the worldwide commercialization rights to our other proprietary development candidates. In addition, we continuously evaluate potential strategic marketing partnerships as well as collaboration programs with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies and academic research institutes.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the accounting policies below are critical for one to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate such estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our financial condition, liquidity, or results of operations will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets.
Revenues
Our primary sources of revenues include our sales of BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil, of drug substance to Pfizer under our Amended Pfizer Agreement and of drug product to Chiesi under the Chiesi Agreements. We recognize
revenue from the Amended Pfizer Agreement at a point in time when control over the product is transferred to customers (upon delivery).
We also generate revenues from the Chiesi agreements. According to Accounting Standards Codification 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and all the related amendments, or ASC 606, a performance obligation is a promise to provide a distinct good or service or a series of distinct goods or services. Goods and services that are not distinct are bundled with other goods or services in the contract until a bundle of goods or services that is distinct is created. A good or service promised to a customer is distinct if the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
We have identified two performance obligations in the Chiesi agreements as follows: (1) the license and research and development services and (2) contingent performance obligation regarding future manufacturing.
We determined that the license together with the research and development services should be combined into single performance obligation since Chiesi cannot benefit from the license without the research and development services. The research and development services are highly specialized and are dependent on the supply of the drug.
The future manufacturing is contingent on regulatory approvals of the drug and we deem these services to be separately identifiable from other performance obligations in the contract. Manufacturing services post-regulatory approval are not interdependent or interrelated with the license and research and development services.
The transaction price of the Chiesi Agreements was comprised of fixed consideration and variable consideration (capped research and development reimbursements). Under ASC 606, the consideration to which we would be entitled upon the achievement of contractual milestones, which are contingent upon the occurrence of future events, are a form of variable consideration. We estimate variable consideration using the most likely method. Amounts included in the transaction price are recognized only when it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenues will not occur. Prior to recognizing revenue from variable consideration, we use significant judgment to determine the probability of a significant reversal of such revenue.
Since the customer benefits from the research and development services as the entity performs the service, revenue from granting the license and the research and development services is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost method. We used significant judgment when we determined the costs expected to be incurred upon satisfying the identified performance obligation.
Revenue from additional research and development services ordered by Chiesi is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost method.
Research and Development Expense
We expect our research and development expense to remain our primary expense in the near future as we continue to develop our product candidates. Research and development expense consists of:
● internal costs associated with research and development activities;
● payments made to third party contract research organizations, investigative/clinical sites and consultants;
● manufacturing development costs;
● personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel, and related costs for the personnel involved in research and development;
● activities relating to the advancement of product candidates through preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
● facilities and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, as well as laboratory and other supplies.
The following table identifies our current major research and development projects:
Project
Status
Expected Near Term Milestones
PRX-102 - pegunigalsidase alfa
BALANCE, BRIDGE and BRIGHT studies complete; extension studies ongoing
Top-line results from BALANCE study to be released in the second quarter of 2022 and final results to be released in the second half of 2022; resubmission of PRX-102 BLA in second half of 2022
PRX-110 - alidornase alfa
Preclinical
PRX-115 - Uricase
Preclinical
PRX-119 - Long Acting DNase I
Preclinical
We anticipate incurring increasing costs in connection with the continued development of all of the product candidates in our pipeline. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not tied to any individual research project and are typically deployed across all of our projects. We currently do not record and maintain research and development costs per project.
The costs and expenses of our projects are partially funded by grants we have received from NATI. Each grant is deducted from the related research and development expenses as the costs are incurred. For additional information regarding the grant process, see “Business-Israeli Government Programs- Encouragement of Industrial Research, Development and Technology Innovation, 1984” in Item 1 of this Annual Report. There can be no assurance that we will continue to receive grants from NATI in amounts sufficient for our operations, if at all. In addition, under the two Chiesi Agreements, Protalix Ltd. was entitled to payments of up to $45.0 million in the aggregate to cover development costs for pegunigalsidase alfa, capped at $17.5 million per year. To date, Protalix Ltd. has received the complete amount of development costs to which it is entitled under the Chiesi Agreements.
At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development processes and given the early stage of our preclinical product development programs, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the costs we will incur in the continued development of the product candidates in our pipeline for potential commercialization. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. The current focus of our product development efforts are on pegunigalsidase alfa. Our future research and development expenses for pegunigalsidase alfa and the other product candidates will depend on the clinical success of each product candidate, as well as ongoing assessments of each product candidate’s commercial potential. In addition, we cannot forecast with any degree of certainty which product candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements. See “Risk Factors-If we are unable to develop and commercialize our product candidates, our business will be adversely affected” and “-We may not obtain the necessary U.S., EMA or other worldwide regulatory approvals to commercialize our drug candidates in a timely manner, if at all, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
We expect our research and development expenses to continue to be our primary expense in the future as we continue the advancement of our clinical trials and preclinical product development programs for our product candidates, particularly with respect to the development of pegunigalsidase alfa. The lengthy process of completing clinical trials and seeking regulatory approvals for our product candidates requires expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure or delay in completing clinical trials, or in obtaining regulatory approvals, could cause a delay in generating product revenue and cause our research and development expense to increase and, in turn, have a material adverse effect on our operations. Due to the factors set forth above, we are not able to estimate with any certainty when we would recognize
any net cash inflows from our projects. See “Risk Factors-Clinical trials are very expensive, time-consuming and difficult to design and implement and may result in unforeseen costs which may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial condition.”
Share-Based Compensation
We measure share-based compensation cost for all share-based awards at the fair value on the grant date and recognition of share-based compensation over the related service period. The fair value of stock options is determined based on the number of shares granted and the price of our ordinary shares, and calculated based on the Black-Scholes valuation model. For grants made to employees we recognize the fair value of the grant as expense over the service period using the accelerated method while for grants made to consultants and other non-employees we recognize the expenses using the straight-line accounting method.
The guidance requires companies to estimate the expected term of the option rather than simply using the contractual term of an option. Because of lack of sufficient data on past option exercises by employees, the expected term of the options could not be based on historic exercise patterns. Accordingly, we adopted the simplified method, according to which companies may calculate the expected term as the average between the vesting date and the expiration date, assuming the option was granted as a “plain vanilla” option.
In performing the valuation, we assumed an expected 0% dividend yield in the previous years and in the next years. We do not have a dividend policy and given the lack of profitability, dividends are not expected in the foreseeable future, if at all. The guidance stipulates a number of factors that should be considered when estimating the expected volatility, including the implied volatility of traded options, historical volatility and the period that the shares of the company are being publicly traded.
The risk-free interest rate used in the valuation of the options is based on the implied yield of U.S. federal reserve zero-coupon government bonds. The remaining term of the bonds used for each valuation was equal to the expected term of the grant. This methodology has been applied to all grants valued by us. The guidance requires the use of a risk-free interest rate based on the implied yield currently available on zero-coupon government issues of the country in whose currency the exercise price is expressed, with a remaining term equal to the expected life of the option being valued. This requirement has been applied for all grants valued as part of this report.
Convertible Notes
The outstanding convertible notes are accounted for using the guidance set forth in the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or the FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 815 requiring that we determine whether the embedded conversion option must be separated and accounted for separately. ASC 470-20 regarding debt with conversion and other options requires the issuer of a convertible debt instrument that may be settled in cash upon conversion to separately account for the liability (debt) and equity (conversion option) components of the instrument in a manner that reflects the issuer’s nonconvertible debt borrowing rate. The 2021 Notes were accounted for partially as liability and equity components of the instrument and partially as a debt host contract with an embedded derivative resulting from the conversion feature. During the year ended December 31, 2017, the embedded derivative was reclassified to additional paid in capital. The 2024 Notes were accounted for as a liability (debt) and equity component (conversion option) as the convertible notes may be settled wholly or partly in cash, at our option, when converted.
Issuance costs regarding the issuance of the 2021 Notes, as well as the debt discount and debt issuance costs from the issuance of the 2024 Notes, were deferred and amortized over the applicable convertible notes period using the effective interest rate.
On August 25, 2021, we completed the Exchanges of a substantial majority of the 2021 Notes with certain institutional note holders. The Exchanges involved the exchange of an aggregate of $54.65 million principal amount of our outstanding 2021 Notes for an aggregate of $28.75 million principal amount of newly issued 2024 Notes, $25.90 million in cash, and approximately $1.1 million in cash representing accrued and unpaid interest through the closing date. The initial conversion rate for the 2024 Notes is 563.2216 shares of Common Stock for each $1,000 principal amount of 2024 Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $1.7755 per share of the Common Stock), subject
to adjustment in certain circumstances. This initial conversion price represents a premium of approximately 32.5% relative to the closing price of the Common Stock on the NYSE American on August 13, 2021. The Exchanges are described in greater detail in Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements
For accounting purposes, as the terms of the 2021 Notes and the 2024 Notes are substantially different, the Exchanges were considered an extinguishment of debt. We allocated the fair value of the consideration transferred to the participating note holders between the 2021 Notes and their equity component based on the fair value of the liability component before the extinguishment, and the remainder was allocated to the equity component. As a result, we recognized a loss from extinguishment in the statement of operations equal to $0.8 million due to derecognition of the liability component and a reduction of stockholders’ equity of $12.2 million.
As of December 31, 2021, a total of $28.75 million aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes were outstanding. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, none of the 2021 Notes were outstanding.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues from Selling Goods
We recorded revenues of $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.5 million, or 3%, compared to revenues of $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. An increase of $2.1 million in sales of drug substance to Pfizer was partially offset by a $1.6 million decrease in sales of drug to Brazil.
Revenues from License and R&D services
We recorded revenues from license and R&D services of $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $25.1 million, or 54%, compared to revenues of $46.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenues from license and R&D services represent mainly the revenues we recognized in connection with the Chiesi Agreements. The decrease is primarily due to lower costs incurred in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $5.4 million, or 50%, compared to cost of goods sold of $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of goods sold was primarily the result of certain one-time manufacturing costs incurred while preparing for the then anticipated FDA approval of the PRX-102 BLA and higher manufacturing costs.
Research and Development Expenses, Net
Research and development expenses, net were $29.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $8.5 million, or 22% from $38.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the completion of the three phase III clinical trials of PRX-102.
We expect research and development expenses to continue to be our primary expense as we enter into a more advanced stage of preclinical and clinical trials for certain of our product candidates.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.6 million, or 14%, from $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from an increase in corporate costs of $1.7 million related mainly to insurance.
Financial Expenses and Income, Net
Financial expense, net was $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $2.1 million, or 23%, compared to financial expenses of $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Financial expenses are comprised primarily of interest expense on our outstanding convertible notes equal to $3.6 million and $4.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease resulted primarily from the exchange of our 2021 notes; $0.7 million decrease in interest expenses, $0.8 million decrease in amortization of debt discount, and $1.3 million decrease in related expenses offset by a $0.8 million loss on extinguishment related to the Exchanges.
Year ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our sources of liquidity include our cash balances and bank deposits. At December 31, 2021, we had $39.0 million in cash and cash equivalents. We have primarily financed our operations through equity and debt financings, business collaborations, and grants funding.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we raised gross proceeds equal to approximately $8.8 million from sales of common stock under our ATM program through the sale of 1,867,552 shares of our common stock. In addition, we raised gross proceeds of approximately $40.2 million from a public offering of our common stock before deducting the underwriting discount and estimated expenses of the offering. In connection with the offering, we issued 8,749,999 shares of our common stock at a purchase price per share of $4.60.
On August 25, 2021, we completed Exchanges with institutional note holders of a substantial majority of the then outstanding 2021 Notes. The Exchanges involved the exchange of an aggregate of $54.65 million principal amount of 2021 Notes for an aggregate of $28.75 million principal amount of newly issued 2024 Notes, $25.90 million in cash and approximately $1.1 million in cash representing accrued and unpaid interest through the closing date. The initial conversion rate of the 2024 Notes is 563.2216 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of 2024 Notes, which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $1.7755 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment in certain circumstances. This initial conversion price represents a premium of approximately 32.5% relative to the closing price of the common stock on the NYSE American on August 13, 2021. After giving effect to the Exchanges, $3.27 million aggregate principal amount of the 2021 Notes remained outstanding. On November 15, 2021, all of the then outstanding 2021 Notes matured and were paid in full.
The 2024 Notes were issued pursuant to the 2024 Indenture which was entered into between us, the guarantors party thereto, The Bank of New York Mellon Trust Company, N.A., as trustee and Wilmington Savings Fund Society, FSB, as collateral agent. Interest on the Notes are payable semi-annually at a rate of 7.50% per annum. The 2024 Notes will mature three years after the issuance thereof, unless earlier purchased, converted, exchanged or redeemed and will be guaranteed by our subsidiaries. The 2024 Notes are secured by perfected liens on all of our assets, including those of our subsidiaries.
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operations was $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $27.6 million was further increased by a $4.9 million increase in inventories and by a $1.0 million increase in accounts receivable and other assets, which was partially offset by a $13.2 million increase in contracts liability and an increase of $2.4 million in accounts payable and accruals, by $2.7 million amortization of debt issuance costs and debt discount, by a $2.4 million in share-based compensation and $1.1 million in depreciation. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $18.9 million and consisted primarily of a net decrease in bank deposits. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $12.1 million, net proceeds of $37.6 million from the issuance of common stock and of $8.6 million from the issuance of
common stock under the sales agreement were offset by payments of $30.0 million for convertible notes redemption and transactions costs, and $4.1 million net payment to satisfy an outstanding promissory note.
Future Funding Requirements
As a result of our significant research and development expenditures and the lack of significant revenue from sales of taliglucerase alfa, we have generated operating losses from our continuing operations since our inception. Our outstanding 2024 Notes are secured by a perfected lien on all of our assets. Under the terms of the 2024 Indenture, we are required to comply with certain covenants, including the requirement to maintain a minimum cash balance of at least $7.5 million. Failure to comply with such covenants may result in an event of default under the 2024 Indenture and, accordingly, may result in the acceleration of the payment of the notes or in additional interest payments. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenditures in the near future as we increase our research and developments efforts with respect to our product candidates given the receipt of the CRL from the FDA discussed above, we expect to incur additional expenses in connection with any resubmission. We cannot anticipate the costs or the timing of the occurrence of such costs. In addition, to the extent we need to obtain additional financing in connection with this process or with any additional clinical testing that may be required, it may be more difficult for us to do so given the volatility of the price of our common stock. Our material cash needs for the next 24 months will include, among other expenses, (i) costs of preclinical and clinical trials, (ii) employee salaries, (iii) payments for rent and operation of our manufacturing facilities, (iv) fees to our consultants and legal advisors, patent advisors and fees for service providers in connection with our research and development efforts and (v) payment of interest on our outstanding 2024 Notes. We believe that the funds currently available to us are sufficient to satisfy our capital needs for at least 12 months.
As discussed above, we may be required to raise additional capital to develop our product candidates and continue research and development activities. Our ability to raise capital, and the amounts of necessary capital, will depend on many other factors, including:
● our efforts, combined with those of Chiesi, to file for resubmission with the FDA and to commercialize PRX-102;
● our progress in commercializing BioManguinhos alfataliglicerase in Brazil;
● the duration and cost of discovery and preclinical development and laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
● the timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
● the costs associated with any litigation claims.
We expect to finance our future cash needs through corporate collaborations, licensing or similar arrangements, public or private equity offerings and/or debt financings. We currently do not have any commitments for future external funding, except with respect to the development-related payments and milestone payments that may become payable under the Chiesi Agreements. On July 2, 2021, we entered into the Sales Agreement in connection with a new ATM program pursuant to which we may sell from time to time through the Agent ATM Shares having an aggregate offering price of up to $20.0 million. On the same date, we terminated our former ATM program.
Contractual obligations
Our contractual obligations include obligations under our convertible notes, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations, a certain clinical contract and the liability for employee rights upon retirement.
Our convertible senior notes had an aggregate outstanding principal balance of $28.75 million at December 31, 2021. The notes will mature on September 1, 2024 unless earlier purchased, converted, exchanged or redeemed, and interest is payable on the note semi-annually at a rate of 7.50% per annum.
We lease certain assets under operating leases, which expire through 2026, with an option to extend the lease on our main facility to 2031. The leases relate primarily to office, laboratory and manufacturing space and vehicles used by our employees. Our aggregate future minimum commitments under these facility and vehicles leases over the next five fiscal years is approximately $5.1 million as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we are subject to open purchase orders issued to certain suppliers and other vendors mainly in connection with our research and development and manufacturing activities that were outstanding as of December 31, 2021 for approximately $5.1 million over the next five fiscal years.
We have a contractual obligation of approximately $853,000 as of December 31, 2021 payable over the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022. In addition, we enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, CMOs and other third parties for clinical trials, preclinical and other research studies and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation.
As of December 31, 2021, we have a contractual obligation of approximately $2.5 million for employee rights upon retirement.
We are also party to certain research and license agreements. If all of the contingencies with respect to milestone payments under our research and license agreements are met, as of December 31, 2021, the aggregate milestone payments payable would be approximately $8.4 million, and would be payable, if at all, as our projects progress over the course of a number of years. The royalty payments payable by our company in connection with sales of each of our product candidates, if any, shall not exceed low, single-digit percentages of net sales of the relevant product.
Effects of Currency Fluctuations
Currency fluctuations could affect us through increased or decreased acquisition costs for certain goods and services. We do not believe currency fluctuations have had a material effect on our results of operations during the years ended December 31, 2020 or 2021.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Certain recently issued accounting pronouncements are discussed in note 1r of the financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.