Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses 2020 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2021. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
Playa is a leading owner, operator and developer of all-inclusive resorts in prime beachfront locations in popular vacation destinations in Mexico and the Caribbean. As of December 31, 2021, Playa owned and/or managed a total portfolio consisting of 22 resorts (8,366 rooms) located in Mexico, Jamaica, and the Dominican Republic:
•In Mexico, Playa owns and manages Hyatt Zilara Cancún, Hyatt Ziva Cancún, Wyndham Alltra Cancún, Wyndham Alltra Playa del Carmen, Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort, Hyatt Ziva Puerto Vallarta, and Hyatt Ziva Los Cabos;
•In Jamaica, Playa owns and manages Hyatt Zilara Rose Hall, Hyatt Ziva Rose Hall, Hilton Rose Hall Resort & Spa, Jewel Grande Montego Bay Resort & Spa, and Jewel Paradise Cove Beach Resort & Spa;
•In the Dominican Republic, Playa owns and manages the Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Family Resort, the Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Adult Resort, Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana and Hyatt Ziva Cap Cana; and
•Playa owns two resorts in the Dominican Republic that are managed by a third-party and manages five resorts on behalf of third-party owners.
Playa’s strategy is to leverage its globally recognized brand partnerships and proprietary in-house direct booking capabilities to capitalize on the growing popularity of the all-inclusive resort model and reach first-time all-inclusive consumers in a cost effective manner. We believe that this strategy should position us to generate attractive returns for our shareholders, build lasting relationships with our guests, and enhance the lives of our associates and the communities in which we operate.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated a net loss of $89.7 million, total revenue of $534.6 million, Net Package RevPAR of $159.88 and Adjusted EBITDA of $99.2 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, during which time our operations were severely impacted by COVID-19, we generated a net loss of $262.4 million, total revenue of $273.2 million, Net Package RevPAR of $76.61 and Adjusted EBITDA of ($21.2) million.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and the public health measures that have been undertaken in response have had a significant adverse impact on the global economy, the travel and hospitality industries and our business starting in the first quarter of 2020. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including related government restrictions, border closings, quarantines, “shelter-in-place” orders and “social distancing,” as well as overall changes in consumer demand, have significantly disrupted global leisure travel, and have adversely impacted global commercial activity. We expect that the continuing fallout will create headwinds for global travel even after government restrictions are lifted.
Due to the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated restrictions placed on international travel, we temporarily suspended operations at all of our resorts in late March 2020. We subsequently began reopening our resorts on July 1, 2020, but occupancy levels at all of our resorts have remained below historical levels due to the continuing effects of the pandemic. All of our resorts were reopened by December 31, 2020, except for the Capri Resort which was sold in June 2021, and all of our resorts continue to be open as of December 31, 2021.
The suspension of operations at our resorts during part of 2020, and the reduced occupancy at the resorts since they have reopened, adversely affected our liquidity. As of December 31, 2021, we had $270.1 million of available cash, excluding $23.5 million of restricted cash. We took the following measures during the fiscal years 2020 and 2021 to mitigate the impact of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity position:
•raised $224.0 million of additional capital during the second quarter of 2020 from affiliates of Davidson Kempner Capital Management L.P. in the form of $204.0 million of additional debt financing and $20.0 million of equity financing at $4.10 per share;
•sold the Jewel Dunn's River Beach Resort & Spa and the Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020 for a total cash consideration of $60.0 million;
•the temporary suspension of operations of all of our resorts during the second quarter of 2020 significantly reduced the variable cost components of our resort-level operating expenses, including resort franchise and franchise-related fees, management fees and expenses related to our resort employees;
•deferred substantially all of our non-critical capital expenditures planned for 2020 and 2021;
•adopted temporary voluntary senior executive salary reductions while the majority of our resorts were closed, and our Chief Executive Officer’s voluntary 100% salary reduction remained in place through December 31, 2020;
•imposed temporary compensation cuts broadly throughout our corporate workforce and canceled all non-essential corporate travel and spending;
•raised $138.0 million, net of underwriting discounts, of additional capital in January 2021 through an underwritten public equity offering at $5.00 per share;
•paid down the outstanding balance under our Revolving Credit Facility in February 2021 and also amended and extended our existing facility, further extending the covenant waiver period were we to draw the credit line over 35%;
•sold the Dreams Puerto Aventuras in February 2021 for a total cash consideration of $34.5 million; and
•sold the Capri Resort in June 2021 for a total cash consideration of $55.0 million.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact us and consumer behavior will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic, continuing resurgences of the virus and its variants, including the Delta and Omicron variants, the government actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, the speed, continuing effectiveness and distribution of vaccines (including boosters) and treatment therapies, the rate of public adoption of COVID-19 vaccines, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, including the magnitude of its impact on unemployment rates, labor-force availability (including as a result of vaccine mandates), disruption in the supply chain for materials and consumer discretionary spending, among others. We cannot predict when the effects of the pandemic will subside, and thus we cannot predict whether our resorts will be permitted to remain open or when our business will return to normalized or even to break-even levels. There also can be no guarantee that when the effects of the pandemic subside that there will not be continuing resurgences of the virus or that the demand for lodging, and consumer confidence in travel generally, will recover as quickly as other industries. The longer and more severe the pandemic, and the actual occurrence or even the possibility of repeat or cyclical outbreaks of the virus beyond the one currently being experienced, the greater the material adverse effect the pandemic will have on our business, results of operations, cash flows, financial condition, access to credit markets and ability to service our indebtedness. See Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors included elsewhere in this report for additional information.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations on a consolidated basis for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ in thousands):
The tables below set forth information for our total portfolio and our comparable portfolio with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Management Fee Revenue, Total Net Revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. For a description of these operating metrics and non-U.S. GAAP measures, see “Key Indicators of Financial and Operating Performance” below. For discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and reconciliation to the most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, see “Key Indicators of Financial and Operating Performance” and “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures” below.
Our comparable portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2021 excludes the following resorts:
•Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, which were sold in May 2020;
•Dreams Puerto Aventuras, which was sold in February 2021; and
•Capri Resort, which was sold in June 2021.
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Total Revenue and Total Net Revenue
Our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $261.5 million, or 95.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our Total Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $252.9 million, or 96.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of the resumption of resort operations for the entirety of 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed all of our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” above for more information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations. We believe the increase in Total Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was also due to an increase in Net Package ADR as a result of pent-up customer demand following COVID-19 related travel restrictions and vaccine availability, and our strategic decision to focus on pricing discipline to coincide with investments in guest satisfaction at our resorts.
Our Total Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes a $1.3 million favorable value-added tax (“VAT”) impact following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. This VAT adjustment resulted in a $0.94 favorable impact in Net Package ADR. Additionally, Net Package ADR of $309.94 for the year ended December 31, 2021 benefited by an additional $4.95 as a result of a change in billing methodology of an online travel agency (“OTA”), which required Playa to present this revenue gross of commissions under U.S. GAAP. Excluding the aforementioned adjustments, Net Package ADR would have been $304.05.
The following table shows a reconciliation of comparable Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Management Fee Revenue and Total Net Revenue to total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ in thousands):
Direct Expenses
The following table shows a reconciliation of our direct expenses to Net Direct Expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ in thousands):
Our direct expenses include resort expenses, such as food and beverage, salaries and wages, utilities and other ongoing operational expenses. Our Net Direct Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $313.9 million, or 60.9% of Total Net Revenue. Our Net Direct Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $201.8 million, or 76.7% of Total Net Revenue.
Net Direct Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $112.2 million, or 55.6%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of Owned Net Revenue, Net Direct Expenses decreased to 61.3%, compared to 77.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net Direct Expenses at our comparable properties increased $129.2 million, or 71.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Net Direct Expenses was primarily a result of the resumption of resort operations for the entirety of 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed all of our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase was also a result of a higher rate of inflation in 2021 as compared to 2020, particularly in the second half of 2021. See the “Inflation” section for additional discussion. Direct operating expenses fluctuate based on various factors, including changes in occupancy, labor costs, utilities, repair and maintenance costs and license and property taxes. Management fees and franchise fees, which are computed as a percentage of revenue, increase or decrease as a result of changes in revenues.
Net Direct Expenses consists of the following ($ in thousands):
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $15.7 million, or 15.1%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The higher occupancy levels at our resorts in 2021 as compared to 2020 resulted in a $10.3 million increase in commissions expenses, a $5.6 million increase in credit card commissions, and a $4.1 million increase in advertising expense. The increase in commissions expenses includes $6.8 million that was a result of a change in billing methodology of an OTA in 2021, which required Playa to present the commissions on a gross basis under U.S. GAAP. We also experienced a $2.4 million increase in corporate personnel costs due to the reinstatement of full executive and employee salaries and the hiring of additional resources as we recovered from the effects of COVID-19. Additionally, our January 2021 grants of restricted and
performance share awards (see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) drove a $3.0 million increase in share-based compensation expense over the prior year.
These increases in selling, general and administrative expenses were partially offset by a $3.8 million decrease in our provision for doubtful accounts due to the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on tour operators and travel agencies. Additionally, the sales of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020, Dreams Puerto Aventuras in February 2021, and Capri Resort in June 2021 resulted in a $2.1 million decrease in insurance expenses and a $1.2 million decrease in property selling, general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Our depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $11.1 million, or 11.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of a $7.7 million decrease from our dispositions of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020, the Dreams Puerto Aventuras in February 2021, and the Capri Resort in June 2021, and a $1.8 million decrease due to accelerated depreciation incurred in 2020 related to the completion of renovation projects at the Hilton Playa del Carmen All-Inclusive Resort.
Impairment Loss
Our impairment loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $31.6 million, or 56.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by $25.3 million of property and equipment impairment recognized upon classification of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark as held for sale in May 2020 and an additional $10.6 million of property and equipment impairment recognized upon classification of the Dreams Puerto Aventuras as held for sale in November 2020. We also recognized $17.7 million of goodwill impairment resulting from the decrease in forecasted future cash flows during the first quarter of 2020 from the temporary suspension of operations from COVID-19, as we fully impaired the goodwill of our Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Paradise Cove Beach Resort & Spa reporting units and recognized $2.1 million of goodwill impairment losses at the Hilton Rose Hall Resort & Spa reporting unit during the fourth quarter of 2020. These decreases were partially offset by $24.0 million of property and equipment impairment losses recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 upon classification of the Capri Resort as held for sale in March 2021.
Loss on Sale of Assets
Our loss on sale of assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $1.3 million, or 66.6%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the sale of the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark in May 2020, which resulted in a $1.8 million loss during the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized a loss of $0.5 million on the sale of the Capri Resort in June 2021.
Gain on Insurance Proceeds
Our gain on insurance proceeds for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $3.0 million, or 100.0%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of insurance proceeds received for the temporary suspension of operations at all of our resorts in late March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We had no gain on insurance proceeds during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $10.6 million, or 12.9%, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense was driven primarily by $20.2 million related to the change in fair value of our interest rate swaps. In March 2019, we elected to adopt hedge accounting and designate our interest rate swaps as cash flow hedges. After the adoption of hedge accounting, we recorded the change in fair value of our interest rate swaps through other comprehensive income (loss). Due to the significant drop in interest rates during 2020 related to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, our cash flow hedge was deemed ineffective in March 2020, resulting in the recognition of losses on the change in fair value of our interest rate swaps through interest expense. In addition, interest on our Revolving Credit Facility for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $2.6 million compared to the same period last year due to the repayment of the entire outstanding balance in February 2021. These decreases were partially offset by additional interest expense from the Additional Senior Secured Credit Facility and Property Loan of $4.0 million and $4.9 million, respectively, additional interest expense on our Term Loan of $1.5 million, as well as additional discount accretion and financing costs of $1.5 million.
Cash interest paid was $78.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing an $8.9 million, or 12.8% increase as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash interest paid increased due to the Additional Senior Secured Credit Facility and Property Loan of $4.3 million and $4.9 million, respectively, as both agreements were executed in June 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.4 million, a decrease of $3.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, during which we reported an income tax benefit of $11.0 million. The decrease in tax benefit was driven primarily by:
•$44.1 million reduction in tax benefit due to a reduction in book losses;
•$7.9 million reduction in tax benefit due to hybrid tax jurisdictions; and
•$7.8 million reduction in tax benefit due to changes in statutory tax rates.
These decreases were partially offset by:
•$27.4 million increase in tax benefit due to changes in valuation allowances recorded;
•$17.3 million increase in tax benefit from rate-favorable jurisdictions;
•$6.9 million increase in tax benefit due to decreases in non-deductible expenses; and
•$4.9 million increase in tax benefit due to non-recurring goodwill impairments recorded in 2020.
Key Indicators of Financial and Operating Performance
We use a variety of financial and other information to monitor the financial and operating performance of our business. Some of this is financial information prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, while other information, though financial in nature, is not prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. For reconciliations of non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to the most comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, see “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures.” Our management also uses other information that is not financial in nature, including statistical information and comparative data that are commonly used within the lodging industry to evaluate the financial and operating performance of our portfolio. Our management uses this information to measure the performance of our segments and consolidated portfolio. We use this information for planning and monitoring our business, as well as in determining management and employee compensation. These key indicators include:
•Net Package Revenue
•Net Non-package Revenue
•Owned Net Revenue
•Management Fee Revenue
•Total Net Revenue
•Occupancy
•Net Package ADR
•Net Package RevPAR
•Net Direct Expenses
•EBITDA
•Adjusted EBITDA
•Adjusted EBITDA Margin
•Owned Resort EBITDA
•Owned Resort EBITDA Margin
•Comparable Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Management Fee Revenue, Total Net Revenue and Net Direct Expenses
“Net Package Revenue” is derived from the sale of all-inclusive packages, which include room accommodations, food and beverage services, kids club and entertainment activities, net of compulsory tips paid to employees. Government mandated compulsory tips in the Dominican Republic are not included in this adjustment, as they are already excluded from revenue. Revenue is recognized, net of discounts and rebates, when the rooms are occupied and/or the relevant services have been rendered. Advance deposits received from guests are deferred and included in trade and other payables until the rooms are occupied and/or the relevant services have been rendered, at which point the revenue is recognized.
“Net Non-package Revenue” represents all other revenues earned from the operations of our resorts, other than Net Package Revenue, net of compulsory tips paid to employees. Government mandated compulsory tips in the Dominican Republic are not included in this adjustment, as they are already excluded from revenue. Net Non-package Revenue includes revenue associated with guests' purchases of upgrades, premium services and amenities, such as premium rooms, dining experiences, wines and spirits and spa packages, which are not included in the all-inclusive package. Revenue not included in a guest’s all-inclusive package is recognized when the goods are consumed.
“Owned Net Revenue” represents Net Package Revenue and Net Non-Package Revenue. Owned Net Revenue represents a key indicator to assess the overall performance of our business and analyze trends, such as consumer demand, brand preference and competition. In analyzing our Owned Net Revenues, our management differentiates between Net Package Revenue and Net Non-package Revenue. Guests at our resorts purchase packages at stated rates, which include room accommodations, food and beverage services and entertainment activities, in contrast to other lodging business models, which typically only include the room accommodations in the stated rate. The amenities at all-inclusive resorts typically include a variety of buffet and á la carte restaurants, bars, activities, and shows and entertainment throughout the day.
“Management Fee Revenue” is derived from fees earned for managing resorts owned by third-parties. The fees earned are typically composed of a base fee, which is computed as a percentage of resort revenue, and an incentive fee, which is computed as a percentage of resort profitability. Management Fee Revenue was immaterial to our operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, but we expect Management Fee Revenue to be a more relevant indicator to assess the overall performance of our business in the future as we enter into more management contracts.
“Total Net Revenue” represents Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue and Management Fee Revenue. “Cost Reimbursements” is excluded from Total Net Revenue as it is not considered a key indicator of financial and operating performance. Cost reimbursements is derived from the reimbursement of certain costs incurred by Playa on behalf of resorts managed by Playa and owned by third parties. This revenue is fully offset by reimbursable costs and has no net impact on operating income or net income.
“Net Direct Expenses” represents direct expenses, net of compulsory tips paid to employees.
Occupancy
“Occupancy” represents the total number of rooms sold for a period divided by the total number of rooms available during such period. The total number of rooms available excludes any rooms considered “Out of Order” due to renovation or a temporary problem rendering them inadequate for occupancy for an extended period of time. Occupancy is a useful measure of the utilization of a resort’s total available capacity and can be used to gauge demand at a specific resort or group of properties during a given period. Occupancy levels also enable us to optimize Net Package ADR (as defined below) by increasing or decreasing the stated rate for our all-inclusive packages as demand for a resort increases or decreases.
Net Package ADR
“Net Package ADR” represents total Net Package Revenue for a period divided by the total number of rooms sold during such period. Net Package ADR trends and patterns provide useful information concerning the pricing environment and the nature of the guest base of our portfolio or comparable portfolio, as applicable. Net Package ADR is a commonly used performance measure in the all-inclusive segment of the lodging industry, and is commonly used to assess the stated rates that guests are willing to pay through various distribution channels.
Net Package RevPAR
“Net Package RevPAR” is the product of Net Package ADR and the average daily occupancy percentage. Net Package RevPAR does not reflect the impact of non-package revenue. Although Net Package RevPAR does not include this additional revenue, it generally is considered the key performance statistic in the all-inclusive segment of the lodging industry to identify trend information
with respect to net room revenue produced by our portfolio or comparable portfolio, as applicable, and to evaluate operating performance on a consolidated basis or a regional basis, as applicable.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, Owned Resort EBITDA, and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin
We define EBITDA, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, as net income or loss, determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, for the period presented, before interest expense, income tax and depreciation and amortization expense. We define Adjusted EBITDA, a non-U.S. GAAP financial measure, as EBITDA further adjusted to exclude the following items:
•Other income or expense
•Pre-opening expense
•Share-based compensation
•Other tax expense
•Transaction expenses
•Severance expense
•Gain on property damage insurance proceeds
•Loss on extinguishment of debt
•Other items which may include, but are not limited to the following: contract termination fees; gains or losses from legal settlements; repairs from hurricanes and tropical storms; and impairment losses.
We include the non-service cost components of net periodic pension cost recorded within other expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations in calculating Adjusted EBITDA as they are considered part of our ongoing resort operations.
“Adjusted EBITDA Margin” represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of Total Net Revenue.
“Owned Resort EBITDA” represents Adjusted EBITDA before corporate expenses and Management Fee Revenue.
“Owned Resort EBITDA Margin” represents Owned Resort EBITDA as a percentage of Owned Net Revenue.
Usefulness and Limitation of Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
We believe that each of Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Total Net Revenue, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR and Net Direct Expenses are all useful to investors as they more accurately reflect our operating results by excluding compulsory tips. These tips have a margin of zero and do not represent our operating results.
We also believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors for two principal reasons. First, we believe Adjusted EBITDA assists investors in comparing our performance over various reporting periods on a consistent basis by removing from our operating results the impact of items that do not reflect our core operating performance. For example, changes in foreign exchange rates (which are the principal driver of changes in other expense), and expenses related to capital raising, strategic initiatives and other corporate initiatives, such as expansion into new markets (which are the principal drivers of changes in transaction expenses), are not indicative of the operating performance of our resorts. The other adjustments included in our definition of Adjusted EBITDA relate to items that occur infrequently and therefore would obstruct the comparability of our operating results over reporting periods. For example, revenue from insurance policies, other than business interruption insurance policies, is infrequent in nature, and we believe excluding these expense and revenue items permits investors to better evaluate the core operating performance of our resorts over time. We believe Adjusted EBITDA Margin provides our investors a useful measurement of operating profitability for the same reasons we find Adjusted EBITDA useful.
The second principal reason that we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors is that it is considered a key performance indicator by our board of directors (our “Board”) and management. In addition, the compensation committee of our Board determines the annual variable compensation for certain members of our management based, in part, on consolidated Adjusted EBITDA. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors because it provides investors with information utilized by our Board and management to assess our performance and may (subject to the limitations described below) enable investors to compare the performance of our portfolio to our competitors.
Our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures are not substitutes for revenue, net income or any other measure determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP. There are limitations to the utility of non-U.S. GAAP financial measures, such as Adjusted EBITDA.
For example, other companies in our industry may define Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. As a result, it may be difficult to use Adjusted EBITDA or similarly named non-U.S. GAAP financial measures that other companies publish to compare the performance of those companies to our performance. Because of these limitations, our non-U.S. GAAP financial measures should not be considered as a measure of the income or loss generated by our business or discretionary cash available for investment in our business, and investors should carefully consider our U.S. GAAP results presented.
For a reconciliation of EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA to net loss as computed under U.S. GAAP, see “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures.”
Comparable Non-U.S. GAAP Measures
We believe that presenting Adjusted EBITDA, Total Net Revenue, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue and Net Direct Expenses on a comparable basis is useful to investors because these measures include only the results of resorts owned and in operation for the entirety of the periods presented and thereby eliminate disparities in results due to the acquisition or disposition of resorts or the impact of resort closures or re-openings in connection with redevelopment or renovation projects. As a result, we believe these measures provide more consistent metrics for comparing the performance of our operating resorts. We calculate Comparable Adjusted EBITDA, Comparable Total Net Revenue, Comparable Net Package Revenue and Comparable Net Non-package Revenue as the total amount of each respective measure less amounts attributable to non-comparable resorts, by which we mean resorts that were not owned or in operation during some or all of the relevant reporting period.
Our comparable resorts for the year ended December 31, 2021 exclude the following resorts: Jewel Dunn's River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, which were sold in May 2020, Dreams Puerto Aventuras, which was sold in February 2021, and Capri Resort, which was sold in June 2021.
A reconciliation of net income as computed under U.S. GAAP to comparable Adjusted EBITDA is presented in “Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures,” below. For a reconciliation of Comparable Net Package Revenue, Comparable Net Non-package Revenue, Comparable Management Fee Revenue and Comparable Total Net Revenue to total revenue as computed under U.S. GAAP, see “Results of Operations.”
Segment Results
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
We evaluate our business segment operating performance using segment Owned Net Revenue and segment Owned Resort EBITDA. The following tables summarize segment Owned Net Revenue and segment Owned Resort EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ in thousands):
For a reconciliation of segment Owned Net Revenue and segment Owned Resort EBITDA to total revenue and net income or loss, respectively, each as computed under U.S. GAAP, see Note 18 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Yucatán Peninsula
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Yucatán Peninsula segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the total segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio:
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Segment Comparable Owned Net Revenue. Our Comparable Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $93.3 million, or 98.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe this increase was primarily a result of pent-up customer demand following COVID-19 related travel restrictions and vaccine availability, and our strategic decision to focus on pricing discipline to coincide with investments in guest satisfaction at our resorts, but also due to the following:
•the resorts being open for the entirety of 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•a $10.15 favorable Comparable Net Package ADR impact as a result of a change in billing methodology of an OTA, which requires Playa to present this revenue gross of commissions under U.S. GAAP; and
•a $2.43 favorable Comparable Net Package ADR impact driven by a favorable $1.1 million VAT adjustment to Comparable Owned Net Revenue following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Excluding the aforementioned adjustments, Comparable Net Package ADR would have been $324.57 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Compared to 2019, Comparable Net Package ADR for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $60.61, or 21.9%. Excluding the aforementioned adjustments, the increase would have been $48.03, or 17.4%.
Segment Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $42.3 million, or 227.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were a result of the on-going
revenue recovery, particularly the strong Comparable Net Package ADR increases compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pacific Coast
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Pacific Coast segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the total segment portfolio:
Segment Owned Net Revenue. Our Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $43.7 million, or 132.3%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We believe the increase was primarily a result of pent-up customer demand following COVID-19 related travel restrictions and vaccine availability, and our strategic decision to focus on pricing discipline to coincide with investments in guest satisfaction at our resorts, but also due to the following:
•the resorts being open for the entirety of 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•an $11.44 favorable Net Package ADR impact as a result of a change in billing methodology of an OTA, which requires Playa to present this revenue gross of commissions under U.S. GAAP; and
•an $0.85 favorable Net Package ADR impact driven by a $0.2 million favorable VAT adjustment to Owned Net Revenue following OECD guidelines for Transfer Pricing for Multinational Enterprises as a result of the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Excluding the aforementioned adjustments, Net Package ADR would have been $349.99 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Compared to 2019, Net Package ADR for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $77.29, or 27.1%. Excluding the aforementioned adjustments, the increase would have been $65.00, or 22.8%.
Segment Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $19.5 million, or 455.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were a result of the on-going revenue recovery, particularly the strong Net Package ADR increases compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Dominican Republic
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Dominican Republic segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the total segment portfolio:
Total Portfolio
Segment Owned Net Revenue. Our Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $99.9 million, or 200.2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was a result of the resorts being open for the entirety of 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Compared to 2019, Net Package ADR for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $72.22, or 37.9%. This increase was driven by the opening of the premium-positioned Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana resorts in the fourth quarter of 2019, the renovation of the Hilton La Romana All-Inclusive Resort, and our strategic decision to focus on pricing discipline to coincide with investments in guest satisfaction at our resorts.
Segment Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $44.8 million, or 669.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were a result of the on-going revenue recovery, particularly the strong Net Package ADR increases compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Jamaica
The following tables set forth information with respect to our Occupancy, Net Package ADR, Net Package RevPAR, Net Package Revenue, Net Non-package Revenue, Owned Net Revenue, Owned Resort EBITDA and Owned Resort EBITDA Margin for our Jamaica segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 for the total segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio and comparable segment portfolio:
Total Portfolio
Comparable Portfolio
Segment Comparable Owned Net Revenue. Our Comparable Owned Net Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $38.7 million, or 66.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were a result of the resorts being open for the entirety of 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Compared to 2019, Comparable Net Package ADR for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $3.32, or 1.0%. This decrease is due to more stringent COVID-19 related travel restrictions in Jamaica compared to the other regions where we operate.
Segment Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA. Our Comparable Owned Resort EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $17.1 million, or 624.4%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were a result of the on-going revenue recovery, particularly the strong Comparable Net Package ADR increases compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, when we closed our resorts for the second quarter of 2020 and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
Reconciliation of Net Income to Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization)
The following is a reconciliation of our U.S. GAAP net income or loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 ($ in thousands):
________
(a) Represents changes in foreign exchange and other miscellaneous expenses or income.
(b) Represents expenses incurred in connection with corporate initiatives, such as: system implementations; debt refinancing costs; other capital raising efforts; and strategic initiatives, such as the launch of a new resort or possible expansion into new markets.
(c) Represents expenses incurred for employee terminations.
(d) Relates primarily to a Dominican Republic asset/revenue tax, which is an alternative tax to income tax in the Dominican Republic. We eliminate this expense from Adjusted EBITDA because it is similar to the income tax provision we eliminate from our calculation of EBITDA.
(e) Represents expenses incurred that are not covered by insurance claims nor offset by insurance proceeds.
(f) Represents the non-service cost components of net periodic pension (cost) benefit recorded within other expense in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. We include these benefits or costs for calculating Adjusted EBITDA as they are considered part of our ongoing resort operations.
(g) Our comparable resorts for the year ended December 31, 2021 exclude the following resorts: Jewel Dunn's River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, which were sold in May 2020, Dreams Puerto Aventuras, which was sold in February 2021, and Capri Resort, which was sold in June 2021.
Seasonality
The seasonality of the lodging industry and the location of our resorts in Mexico, Jamaica and the Dominican Republic have historically resulted in the greatest demand for our resorts between mid-December and April of each year, yielding higher occupancy levels and package rates during this period. This seasonality in demand has resulted in predictable fluctuations in revenue, results of operations and liquidity, which are consistently higher during the first quarter of each year than in successive quarters.
However, the COVID-19 pandemic altered this seasonal trend in both 2020 and 2021 and Net Package ADR was progressively stronger during the second, third and fourth quarters of 2021 than it was in the first quarter of 2021. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” for more information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations.
Inflation
We experienced a higher rate of inflation in our direct resort expenses in 2021 as compared to 2020, particularly in the second half of 2021, which was approximately 200 basis points higher than the first half of 2021. Inflation effects were experienced mostly through higher labor costs, food and beverage prices, and utility costs. We expect this trend will likely continue at least through the first half of 2022, but it could continue for longer. While we, like most operators of lodging properties, have the ability to adjust room rates to reflect the effects of inflation, competitive pricing pressures and the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic may limit our ability to raise room rates to fully offset inflationary cost increases. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” above for more information regarding the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The suspension of operations at our resorts during part of 2020, and the reduced occupancy at the resorts since they have reopened, has adversely affected our liquidity. Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.6 million, representing a significant increase over 2020, but we expect that our cash flows from operations will be adversely affected for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and for a transitional period thereafter. See “Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic” above for information regarding the significant measures we took to preserve our available cash and improve our liquidity position during 2020 and 2021. Based on these actions, we believe that our sources of cash, which consist of available cash and cash from operations, together with the available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility and our access to the capital markets, will be adequate to meet our cash requirements, including our contractual obligations, over the next twelve months and beyond.
Sources of Cash
As of December 31, 2021, we had $270.1 million of available cash, excluding restricted cash, up from $146.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase in available cash was primarily due to improved performance across our portfolio due to the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and our resorts being open for the entirety of 2021 as compared to 2020, during which time we closed all of our resorts for the second quarter and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters. We also benefited from pent-up customer demand following the easing of COVID-19 related travel restrictions and increased public adoption of vaccines, as well as our strategic decision to focus on pricing discipline to coincide with investments in guest satisfaction at our resorts. This combination of factors allowed us to generate positive resort-level cash flow starting in the second quarter of 2021.
Additionally, we received cash proceeds from our public equity offering of ordinary shares of $137.7 million in January 2021, our sale of the Dreams Puerto Aventuras for $34.5 million in February 2021, and sale of the Capri Resort for $55.0 million in June 2021, all of which further improved our liquidity position. These increases were partially offset by the repayment of our outstanding Revolving Credit Facility balance of $84.7 million and the Term Loan and Term A3 Loan principal repayments of $25.1 million resulting from the sale of Capri Resort. As of January 31, 2022, we had approximately $275.6 million of available cash, excluding $22.4 million of restricted cash, and also had $85.0 million available on our Revolving Credit Facility, of which $68.0 million does not mature until January 2024.
We expect to meet our long-term liquidity requirements generally through the sources of cash available for short-term needs, net cash provided by operations, as well as equity or debt issuances or proceeds from the potential disposal of assets.
Cash Requirements
Our expected material cash requirements for the twelve months ended December 31, 2022 and thereafter consist of (i) contractually obligated expenditures, including payments of principal and interest; (ii) other essential expenditures, including operating expenses and maintenance of our resorts; and (iii) opportunistic expenditures, including possible property developments, expansions, renovations, repositioning and rebranding projects, potential acquisitions, the repayment of indebtedness and discretionary repurchases of our securities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $127.8 million of scheduled contractual obligations in 2022, which primarily relate to servicing our outstanding debt and mandatory Term Loan repayments resulting from the sales of our resorts in 2020 and 2021. Refer to the table below for a summary of our contractual commitments.
________
(1)The commitment fee, which may range from 0.25% to 0.5% depending on certain leverage ratios, was 0.5% on the $85.0 million undrawn balance of our Revolving Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021.
(2)The interest commitment on our Term Loan is calculated based on LIBOR plus 275 basis points with a 1.0% LIBOR floor and the estimated net settlement of the related interest rate swaps. Projected interest rates range between 3.75% and 5.60%. Interest payments were calculated using the forecasted one-month forward-looking LIBOR curve.
(3)Under the terms of the Existing Credit Agreement and Second Amendment, we are required to use the net proceeds from the sale of assets, subject to certain exceptions, to repay the proportionate balance on our Senior Secured Credit Facility and Term A3 Loan. See Note 4, “Property and equipment,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
In addition, as of December 31, 2021 we have budgeted between $30.0 million and $35.0 million of capital expenditures for 2022, a vast majority of which is related to maintenance of our resorts.
We are continuing to monitor our liquidity and we may pursue additional sources of liquidity as needed. The availability of additional liquidity options will depend on the economic and financial environment, our credit, our historical and projected financial and operating performance and continued compliance with financial covenants. If operating conditions do not improve, whether as a result of the current pandemic or a resurgence thereof or for other reasons, we may not be able to maintain our current liquidity position or access additional sources of liquidity at acceptable terms or at all.
Financing Strategy
We intend to use other financing sources that may be available to us from time to time, including financing from banks, institutional investors or other lenders, such as bridge loans, letters of credit, joint ventures and other arrangements. Future financings may be unsecured or may be secured by mortgages or other interests in our assets. In addition, we may issue publicly or privately placed debt or equity securities. When possible and desirable, we will seek to replace short-term financing with long-term financing. We may use the proceeds from any financings to refinance existing indebtedness, to finance resort projects or acquisitions or for general working capital or other purposes.
Our indebtedness may be recourse, non-recourse or cross-collateralized and may be fixed rate or variable rate. If the indebtedness is non-recourse, the obligation to repay such indebtedness will generally be limited to the particular resort or resorts pledged to secure such indebtedness. In addition, we may invest in resorts subject to existing loans secured by mortgages or similar liens on the resorts or may refinance resorts acquired on a leveraged basis.
Recent Transactions Affecting Our Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our net cash provided by or used in operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the periods indicated and should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and accompanying notes thereto included in the Consolidated Financial Statements ($ in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our net cash from operating activities is generated primarily from operating income from our resorts. Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.6 million, compared to $99.9 million of net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to improved performance across our portfolio due to the ongoing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and our resorts being open for the entirety of 2021 as compared to 2020, during which time we closed all of our resorts for the second quarter and experienced severely reduced occupancy during the third and fourth quarters.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net cash provided by investing activities was $73.4 million and $29.4 million, respectively.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2021:
•Net proceeds from the sale of assets, including the Capri Resort and Dreams Puerto Aventuras, of $89.2 million;
•Purchases of property and equipment, which primarily consisted of maintenance expenditures, of $17.3 million;
•Purchases of intangible assets, which primarily related to our integrated enterprise resource planning system, of $0.3 million; and
•Receipt of key money of $1.9 million in accordance with the terms of our franchise agreements.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Net proceeds from the sale of assets, including the Jewel Dunn’s River Beach Resort & Spa and Jewel Runaway Bay Beach Resort & Waterpark, of $58.3 million;
•Purchases of property and equipment of $36.4 million
◦Included $18.7 million in payments for prior year non-cash purchases of property and equipment related to our Hilton renovation projects and construction of the Hyatt Ziva and Hyatt Zilara Cap Cana;
•Purchases of intangible assets of $1.0 million; and
•Receipt of key money of $8.5 million in accordance with the terms of our franchise agreements.
Capital Expenditures
We maintain each of our properties in good repair and condition and in conformity with applicable laws and regulations, franchise and license agreements and management agreements. Capital expenditures made to extend the service life or increase the capacity of our assets, including expenditures for the replacement, improvement or expansion of existing capital assets (i.e., maintenance capital expenditures), differ from ongoing repair and maintenance expense items, which do not in our judgment extend the service life or
increase the capacity of assets and are charged to expense as incurred. We have approval rights over capital expenditures made by our third-party manager as part of the annual budget process for each property they manage. From time to time, certain of our resorts may be undergoing renovations as a result of our decision to upgrade portions of the resorts, such as guestrooms, public space, meeting space, gyms, spas and/or restaurants, in order to better compete with other resorts in our markets. Due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity, we deferred substantially all potential development, expansion, renovation, repositioning and rebranding projects in 2020 and 2021.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Our net cash provided by financing activities was $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $222.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2021:
•Net proceeds from our January 2021 equity issuance of $137.7 million;
•Principal payments on our Term Loan, including the repayments as a result of the sale of Capri Resort, of $34.5 million; and
•Repayments on our Revolving Credit Facility of $84.7 million.
Activity for the year ended December 31, 2020:
•Net proceeds from our June 2020 debt issuance of $199.6 million;
•Proceeds from borrowings on our Revolving Credit Facility of $40.0 million;
•Net proceeds from our June 2020 equity issuance of $19.6 million;
•Quarterly principal payments on our Term Loan of $10.1 million;
•Issuance costs of debt of $8.7 million;
•Repayments on our Revolving Credit Facility of $15.3 million; and
•Purchases of ordinary shares of $2.5 million.
Share Repurchases and Dividends
On December 14, 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100.0 million of our outstanding ordinary shares as means of returning capital to our shareholders. Repurchases may be made from time to time in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions or by other means (including Rule 10b5-1 trading plans). Depending on market conditions and other factors, these repurchases may be commenced or suspended from time to time without prior notice. We have purchased a total of 2,178,837 shares and there was approximately $83.5 million remaining under our share repurchase authorization as of December 31, 2021. As part of our cash preservation efforts given our liquidity position as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we suspended repurchases of our ordinary shares under our share repurchase program during 2020 and 2021. However, given the rapidly changing environment, we may consider repurchases of our ordinary shares in the future in order to enhance shareholder returns and optimize our balance sheet.
We also do not plan on paying cash dividends on our ordinary shares in the foreseeable future. No cash dividends were paid for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Senior Secured Credit Facility, Additional Credit Facility and Property Loan
As of December 31, 2021, our total debt obligations were $1,151.2 million which represents the principal amounts outstanding under our term loan (the “Term Loan”) and revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility,” and, collectively with the Term Loan, the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”), our additional senior secured credit facility (the “Additional Credit Facility”), our property loan agreement (the “Property Loan”) and finance lease obligations, excluding $4.3 million of issuance discounts and $7.7 million of unamortized debt issuance costs.
For discussion of our debt obligations, refer to Note 13 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, trade and other receivables, accounts receivable from related parties, certain prepayments and other assets, trade and other payables, payables to related parties, derivative financial instruments, other liabilities, including our pension obligation, and debt. See Note 15, “Fair value of financial instruments,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Related Party Transactions
See Note 6, “Related party transactions,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information on these transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our Consolidated Financial Statements included herein have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts and related disclosures. A number of our significant accounting policies are critical due to the fact that they involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or area reasonable likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations. We believe our estimates, assumptions and judgments with respect to such policies are reasonable based upon information presently available. However, actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments or conditions, which could have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations and related disclosures.
Property and equipment, net - Estimating useful lives of property and equipment
Property and equipment are recorded at cost and depreciated using the straight-line method over an estimated useful life of five to 50 years for buildings, seven to 18 years for fixtures and machinery and four to 12 years for furniture and other fixed assets.
We are required to apply judgment in determining the estimated useful lives of our property and equipment for purposes of calculating the amount of depreciation expense to record each year with respect to the assets. Changes to the significant assumptions or estimates of useful lives could materially affect our results of operations; however, there were no significant changes to our estimates of useful lives during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Property and equipment, net - Estimates related to the impairment of property and equipment
We are required to apply judgment in determining whether indicators of impairment are present at one or more of our asset groups, or resorts. The determination as to whether a triggering event exists is based on our knowledge of the industry, historical experience, market and economic conditions, the business climate, our operations and other relevant facts and circumstances as of the assessment date. If we determine that an indicator is present, we compare the carrying amount of the asset group to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows and measure the amount of the impairment loss by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to its estimated fair value.
Judgment is also required in estimating the fair value of our resorts when quantitatively assessing an asset group for impairment. When determining fair value, we generally rely on discounted cash flow models. Under the discounted cash flow approach, we utilize various assumptions and estimates including projections of revenues and expenses based on estimated long-term growth rates and discount rates based on the weighted-average cost of capital. Our estimates of long-term growth and costs are based on historical data as well as various internal projections and external sources. The weighted-average cost of capital is estimated based on each resort's cost of debt and equity and a selected capital structure.
As of December 31, 2021, incorporating a 5.0% decline in our underlying undiscounted future cash flow projections would not result in the estimated cash flows falling below the carrying value for any of our asset groups. However, the future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and difficult to predict, and may change the estimates and assumptions used in our qualitative or quantitative property and equipment impairment testing, which could result in future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Income taxes - Estimates related to tax liabilities and realization of deferred tax assets
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between the financial statement bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities using currently enacted tax rates for the period in which the deferred tax items are expected to reverse. Significant judgment is required in the calculation of our tax provision and the resulting tax liabilities as well as our ability to realize our deferred tax assets. Our estimates of future taxable income can significantly affect our tax provision in a given period. Significant judgment is required in determining our ability to realize our deferred tax assets related to federal, state and foreign tax attributes
within their carryforward periods, as we estimate the amount and timing of the future reversal of deferred tax items in our projections of future taxable income. We establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts we expect to realize in the future.
We recognize income tax positions only when we estimate that it is “more likely than not” that the position will be sustainable based on its technical merits. Assumptions, judgment and the use of estimates are required in determining if the “more likely than not” standard has been met when developing our provision for income taxes. Changes to the assessment of the “more likely than not” standard could materially impact our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill - Estimates related to the impairment of goodwill
Goodwill is reviewed for impairment annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate a potential impairment.
We are required to apply judgment in determining whether indicators of impairment are present at one or more of our reporting units. The determination as to whether a triggering event exists is based on our knowledge of the industry, historical experience, market and economic conditions, the business climate and other relevant facts and circumstances as of the assessment date.
Judgment is also required in estimating the fair value of our reporting units. Under the discounted cash flow approach, we utilize various assumptions and estimates including projections of revenues and expenses based on estimated growth rates and discount rates based on the weighted-average cost of capital. Our estimates of growth and costs are based on historical data as well as various internal projections and external sources. The weighted-average cost of capital is estimated based on each reporting unit's cost of debt and equity and a selected capital structure. Under the market transaction approach, we rely on assumptions and estimates including comparable asset sales.
Our most recent annual goodwill impairment test was performed on July 1, 2021 and October 1, 2021 for our Yucatán Peninsula and Jamaica reporting units, respectively. As of each testing date, incorporating a 5.0% decline in our underlying cash flow projections or a 1.0% increase in the discount rate or the terminal capitalization rate would not result in material impairment of goodwill at any reporting unit. However, the future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and difficult to predict, and may change the estimates and assumptions used in our qualitative or quantitative goodwill impairment testing, which could result in future impairment losses that could be material to our results of operations.
Derivative financial instruments - Estimating future one-month LIBOR
We use derivative financial instruments, primarily interest rate swap contracts, to hedge our exposure to interest rate risk. Such derivative financial instruments are initially recorded at fair value on the date on which a derivative contract is entered into and are subsequently remeasured to fair value at period end. Changes in the fair value of a derivative contract that is qualified, designated and highly effective as a cash flow hedge are recorded in total other comprehensive loss and reclassified into interest expense in the same period or periods during which the hedged transaction affects earnings. If a derivative contract does not meet this criteria, then the change in fair value is recognized in earnings. The fair value of our interest rate swaps is the present value of estimated future cash flows, calculated as the difference between the fixed rate paid by us and the variable rate received from our counterparty, multiplied by the notional principal amount.
The fair value of our interest rate swaps at period end is most significantly affected by our estimate of future one-month London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) interest rates through the contractual period to maturity. It is also affected by changes in our own and our counterparty's specific credit risk, which are incorporated into the credit valuation adjustment, as well as the discount rate applied to our estimated future cash flows of the interest rate swaps. Changes to these significant inputs or estimates could materially affect our recorded interest expense and our results of operations.
As of December 31, 2021, incorporating a 50 basis point decrease in the forecasted one-month LIBOR rates through the maturity date of our derivative financial instruments would result in a $5.1 million impact to our results of operations by increasing interest expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the recent accounting pronouncements in the “Accounting standards” section of Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.