Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the consolidated financial statements and related notes contained in Item 8, and the discussion of risks and cautionary factors that may affect future results in Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Description of Our Company
We are a leading international tobacco company working to deliver a smoke-free future and evolving our portfolio for the long-term to include products outside of the tobacco and nicotine sector. Our current product portfolio primarily consists of cigarettes and reduced-risk products, including heat-not-burn, vapor and oral nicotine products, which are sold in markets outside the United States. Since 2008, we have invested more than $9 billion to develop, scientifically substantiate and commercialize innovative smoke-free products for adults who would otherwise continue to smoke, with the goal of completely ending the sale of cigarettes. This includes the building of world-class scientific assessment capabilities, notably in the areas of pre-clinical systems toxicology, clinical and behavioral research, as well as post-market studies. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") has authorized the marketing of a version of PMI’s IQOS Platform 1 device and consumables as a Modified Risk Tobacco Product (MRTP), finding that an exposure modification order for these products is appropriate to promote the public health. We describe the MRTP order in more detail in the "Business Environment" section of this Item 7. With a strong foundation and significant expertise in life sciences, in February 2021, we announced our ambition to expand into wellness and healthcare areas and deliver innovative products and solutions that aim to address unmet patient and consumer needs.
In the third quarter of 2021, our former Latin America & Canada segment was renamed as the Americas segment.
We currently manage our business in six geographical segments and an Other category:
•European Union ("EU");
•Eastern Europe ("EE");
•Middle East & Africa ("ME&A"), which includes our international duty free business;
•South & Southeast Asia ("S&SA");
•East Asia & Australia ("EA&A");
•Americas ("AMCS"); and
•Other, which includes our third quarter 2021 acquisitions of Fertin Pharma A/S, Vectura Group plc. (also known as Vectura Group Ltd.) and OtiTopic, Inc. For further details, see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions, and Item 8, Note 12. Segment Reporting.
Our cigarettes are sold in approximately 180 markets, and in many of these markets they hold the number one or number two market share position. We have a wide range of premium, mid-price and low-price brands. Our portfolio comprises both international and local brands.
In addition to the manufacture and sale of cigarettes, we are engaged in the development and commercialization of reduced-risk products ("RRPs"). RRPs is the term we use to refer to products that present, are likely to present, or have the potential to present less risk of harm to smokers who switch to these products versus continuing smoking. IQOS is the leading brand in our smoke-free product portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, our smoke-free products are available for sale in 71 markets in key cities or nationwide.
During 2021, we laid the foundation for our long-term growth ambitions beyond nicotine in wellness and healthcare, including the milestone acquisitions of Vectura Group plc and Fertin Pharma A/S which provide essential capabilities for future product development.
We use the term net revenues to refer to our operating revenues from the sale of our products, including shipping and handling charges billed to customers, net of sales and promotion incentives, and excise taxes. Our net revenues and operating income are
affected by various factors, including the volume of products we sell, the price of our products, changes in currency exchange rates and the mix of products we sell. Mix is a term used to refer to the proportionate value of premium-price brands to mid-price or low-price brands in any given market (product mix). Mix can also refer to the proportion of shipment volume in more profitable markets versus shipment volume in less profitable markets (geographic mix).
Our cost of sales consists principally of: tobacco leaf, non-tobacco raw materials, labor and manufacturing costs; shipping and handling costs; and the cost of devices produced by third-party electronics manufacturing service providers. Estimated costs associated with device warranty programs are generally provided for in cost of sales in the period the related revenues are recognized.
Our marketing, administration and research costs include the costs of marketing and selling our products, other costs generally not related to the manufacture of our products (including general corporate expenses), and costs incurred to develop new products. The most significant components of our marketing, administration and research costs are marketing and sales expenses and general and administrative expenses.
Philip Morris International Inc. is a legal entity separate and distinct from its direct and indirect subsidiaries. Accordingly, our right, and thus the right of our creditors and stockholders, to participate in any distribution of the assets or earnings of any subsidiary is subject to the prior rights of creditors of such subsidiary, except to the extent that claims of our company itself as a creditor may be recognized. As a holding company, our principal sources of funds, including funds to make payment on our debt securities, are from the receipt of dividends and repayment of debt from our subsidiaries. Our principal wholly owned and majority-owned subsidiaries currently are not limited by long-term debt or other agreements in their ability to pay cash dividends or to make other distributions that are otherwise compliant with law.
Executive Summary
The following executive summary provides the business update and significant highlights from the Discussion and Analysis that follows.
Consolidated Operating Results
•Net Revenues - Net revenues of $31.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $2.7 billion, or 9.4%, from the comparable 2020 amount, and were impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, particular in 2020. The change in our net revenues from the comparable 2020 amount was driven by the following (variances not to scale):
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 6.7%, mainly reflecting: favorable volume/mix, primarily driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume (notably in the EU, particularly Germany, Hungary, Italy and Poland, as well as Japan, Russia and Ukraine), and higher device volume (notably in the EU, primarily Italy, and Japan, partly offset by South Korea), partially offset by lower cigarette volume (mainly in the EU Region, notably the Czech Republic, France and Germany, as well as the GCC, North Africa, the Philippines, Russia and Ukraine, partly offset by India, Indonesia, PMI Duty Free and Turkey) and unfavorable cigarette mix (primarily in Germany, Japan and Russia, partially offset by Indonesia and PMI Duty Free); and a favorable pricing variance (notably driven by the Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russia and Turkey, partly offset by Australia, Indonesia, Poland and Ukraine); partially offset by the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments of $246 million, included in "Other" and further described in the following "Diluted Earnings Per Share" discussion.
This net revenue growth reflects the continued strength of IQOS, and the recovery of the combustible business in many markets from the low base in 2020 due to the impact of COVID-19.
Net revenues by product category for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, are shown below:
Net revenues in the Other category primarily consist of operating revenues generated from the sale of inhaled therapeutics, and oral and intra-oral delivery systems resulting from the third quarter 2021 acquisitions of Fertin Pharma A/S, Vectura Group plc. and OtiTopic, Inc.
•Diluted Earnings Per Share - The changes in our reported diluted earnings per share (“diluted EPS”) for the year ended December 31, 2021, from the comparable 2020 amounts, were as follows:
Asset impairment and exit costs - During 2020, we recorded pre-tax asset impairment and exit costs of $149 million, representing $124 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.08 per share, related to the organizational design optimization plan,
primarily in Switzerland. During 2021, we recorded pre-tax asset impairment and exit costs of $216 million, representing $181 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.12 per share, related to the organizational design optimization plan, primarily in Switzerland, and the product distribution restructuring in South Korea. The total pre-tax charges in 2020 and 2021 were included in marketing, administration and research costs on the consolidated statements of earnings. For further details, see Item 8, Note 19. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs.
Brazil indirect tax credit - Following a final and enforceable decision by the highest court in Brazil in October 2020, we recorded a gain of $119 million for tax credits in 2020 ($79 million net of income tax and $0.05 per share increase in diluted EPS) representing overpayments of indirect taxes for the period from March 2012 through December 2019; these tax credits were applied to tax liabilities in Brazil during 2021. This amount was included as a reduction in marketing, administration and research costs in the consolidated statements of earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020, and was included in the operating income of the Americas segment. An additional amount of overpaid indirect taxes of approximately $90 million is dependent on a potential tax authority challenge.
Fair Value adjustment for equity security investments - During 2020, we recorded an unfavorable fair value adjustment for our equity security investments of $60 million after tax (or $0.04 per share decrease in diluted EPS). The fair value adjustment for our equity security investments was included in equity investments and securities (income)/loss, net ($76 million loss) and provision for income taxes ($16 million benefit) on the consolidated statements of earnings in 2020. For further details, see Item 8, Note 4. Related Parties - Equity Investments and Other.
Income taxes - The 2020 Tax items that increased our 2020 diluted EPS by $0.06 per share in the table above were due to final U.S. tax regulations under the Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income ("GILTI") provisions of the Internal Revenue Code for years 2018 and 2019 ($93 million).
The change in the tax rate that increased our diluted EPS by $0.08 per share in the table above was primarily due to the corporate income tax rate reduction in the Philippines (enacted in the first quarter of 2021), as well as changes in earnings mix by taxing jurisdiction. For further details, see Item 8, Note 11. Income Taxes.
Saudi Arabia customs assessments - In June 2021, the Customs Appeal Committee in Riyadh notified our distributors in Saudi Arabia of its decisions to largely reject their challenges of the Saudi Arabia Customs General Authority assessments as described in Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies. On the basis of these decisions and in line with arrangements with the distributors, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $246 million in the second quarter of 2021 (representing $215 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.14 per share). The pre-tax charge was recorded as a reduction of net revenues on the consolidated statement of earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021, and was included in the Middle East & Africa segment results.
Asset acquisition cost - In August 2021, we acquired 100% of OtiTopic, Inc., a U.S. respiratory drug development company with a late-stage dry powder inhalation aspirin treatment for acute myocardial infarction. We accounted for this transaction as an asset acquisition since the acquired in-process research and development ("IPR&D") of the dry powder inhalation aspirin treatment represented substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired. At the date of acquisition, we determined that the acquired IPR&D had no alternative future use. As a result, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $51 million (representing a $0.03 per share charge to diluted EPS) to research and development costs within marketing, administration and research costs in the consolidated statements of earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021. For further details, see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions.
Equity investee ownership dilution - In 2021, our equity method investee, Medicago Inc, initiated additional rounds of equity funding in which we did not participate. As a result, our share of holdings in Medicago Inc. was reduced from approximately 32% to approximately 23% as of December 31, 2021. The ownership dilution resulted in a $0.04 per share favorable impact to diluted EPS and income of $55 million to Equity investments and securities (income)/loss, net in the consolidated statements of earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021. For further details, see Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies - Third Party Guarantees.
Currency - The favorable impact of $0.12 per share during the reporting period primarily results from the fluctuations of the U.S. dollar, especially against the Euro. This favorable currency movement has impacted our profitability across our primary revenue markets and local currency cost bases.
Operations - The increase in diluted EPS of $0.71 per share from our operations in the table above was due primarily to the following segments:
•European Union: Favorable volume/mix, lower manufacturing costs and favorable pricing, partially offset by higher marketing, administration and research costs;
•Middle East & Africa: Favorable pricing, favorable volume/mix and lower manufacturing costs, partially offset by lower
fees for certain distribution rights and higher marketing, administration and research costs;
•Eastern Europe: Favorable volume/mix, lower manufacturing costs, favorable pricing and lower marketing, administration and research costs;
•East Asia & Australia: Favorable pricing and lower manufacturing costs, partially offset by higher marketing, administration and research costs; and
•Americas: Favorable pricing and lower marketing, administration and research costs, partially offset by higher manufacturing costs;
partially offset by
•South & Southeast Asia: Unfavorable pricing, unfavorable volume/mix and higher marketing, administration and research costs.
For further details, see the Consolidated Operating Results and Operating Results by Business Segment sections of the following Discussion and Analysis.
IQOS Device Supply
The current global semiconductor shortage has resulted in a tightness in IQOS device supply in the second half of 2021. In the fourth quarter of 2021, the IQOS device supply situation eased, resulting in an improved IQOS user growth versus the third quarter. We expect an improving IQOS device supply situation, with a gradual return to an unconstrained IQOS user quarterly growth progression. However, we still do not have full visibility over the full year 2022.
IQOS in the United States
On November 29, 2021, an importation ban and cease-and-desist orders imposed by the U.S. International Trade Commission ("ITC") relating to IQOS Platform 1 products (including consumables and infringing components) went into effect. As a result, IQOS is not currently available for sale in the U.S. We have appealed the patent and statutory issues related to the ITC's Final Determination, and also have contingency plans underway, including domestic production. We hope to be able to resume U.S. supply in the first half of 2023. For more details on the ITC case and related legal matters, please refer to Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies.
The ITC decision has no bearing outside the U.S.; competitor lawsuits based on the same patent families have repeatedly and universally failed in European courts and the European Patent Office.
Acquisitions
During 2021, PMI acquired the following companies:
•Vectura Group plc, an inhaled therapeutics company based in the United Kingdom;
•Fertin Pharma A/S, a Danish company that is a leading developer and manufacturer of innovative pharmaceutical and well-being products based on oral and intra-oral delivery systems;
•OtiTopic, Inc., a U.S. respiratory drug development company with a late-stage dry powder inhalation aspirin treatment for acute myocardial infarction; and
•AG Snus Aktieselskab, a Danish company, and its Swedish subsidiary, Tobacco House of Sweden AB, fully owned by AG Snus, which operates in the oral tobacco and modern oral product categories.
For further details on these acquisitions, see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions.
Discussion and Analysis
Critical Accounting Estimates
Item 8, Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. In most instances, we must use a particular accounting policy or method because it is the only one that is permitted under U.S. GAAP.
The preparation of financial statements requires that we use estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, net revenues and expenses, as well as our disclosure of contingencies. If actual amounts differ from previous estimates, we include the revisions in our consolidated results of operations in the period during which we know the actual amounts. Historically, aggregate differences, if any, between our estimates and actual amounts in any year have not had a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements.
The selection and disclosure of our critical accounting estimates have been discussed with our Audit Committee. The following is a discussion of the more significant assumptions, estimates, accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition - We recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied. Our primary performance obligation is the distribution and sales of cigarettes and reduced-risk products, including heat-not-burn, vapor and oral nicotine products. Our performance obligations are typically satisfied upon shipment or delivery to our customers. The company estimates the cost of sales returns based on historical experience, and these estimates are immaterial. Estimated costs associated with warranty programs for IQOS devices are generally provided for in cost of sales in the period the related revenues are recognized, based on a number of factors, including historical experience, product failure rates and warranty policies. The transaction price is typically based on the amount billed to the customer and includes estimated variable consideration where applicable. Such variable consideration is typically not constrained and is estimated based on the most likely amount that PMI expects to be entitled to under the terms of the contracts with customers, historical experience of discount or rebate redemption, where relevant, and the terms of any underlying discount or rebate programs, which may change from time to time as the business and product categories evolve.
Inventories - Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost or market based upon assumptions about future demand and market conditions. The valuation of inventory also requires us to estimate obsolete and excess inventory. We perform regular reviews of our inventory on hand, as well as our future purchase commitments with our suppliers, considering multiple factors, including demand forecasts, product life cycle, current sales levels, pricing strategy and cost trends. If our review indicates that inventories of raw materials, components or finished products have become obsolete or are in excess of anticipated demand or that inventory cost exceeds net realizable value, we may be required to make adjustments that will impact the results of operations.
Goodwill and Non-Amortizable Intangible Assets Valuation - We test goodwill and non-amortizable intangible assets for impairment annually or more frequently if events occur that would warrant such review. While the company has the option to perform a qualitative assessment for both goodwill and non-amortizable intangible assets to determine if it is more likely than not that an impairment exists, the company elects to perform the quantitative assessment for our annual impairment analysis. The impairment analysis involves comparing the fair value of each reporting unit or non-amortizable intangible asset to the carrying value. If the carrying value exceeds the fair value, goodwill or a non-amortizable intangible asset is considered impaired. To determine the fair value of goodwill, we primarily use the market approach using earnings multiples of comparable global companies within the tobacco industry, supported by a discounted cash flow model. At December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our goodwill was $6.7 billion, which is related to ten geographical reporting units, each of which consists of a group of markets with similar operating and economic characteristics and our 2021 acquisitions. The Fertin Pharma A/S, Vectura Group plc. and OtiTopic, Inc. acquisitions in 2021 are considered separate operating segments and are accounted for within the Other category. For additional information see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions. The estimated fair value of each of our ten reporting units and additional businesses acquired in 2021 exceeded the carrying value as of December 31, 2021. To determine the fair value of non-amortizable intangible assets, we primarily use a discounted cash flow model applying the relief-from-royalty method. We concluded that the fair value of our non-amortizable intangible assets exceeded the carrying value. These discounted cash flow models include management assumptions relevant for forecasting operating cash flows, which are subject to changes in business conditions, such as volumes and prices, costs to produce, discount rates and estimated capital needs. Management considers historical experience and all available information at the time the fair values are estimated, and we believe these assumptions are consistent with the assumptions a hypothetical marketplace participant would use. Since the March 28, 2008, spin-off from Altria Group, Inc., we have not recorded a charge to earnings for an impairment of goodwill or non-amortizable intangible assets.
Marketing Costs - We incur certain costs to support our products through programs that include advertising, marketing, consumer engagement and trade promotions. The costs of our advertising and marketing programs are expensed in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Recognition of the cost related to our consumer engagement and trade promotion programs contain uncertainties due to the judgment required in estimating the potential performance and compliance for each program. For volume-based incentives provided to customers, management continually assesses and estimates, by customer, the likelihood of the customer's achieving the specified targets, and records the reduction of revenue as the sales are made. For other trade promotions, management relies on estimated utilization rates that have been developed from historical experience. Changes in the assumptions used in estimating the cost of any individual marketing program would not result in a material change in our financial position, results of operations or operating cash flows.
Employee Benefit Plans - As discussed in Item 8, Note 13. Benefit Plans to our consolidated financial statements, we provide a range of benefits to our employees and retired employees, including pensions, postretirement health care and postemployment benefits (primarily severance). We record annual amounts relating to these plans based on calculations specified by U.S. GAAP. These calculations include various actuarial assumptions, such as discount rates, assumed rates of return on plan assets, compensation increases, mortality, turnover rates and health care cost trend rates. We review actuarial assumptions on an annual basis and make modifications to the assumptions based on current rates and trends when it is deemed appropriate to do so. As permitted by U.S. GAAP, any effect of the modifications is generally amortized over future periods. We believe that the assumptions utilized in calculating our obligations under these plans are reasonable based upon our historical experience and advice from our actuaries.
Weighted-average discount rate assumptions for pension and postretirement plan obligations at December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
We anticipate that assumption changes will decrease 2022 pre-tax pension and postretirement expense to approximately $152 million as compared with approximately $300 million in 2021, excluding amounts related to employee severance and early retirement programs. The anticipated decrease is primarily due to lower amortization of unrecognized actuarial gains/losses of $123 million, coupled with lower service cost of $45 million and other movements of $9 million, partially offset by higher interest cost of $29 million.
Weighted-average expected rate of return and discount rate assumptions have a significant effect on the amount of expense reported for the employee benefit plans. A fifty-basis-point decrease in our discount rate would increase our 2022 pension and postretirement expense by approximately $70 million, and a fifty-basis-point increase in our discount rate would decrease our 2022 pension and postretirement expense by approximately $58 million. Similarly, a fifty-basis-point decrease (increase) in the expected return on plan assets would increase (decrease) our 2022 pension expense by approximately $43 million.
Income Taxes - Income tax provisions for jurisdictions outside the United States, as well as state and local income tax provisions, are determined on a separate company basis, and the related assets and liabilities are recorded in our consolidated balance sheets.
The extent of our operations involves dealing with uncertainties and judgments in the application of complex tax regulations in a multitude of jurisdictions. The final taxes paid are dependent upon many factors, including negotiations with taxing authorities in various jurisdictions and resolution of disputes arising from federal, state, and international tax audits. In accordance with the authoritative guidance for income taxes, we evaluate potential tax exposures and record tax liabilities for anticipated tax audit issues based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances; however, due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the tax liabilities. If our estimate of tax liabilities proves to be less than the ultimate assessment, an additional charge to expense would result. If payment of these amounts ultimately proves to be less than the recorded amounts, the reversal of the liabilities would result in tax benefits being recognized in the period when we determine the liabilities are no longer necessary.
We are required to assess the likelihood of recovering deferred tax assets against future sources of taxable income. If we determine, using all available evidence, that we do not reach the more likely than not threshold for recovery, a valuation allowance is recorded. Significant judgment is required in determining the need for and amount of valuation allowances for deferred tax assets including estimates of future taxable income in the applicable jurisdictions and the feasibility of on-going tax planning strategies, as applicable.
The effective tax rates used for interim reporting are based on our full-year geographic earnings mix projections. Changes in currency exchange rates, earnings mix by taxing jurisdiction or future regulatory developments may have an impact on the effective tax rates. Significant judgment is required in determining income tax provisions and in evaluating tax positions.
For further details, see Item 8, Note 11. Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements.
Hedging - As discussed below in “Market Risk,” we use derivative financial instruments principally to reduce exposures to market risks resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange and interest rates by creating offsetting exposures. For derivative contracts that are designated and qualify as fair value hedges the gain or loss on the derivative, as well as the offsetting gain or loss on the hedged items attributable to the hedged risk, is recognized in the consolidated statement of earnings. For our other derivatives to which we have elected to apply hedge accounting, gains and losses on these derivatives are initially deferred in accumulated other comprehensive losses on the consolidated balance sheet and recognized in the consolidated statement of earnings into the same line item as the impact of the underlying transaction and in the periods when the related hedged transactions are also recognized in operating results. If we had elected not to use the hedge accounting provisions, gains (losses) deferred in stockholders’ (deficit) equity would have been recorded in our net earnings for these derivatives.
Fair value of non-marketable equity securities - For further details, see Item 8, Note 20. Deconsolidation of RBH.
Contingencies - As discussed in Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements, legal proceedings covering a wide range of matters are pending or threatened against us, and/or our subsidiaries, and/or our indemnitees in various jurisdictions. We and our subsidiaries record provisions in the consolidated financial statements for pending litigation when we determine that an unfavorable outcome is probable and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The variability in pleadings in multiple jurisdictions, together with the actual experience of management in litigating claims, demonstrate that the monetary relief that may be specified in a lawsuit bears little relevance to the ultimate outcome. Much of the tobacco-related litigation is in its early stages, and litigation is subject to uncertainty. At the present time, except as stated otherwise in Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies, while it is reasonably possible that an unfavorable outcome in a case may occur, after assessing the information available to it: (i) management has not concluded that it is probable that a loss has been incurred in any of the pending tobacco-related cases; (ii) management is unable to estimate the possible loss or range of loss for any of the pending tobacco-related cases; and (iii) accordingly, no estimated loss has been accrued in the consolidated financial statements for unfavorable outcomes in these cases, if any. Legal defense costs are expensed as incurred.
Consolidated Operating Results
Our net revenues and operating income by segment were as follows:
(1) As of March 22, 2019, PMI deconsolidated the financial results of its Canadian subsidiary, Rothmans, Benson & Hedges Inc. ("RBH"), from PMI's financial statements. For further details, see Item 8, Note 20. Deconsolidation of RBH.
Items affecting the comparability of results from operations were as follows:
•Asset impairment and exit costs - See Item 8, Note 19. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs for details of the $216 million, $149 million and $422 million pre-tax charges for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, as well as a breakdown of these costs by segment.
•Saudi Arabia customs assessments - See Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies for the details of the $246 million reduction in net revenues of combustible products included in the Middle East & Africa segment for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Asset acquisition cost - See Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions for the details of the $51 million pre-tax charge associated with the asset acquisition of OtiTopic, Inc. included in Other within the operating income table above for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Russia excise and VAT audit charge - See Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies for details of the $374 million pre-tax charge included in the Eastern Europe segment for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Canadian tobacco litigation-related expense - See Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies and Note 20. Deconsolidation of RBH for details of the $194 million pre-tax charge included in the Americas segment for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Loss on deconsolidation of RBH - See Item 8, Note 20. Deconsolidation of RBH for details of the $239 million loss included in the Americas segment for the year ended December 31, 2019.
•Brazil indirect tax credit - Following a final and enforceable decision by the highest court in Brazil in October 2020, PMI recorded a gain of $119 million for tax credits representing overpayments of indirect taxes for the period from March 2012 through December 2019; these tax credits were applied to tax liabilities in Brazil during 2021. This amount was included as a reduction in marketing, administration and research costs in the consolidated statements of earnings for the year ended December 31, 2020, and was included in the operating income of the Americas segment. An additional amount of overpaid indirect taxes of approximately $90 million is dependent on a potential tax authority challenge.
Our net revenues by product category were as follows:
Note: Sum of product categories or Regions might not foot to total PMI due to rounding.
Net revenues related to combustible products refer to the operating revenues generated from the sale of these products, including shipping and handling charges billed to customers, net of sales and promotion incentives, and excise taxes. These net revenue amounts consist of the sale of our cigarettes and other tobacco products combined. Other tobacco products primarily include roll-your-own and make-your-own cigarettes, pipe tobacco, cigars and cigarillos and do not include reduced-risk products.
Net revenues related to reduced-risk products refer to the operating revenues generated from the sale of these products, including shipping and handling charges billed to customers, net of sales and promotion incentives, and excise taxes. These net revenue amounts consist of the sale of our heated tobacco units, heat-not-burn devices and related accessories, and other nicotine-containing products, which primarily include our e-vapor and oral nicotine products.
Net revenues in the Other category primarily consist of operating revenues generated from the sale of inhaled therapeutics, and oral and intra-oral delivery systems resulting from the third quarter 2021 acquisitions of Fertin Pharma A/S, Vectura Group plc. and OtiTopic, Inc.
PMI's heat-not-burn products include licensed KT&G heat-not-burn products.
Revenues from shipments of Platform 1 devices, heated tobacco units and accessories to Altria Group, Inc., commencing in the third quarter of 2019, for sale under license in the United States, are included in Net Revenues of the Americas segment.
References to "Cost/Other" in the Consolidated Financial Summary table of total PMI and the six geographical segments throughout this "Discussion and Analysis" reflects the currency-neutral variances of: cost of sales (excluding the volume/mix cost component); marketing, administration and research costs (including asset impairment and exit costs); and amortization of intangibles. “Cost/Other” also includes the currency-neutral net revenue variance, unrelated to volume/mix and price components, attributable to: fees for certain distribution rights billed to customers in certain markets in the ME&A Region, and the Saudi Arabia customs assessment net revenue adjustment.
Our shipment volume by segment for cigarettes and heated tobacco units was as follows:
Following the deconsolidation of our Canadian subsidiary, we continue to report the volume of brands sold by RBH for which other PMI subsidiaries are the trademark owners. These include HEETS, Next, Philip Morris and Rooftop.
Heated tobacco units ("HTU") is the term we use to refer to heated tobacco consumables, which include our HEETS, HEETS Creations, HEETS Dimensions, HEETS Marlboro and HEETS FROM MARLBORO (defined collectively as HEETS), Marlboro Dimensions, Marlboro HeatSticks, Parliament HeatSticks and TEREA, as well as the KT&G-licensed brands, Fiit and Miix (outside of South Korea).
Market share for HTUs is defined as the total sales volume for HTUs as a percentage of the total estimated sales volume for cigarettes and HTUs.
Shipment volume of heated tobacco units to the United States is included in the heated tobacco unit shipment volume of the Americas segment.
References to total international market, defined as worldwide cigarette and heated tobacco unit volume excluding the United States, total industry, total market and market shares throughout this "Discussion and Analysis" are our estimates for tax-paid products based on the latest available data from a number of internal and external sources and may, in defined instances, exclude the People's Republic of China and/or our duty free business.
2020 and 2021 estimates for total industry volume and market share in certain geographies reflect limitations on the availability and accuracy of industry data during pandemic-related restrictions.
In-market sales ("IMS") is defined as sales to the retail channel, depending on the market and distribution model.
North Africa is defined as Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia.
The Gulf Cooperation Council ("GCC") is defined as Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
Southeast Europe is defined as Albania, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia.
References to total industry, total market, our shipment volume and our market share performance reflect cigarettes and heated tobacco units, unless otherwise stated.
From time to time, PMI’s shipment volumes are subject to the impact of distributor inventory movements, and estimated total industry/market volumes are subject to the impact of inventory movements in various trade channels that include estimated trade inventory movements of PMI’s competitors arising from market-specific factors that significantly distort reported volume disclosures. Such factors may include changes to the manufacturing supply chain, shipment methods, consumer demand, timing of excise tax increases or other influences that may affect the timing of sales to customers. In such instances, in addition to reviewing PMI shipment volumes and certain estimated total industry/market volumes on a reported basis, management reviews these measures on an adjusted basis that excludes the impact of distributor and/or estimated trade inventory movements. Management also believes that disclosing PMI shipment volumes and estimated total industry/market volumes in such circumstances on a basis that excludes the impact of distributor and/or estimated trade inventory movements improves the comparability of performance and trends for these measures over different reporting periods.
2021 compared with 2020
The following discussion compares our consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, with the year ended December 31, 2020.
Estimated international industry cigarette and heated tobacco unit volume, excluding China and the U.S., of 2.6 trillion, increased by 2.4%, driven by the EU, Middle East & Africa, South & Southeast Asia and Americas Regions, partly offset by the Eastern Europe and East Asia & Australia Regions, as described in the Regional sections.
Our total shipment volume increased by 2.2%, driven by:
•the EU, reflecting higher heated tobacco unit shipment volume across the Region, particularly in Germany, Hungary, Italy and Poland, partly offset by lower cigarette shipment volume, notably in the Czech Republic, France and Germany;
•Middle East & Africa, reflecting higher cigarette shipment volume (primarily in PMI Duty Free and Turkey, partly offset by the GCC and North Africa), as well as higher heated tobacco unit shipment volume across the Region;
•East Asia & Australia, reflecting higher heated tobacco unit shipment volume driven by Japan, partly offset by lower cigarette shipment volume, predominantly in South Korea; and
•Americas, mainly reflecting higher cigarette shipment volume, primarily in Brazil and Mexico, partially offset by Argentina;
partly offset by
•South & Southeast Asia, primarily reflecting lower cigarette shipment volume, mainly in the Philippines, partially offset by Indonesia and Pakistan.
Total shipment volume in Eastern Europe was essentially flat, reflecting lower cigarette shipment volume, mainly in Russia and Ukraine, almost fully offset by higher heated tobacco unit shipment volume, primarily in Russia and Ukraine.
Impact of Inventory Movements
Excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements of approximately 8.4 billion units, our total in-market sales increased by 1.0%, driven by a 21.1% increase in heated tobacco units, partly offset by a 1.5% decrease in cigarettes.
The net favorable impact of approximately 8.4 billion units reflected:
•A net favorable impact of 5.6 billion cigarettes, mainly driven by 2020 movements in Japan, PMI Duty Free and Russia; and
•A net favorable impact of 2.7 billion heated tobacco units, primarily reflecting the growing category and driven by Japan, Italy, PMI Duty Free and Russia.
Our total heated tobacco unit in-market sales volume in the year was 92.5 billion units.
Our cigarette shipment volume by brand and heated tobacco unit shipment volume was as follows:
Note: Lark includes Lark Harmony; Next includes Next Dubliss; Philip Morris includes Philip Morris/Dubliss; and Sampoerna A includes Sampoerna.
The increase in our heated tobacco unit shipment volume was mainly driven by the EU (notably Italy), Eastern Europe (notably Russia and Ukraine) and Japan.
Our cigarette shipment volume of the following brands increased:
•Marlboro, mainly driven by Mexico, PMI Duty Free, Russia and Turkey, partly offset by France, Japan and the Philippines;
•Chesterfield, primarily driven by Brazil, the Philippines and Russia, partly offset by Saudi Arabia;
•Parliament, mainly driven by Russia, Saudi Arabia and Turkey, partly offset by South Korea; and
•Sampoerna A in Indonesia, primarily driven by premium A Mild.
Our cigarette shipment volume of the following brands decreased:
•L&M, mainly due to Egypt, Germany, Poland, Russia and Turkey;
•Philip Morris, primarily due to Indonesia, Italy and Russia, partly offset by Japan;
•Dji Sam Soe in Indonesia, mainly due to Dji Sam Soe Magnum Mild;
•Bond Street, primarily due to Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine;
•Next, primarily due to Canada and Ukraine, partly offset by Russia; and
•"Others," notably due to: mid-price Fortune (Philippines) and Sampoerna U (Indonesia); and low-price Jackpot (Philippines) and More (Philippines); partly offset by mid-price Sampoerna Hijau (Indonesia) and low-price Morven (Pakistan).
PMI's cigarette shipment volume for Lark was flat.
2021 International Share of Market (excluding China and the United States)
Our total international market share (excluding China and the United States), defined as our cigarette and heated tobacco unit sales volume as a percentage of total industry cigarette and heated tobacco unit sales volume, decreased by 0.4 points to 27.3%, reflecting:
•Total international market share for cigarettes of 23.8%, down by 0.9 points; and
•Total international market share for heated tobacco units of 3.5%, up by 0.5 points.
Our total international cigarette sales volume as a percentage of total industry cigarette sales volume was down by 0.8 points to 24.9%, mainly reflecting lower cigarette market share and/or an unfavorable geographic mix impact, notably in Japan, the Philippines and Russia, partly offset by Indonesia and Turkey.
In 2021, we owned five of the world's top 15 international cigarette brands, with international cigarette market shares as follows: Marlboro, 9.5%; L&M, 3.4%; Chesterfield, 2.3%; Philip Morris, 1.7%; and Parliament, 1.7%.
Key Market Data
Key market data regarding total market size, our shipments and market share were as follows:
(1) Cost/Other variance includes a $246 million reduction in net revenues in 2021 related to the Saudi Arabia customs assessments. For more details, see Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies.
(2) Cost/Other variance includes charges in 2021 and 2020 of $216 million and $149 million, respectively, for asset impairment and exit costs. Cost/Other variance also includes in 2021 the pre-tax charge of $51 million associated with the asset acquisition cost of OtiTopic, Inc., and in 2020 the Brazil indirect tax credit of $119 million. For more details, see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions, Item 8, Note 12. Segment Reporting and Item 8, Note 19. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs.
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 6.7%, mainly reflecting: favorable volume/mix, primarily driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume (notably in the EU, particularly Germany, Hungary, Italy and Poland, as well as Japan, Russia and Ukraine) and higher device volume (notably in the EU, primarily Italy, and Japan, partly offset by South Korea), partially offset by lower cigarette volume (mainly in the EU Region, notably the Czech Republic, France and Germany, as well as the GCC, North Africa, the Philippines, Russia and Ukraine, partly offset by India, Indonesia, PMI Duty Free and Turkey) and unfavorable cigarette mix (primarily in Germany, Japan and Russia, partially offset by Indonesia and PMI Duty Free); and a favorable pricing variance (notably driven by the Czech Republic, Germany, Japan, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russia and Turkey, partly offset by Australia, Indonesia, Poland and Ukraine); partially offset by the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments of $246 million, shown in "Cost/Other". Excluding the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments of $246 million, net revenues increased by 10.3%, or 7.6% excluding favorable currency of $678 million and acquisitions of $109 million.
The favorable currency in net revenues was due primarily to the Australian dollar, Czech krona, Euro, Indonesian rupiah, Mexican peso and Philippine peso, partially offset by the Russian ruble and Turkish lira.
Net revenues include $9.1 billion in 2021 and $6.8 billion in 2020 related to the sale of RRPs. For the year ended December 31, 2021, IQOS devices accounted for over 6% of RRP net revenues, with a step-up in the second half of 2021 reflecting the IQOS ILUMA launch; outweighing the effect of supply constraints on other IQOS versions.
Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 8.9%, primarily reflecting: favorable volume/mix, mainly driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume, partly offset by lower cigarette volume and unfavorable cigarette mix (each mainly reflecting the same geographies as for net revenues noted above); a favorable pricing variance; and lower manufacturing costs (driven by significant productivity gains related to reduced-risk and combustible products); partly offset by higher marketing, administration and research costs, including an unfavorable comparison related to the Brazil indirect tax credit in 2020, higher asset impairment and exit costs (mainly related to organizational design optimization, as well as product distribution restructuring in South Korea) and asset acquisition costs related to OtiTopic; and the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments (as noted above for net revenues).
Interest expense, net, of $628 million increased by $10 million (1.6%).
Our effective tax rate increased by 0.1 percentage point to 21.8%. We estimate that our 2022 effective tax rate will be around 22%, excluding discrete tax events. For further details, see Item 8, Note 11. Income Taxes.
Net earnings attributable to PMI of $9.1 billion increased by $1.1 billion or 13.1%. This increase was due primarily to higher operating income as discussed above, partially offset by a higher effective tax rate. Basic and diluted EPS of $5.83 increased by 13.0%. Excluding a favorable currency impact of $0.12, diluted EPS increased by 10.7%.
2020 compared with 2019
For a discussion comparing our consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020, with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Discussion and Analysis - Consolidated Operating Results in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 9, 2021.
Operating Results by Business Segment
Business Environment
Taxes, Legislation, Regulation and Other Matters Regarding the Manufacture, Marketing, Sale and Use of Tobacco Products
The tobacco industry and our company face a number of challenges that may adversely affect our business, volume, results of operations, cash flows and financial position. These challenges, which are discussed below and in “Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results,” include:
•regulatory restrictions on our products, including restrictions on the packaging, marketing, and sale of tobacco or other nicotine-containing products that could reduce our competitiveness, eliminate our ability to communicate with adult consumers, or even ban certain of our products;
•fiscal challenges, such as excessive excise tax increases and discriminatory tax structures;
•illicit trade in cigarettes and other tobacco and nicotine-containing products, including counterfeit, contraband and so-called “illicit whites”;
•intense competition, including from non-tax paid volume by certain local manufacturers;
•pending and threatened litigation as discussed in Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies; and
•governmental investigations.
Regulatory Restrictions: The tobacco industry operates in a highly regulated environment. The well-known risks of smoking have led regulators to impose significant restrictions and high excise taxes on cigarettes.
Much of the regulation that shapes the business environment in which we operate is driven by the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (the “FCTC”) of the World Health Organization (the "WHO"), which entered into force in 2005. The FCTC has as its main objective to establish a global agenda for tobacco regulation, with the purpose of reducing tobacco use. To date, 182 countries and the European Union are Parties to the FCTC. The treaty requires Parties to have in place various tobacco control measures and recommends others. The FCTC governing body, the Conference of the Parties (“CoP”), has also adopted non-binding guidelines and policy recommendations related to certain articles of the FCTC that go beyond the text of the treaty. In October 2018, the CoP recognized the need for more scientific assessment and improved reporting to define policy on heated tobacco products. Similar to its previous policy recommendations on e-cigarettes, the CoP invited countries to regulate, restrict or prohibit heated tobacco products, as appropriate under their national laws.
Prior to CoP 9 that took place in November 2021, the WHO and the WHO FCTC Secretariat published two reports on novel and emerging tobacco products. The reports were noted by CoP 9 and related substantive discussions and decisions were deferred to CoP 10, currently scheduled for 2023. It is not possible to predict whether or to what extent measures recommended by the WHO's reports will be implemented as the reports are not binding to the WHO Member States.
We believe that when better alternatives to cigarettes exist, the discussion should not be whether these alternatives should be made available to the more than one billion people who smoke today, but how fast, and within what regulatory framework to maximize their adoption while minimizing unintended use. Therefore, we advocate for regulatory frameworks that recognize a significant difference on a risk continuum between combustible tobacco on the one hand and non-combustible tobacco and other nicotine-containing products on the other. Regulation should include measures that will accelerate switching to non-combustible products, for example, by allowing adult consumers who would not otherwise quit to receive truthful and non-misleading information about such products to
enable them to make informed decisions and by applying uniform product standards to enable manufacturers to demonstrate the safety of these products as well as the absence of combustion. Regulation should also include specific rules for ingredients, labeling and consumer communication, and should ensure that the public is informed about the health risks of all combustible and non-combustible tobacco and nicotine-containing products. Importantly, regulation must include measures designed to prevent initiation by youth and non-smokers. We support mandated health warnings, minimum age laws, restrictions on advertising, and public place smoking restrictions. We also support regulatory measures that help reduce illicit trade.
Certain measures are discussed in more detail below and in the Reduced-Risk Products (RRPs) section.
Fiscal Challenges: Excessive and disruptive excise, sales and other tax increases and discriminatory tax structures are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on our profitability, due to lower consumption and consumer down-trading to non-premium, discount, other low-price or low-taxed combustible tobacco products such as fine cut tobacco and illicit cigarettes. In addition, in certain jurisdictions, some of our combustible products are subject to tax structures that discriminate against premium-price products and manufactured cigarettes. We believe that such tax policies undermine public health by encouraging consumers to turn to illicit trade, and ultimately undercut government revenue objectives, disrupt the competitive environment, and encourage criminal activity. Other jurisdictions have imposed, or are seeking to impose, levies or other taxes specifically on tobacco companies, such as taxes on revenues and/or profits.
World Customs Organization Developments: In 2020, the World Customs Organization (the “WCO”) amended the harmonized system nomenclature to introduce dedicated custom codes for novel tobacco and nicotine products, including heated tobacco products, e-cigarettes and other nicotine-containing products. The amendments became effective as of January 1, 2022. These amendments require WCO member states to transfer products from customs codes in the current nomenclature to the new one. These amendments are not expected to significantly impact current customs duty rates.
EU Tobacco Products Directive: In April 2014, the EU adopted a significantly revised EU Tobacco Products Directive (the "TPD"), which entered into force in May 2016. All member states have adopted laws transposing the TPD. The TPD sets forth a comprehensive set of regulatory requirements for tobacco products, including:
•health warnings covering 65% of the front and back panels of cigarette packs, with an option for member states to further standardize tobacco packaging, including the introduction of plain packaging;
•a ban on characterizing flavors in some tobacco products, with a transition period for menthol that expired in May 2020;
•security features and tracking and tracing measures that became effective in May 2019; and
•a framework for the regulation of novel tobacco products and e-cigarettes, including requirements for health warnings and information leaflets, a prohibition on product packaging text related to reduced risk, and the introduction of notification requirements or authorization procedures in advance of commercialization.
In May 2021, the European Commission published its first report on the application of the TPD. The report identifies significant progress made due to the implementation of the TPD and where there is still room for improvement. Most notably, it finds that the EU legislation has enhanced tobacco control, contributed to protecting the health of EU citizens by providing Member States with strong rules to address the use of tobacco products in the EU. The TPD reportedly achieved the 2% reduction target of the impact assessment with decreased smoking prevalence among youth. The report also concludes that there is scope for improvement in certain areas, such as enforcement at national level, assessment of ingredients, and a better consideration for novel and emerging products.
In November 2021, the European Commission published the implementation roadmap to Europe's Beating Cancer Plan (the "Plan"). According to the Plan, a revision of the TPD is planned for 2024.
EU Tobacco Excise Directive: The EU Commission is preparing a legislative proposal for the revision of the 2011 EU Tobacco Excise Directive that may include definitions and tax treatment for novel tobacco and nicotine-containing products, including heated tobacco products and e-cigarettes. The proposal is expected to be finalized and adopted by the EU Council in 2023. The adoption of the final proposal by the EU Council will require unanimous agreement by all EU member states.
Plain Packaging and Other Packaging Restrictions: Plain packaging legislation bans the use of branding, logos and colors on packaging other than the brand name and variant that may be printed only in specified locations and in a uniform font. To date, plain packaging laws have been adopted in certain markets in all of our operating segments, including the key markets of Australia, France, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Some countries, such as Canada, Denmark, Israel and New Zealand adopted plain packaging regulations that apply to all tobacco products, including RRPs. Other countries are also considering plain packaging legislation.
Some countries have adopted, or are considering adopting, packaging restrictions that could have an impact similar to plain packaging. Examples of such restrictions include standardizing the shape and size of packages, prohibiting certain colors or the use of certain descriptive phrases on packaging, and requiring very large graphic health warnings that leave little space for branding.
Restrictions and Bans on the Use of Ingredients: The WHO and others in the public health community have recommended restrictions or total bans on the use of some or all ingredients in tobacco products, including menthol. Broad restrictions and ingredient bans would require us to reformulate our American blend tobacco products and could reduce our ability to differentiate these products in the market in the long term. In many countries, menthol bans would eliminate the entire category of mentholated tobacco products. The European Union banned cigarettes and roll-your-own tobacco products with characterizing flavors. Other tobacco products, including heated tobacco products, are exempted from this flavor ban. The EU Commission is required to withdraw this exemption for a particular product category if it determines that there is a substantial change of circumstances, such as a significant increase of EU-wide sales volumes in such product category. Other countries may follow the EU’s approach. Turkey banned menthol as of May 2020. Broader ingredient bans have been adopted by Brazil and Canada.
Bans on Display of Tobacco Products at Retail: In a number of our markets, including, but not limited to, Australia and Russia, governments have banned the display of tobacco products at the point of sale. Other countries are considering similar bans.
Bans and Restrictions on Advertising, Marketing, Promotions and Sponsorships: For many years, the FCTC has called for, and countries have imposed, partial or total bans on tobacco advertising, marketing, promotions and sponsorships, including bans and restrictions on advertising on radio and television, in print and on the Internet. The FCTC's non-binding guidelines recommend that governments prohibit all forms of communication with adult smokers.
Restrictions on Product Design: Some members of the public health community are calling for the further standardization of tobacco products by requiring, for example, that cigarettes have a certain minimum diameter, which would amount to a ban on slim cigarettes, or requiring the use of standardized filter and cigarette paper designs. In addition, at its meeting in November 2016, the CoP adopted non-binding guidelines recommending that countries regulate product design features that increase the attractiveness of tobacco products, such as the diameter of cigarettes and the use of flavor capsules.
Restrictions on Public Smoking and Use of Nicotine-Containing Products in Public: The pace and scope of restrictions on the use of our products have increased significantly in most of our markets. Many countries around the world have adopted, or are likely to adopt, regulations that restrict or ban smoking and use of nicotine-containing products in public and/or work places, restaurants, bars and nightclubs. Some public health groups have called for, and some countries, regional governments and municipalities have adopted or proposed, bans on smoking in outdoor places, as well as bans on smoking in cars (typically, when minors are present) and private homes.
Other Regulatory Issues: Some regulators are considering, or in some cases have adopted, regulatory measures designed to reduce the supply of tobacco products. These include regulations intended to reduce the number of retailers selling tobacco products by, for example, reducing the overall number of tobacco retail licenses available or banning the sale of tobacco products within specified distances of certain public facilities. In addition, South Africa banned the sale of tobacco products, e-cigarettes, and electronic devices that heat tobacco for several months during the COVID-19 pandemic. The ban, which was lifted on August 17, 2020, resulted in a significant increase of illicit trade of tobacco products.
In a limited number of markets, most notably Japan, we are dependent on governmental approvals that may limit our pricing flexibility.
The EU Single-Use Plastics Directive, which will require tobacco manufacturers and importers to cover the costs of public collection systems for tobacco product filters, under Extended Producer Responsibility ("EPR") schemes, entered into force on July 2, 2019. To date, some member states transposed the Directive into national legislation. We expect remaining member states to transpose the EU Single-Use Plastics Directive into national legislation including EPR schemes by January 2023. While we cannot predict the impact of this initiative on our business at this time, we are monitoring developments in this area.
Illicit Trade: Illicit tobacco trade creates a cheap and unregulated supply of tobacco products, undermines efforts to reduce smoking prevalence, especially among youth, damages legitimate businesses and intellectual property rights, stimulates organized crime, increases corruption and reduces government tax revenue. We generally estimate that, excluding China and the U.S., illicit trade may account for as much as 12% of global cigarette consumption; this includes counterfeit, contraband and the persistent problem of “illicit whites,” which are cigarettes legally produced in one jurisdiction for the sole purpose of being exported and illegally sold in another jurisdiction where they have no legitimate market. Currently, we estimate that illicit trade in the European Union accounted for approximately 8% of total cigarette consumption in 2021.
A number of jurisdictions are considering actions to prevent illicit trade. In November 2012, the FCTC adopted the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (the “Protocol”), which includes supply chain control measures, such as licensing of manufacturers and distributors, enforcement of these control measures in free trade zones, controls on duty free and Internet channels and the implementation of tracking and tracing technologies. To date, 63 Parties, including the European Union, have ratified it. The Protocol came into force in September 2018. Parties must start implementing its provisions in their national legislation. In November 2021, the second Meeting of the Parties to the Protocol decided, among others, to focus on the implementation of a framework for global information sharing to combat illicit tobacco trade and enable the parties to exchange products' tracking and tracing information in a secure manner. We welcome this decision and expect that other Parties will ratify the Protocol.
We devote substantial resources to help prevent illicit trade in combustible tobacco products and RRPs. For example, we engage with governments, our business partners and other stakeholders to implement effective measures to combat illicit trade and, in some instances, pursue legal remedies to protect our intellectual property rights.
The tracking and tracing regulations for cigarettes and roll-your-own products manufactured or destined for the EU became effective on May 20, 2019. The effective date for other tobacco-containing products, including some of our RRPs such as heated tobacco units, is May 20, 2024. While we expect that this regulation will increase our operating expenses, we do not expect this increase to be significant.
In 2009, our Colombian subsidiaries entered into an Investment and Cooperation Agreement with the national and regional governments of Colombia to promote investment in, and cooperation on, anti-contraband and anti-counterfeit efforts. The agreement provides $200 million in funding over a 20-year period to address issues such as combating illegal cigarette trade and increasing the quality and quantity of locally-grown tobacco.
In May 2016, PMI launched PMI IMPACT, a global initiative that supports third-party projects dedicated to fighting illegal trade and related crimes such as corruption, organized criminal networks and money laundering. The centerpiece of PMI IMPACT is a council of external independent experts in the fields of law, anti-corruption and law enforcement. The experts are responsible for evaluating and approving funding proposals for PMI IMPACT grants. PMI has pledged $100 million to fund projects within PMI IMPACT over three funding rounds.
Reduced-Risk Products (RRPs)
Our Approach to RRPs: We recognize that smoking cigarettes causes serious diseases and that the best way to avoid the harms of smoking is never to start or to quit. Nevertheless, it is predicted that by 2025, the number of smokers will remain largely unchanged from the current estimate of 1.1 billion, despite the considerable efforts to discourage smoking.
Cigarettes burn tobacco, which produces smoke. As a result of the combustion process, the smoker inhales various toxic substances. In contrast, RRPs do not burn tobacco and therefore contain significantly lower levels of harmful and potentially harmful constituents ("HPHCs") than found in cigarette smoke.
For adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke, we believe that RRPs, while not risk-free, offer a much better consumer choice. Accordingly, our key strategic priorities are to: (i) to develop and commercialize products that present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to those products versus continued smoking; and (ii) educate and convince convince current adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke to switch to those products.
We recognize that this transformation from cigarettes to RRPs will take time and that the speed of transformation will depend in part upon factors beyond our control, such as the willingness of governments, regulators and other policy groups to embrace RRPs as a desired alternative to continued cigarette smoking. For as long as a significant number of adult smokers continues to smoke, responsible leadership of the category is critical. We aim to maintain our competitive position in the cigarette market through selective investment. As a leading international cigarette manufacturer, we will continue to accelerate this transformation by using our regulatory and commercial expertise and extensive commercial and distribution infrastructure as an effective platform for the commercialization of our RRPs and communication with adult smokers and trade partners about the benefits of switching to our RRPs.
While seeking to remain competitive in the cigarette market, we are judiciously reallocating resources from cigarettes to RRPs and are streamlining our cigarette portfolio.
We have a range of RRPs in various stages of development, scientific assessment and commercialization. We conduct rigorous scientific assessments of our RRP platforms to substantiate that they reduce exposure to HPHCs and, ultimately, that these products
present, are likely to present, or have the potential to present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to them versus continued smoking. We draw upon a team of expert scientists and engineers from a broad spectrum of scientific disciplines and our extensive learnings of adult consumer preferences to develop and assess our RRPs. Our efforts are guided by the following key objectives:
•to develop RRPs that adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke find to be satisfying alternatives to smoking;
•for those adult smokers, our goal is to offer RRPs with a scientifically substantiated risk-reduction profile that approaches as closely as possible that associated with smoking cessation;
•to substantiate the reduction of risk for the individual adult smoker and the reduction of harm to the population as a whole, based on scientific evidence of the highest standard that is made available for scrutiny and review by external independent scientists and relevant regulatory bodies; and
•to advocate for the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs, including the communication of scientifically substantiated information to enable adult smokers to make better consumer choices.
Our RRP Platforms: Our product development is based on the elimination of combustion via tobacco heating and other innovative systems, which we believe are the most promising path to providing a better consumer choice for those who would otherwise continue to smoke. We recognize that no single product will appeal to all adult smokers. Therefore, we are developing a portfolio of products intended to appeal to a variety of distinct adult consumer preferences.
Five PMI-developed or improved RRP platforms are in various stages of development and commercialization readiness:
Platform 1 uses a precisely controlled heating device incorporating our IQOS HeatControl technology, into which a specially designed and proprietary tobacco unit is inserted and heated to generate an aerosol. We have conducted a series of clinical studies for this platform, the results of which were included in our submission to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) described below. We completed a 6+6-month exposure response study and shared the results with the FDA in April 2020. The study showed that for the group that switched to our Platform 1 product, the eight clinical risk endpoints that were tested as co-primary endpoints in the first six-month term moved in the same direction as observed for smoking cessation after 12 months of use of this product. In addition, we completed an 18-month combined chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity study in mice, which was on-going at the time of our FDA submission. We shared the results with the FDA in August 2018. In addition to the original version of Platform 1 which relies on a heating technology using a blade, a new version of Platform 1 is now available using induction. All studies referenced above were conducted with the blade version of Platform 1. We believe that there is full comparability between the versions, therefore the data from these studies remain valid.
Platform 2 uses a pressed carbon heat source which, when ignited, generates a nicotine-containing aerosol by heating tobacco. The results of our pharmacokinetic study (that measured the nicotine pharmacokinetic profile as well as subjective effects) and of our five-day reduced exposure study indicate that this platform could be an acceptable substitute for adult smokers who seek an alternative to cigarettes. The reduced exposure study results showed a substantial reduction in relevant biomarkers of exposure to the measured HPHCs in those who switched to Platform 2 compared to those who continued to smoke cigarettes over a five-day period. The sustainability of this reduction as well as changes in clinical risk markers were assessed in a three-month reduced exposure study, which was completed in 2018. We conducted a consumer test of our Platform 2 design in the last quarter of 2021. As a result of the feedback from this consumer test, the design of our current Platform 2 technology has been discontinued. We are assessing alternative designs for this consumer segment.
Platform 3 provides an aerosol of nicotine salt. We have explored two routes for this platform, one with electronics and one without, and conducted nicotine pharmacokinetic studies with both versions. The results of our pharmacokinetic study related to the version without electronics indicate this product's potential as an acceptable alternative to continued cigarette smoking in terms of product satisfaction. In February 2020, we completed a one-month product use and adaptation study in adult smokers for the product variant without electronics. The results of the study indicated that while during the study period, the adult smokers did not fully switch from smoking cigarettes to this Platform 3 product, on average, they used this product on a daily basis and significantly reduced their daily consumption of cigarettes. We are working on product modifications to enable switching by those adult smokers who are looking for better alternatives to cigarettes.
Platform 4 covers e-vapor products, which are battery-powered devices that produce an aerosol by vaporizing a nicotine-containing liquid solution. In 2020, our e-vapor products comprised devices with the “coil and wick” technology as well as our e-vapor mesh technology designed to ensure the consistency and quality of the generated aerosol compared to the products with the “coil and wick” technology. Recently, we discontinued the commercialization of devices with the “coil and wick” technology. We conducted a nicotine pharmacokinetic study with respect to products with our e-vapor mesh technology in 2017. The results of this
study indicate that these products are an effective means of nicotine delivery while being a satisfying alternative for e-cigarette users. In March 2019, a six-month pre-clinical study in mice evaluating the impact of e-cigarette vapor on the risks of pulmonary and cardiovascular disease compared to cigarette smoke was completed; this study did not pertain to a specific product. The study demonstrated that e-cigarette vapors induce significantly lower biological responses associated with cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases compared with cigarette smoke. Recently, we designed a new consumable for our e-vapor mesh technology to deliver real tobacco taste satisfaction in an E-Vapor product liquid-using patented technology, where flavors and nicotine are extracted directly from the tobacco leaves and captured in a liquid solution, without having to add flavoring ingredients. This consumable has been commercialized in one market in December 2021.
Platform 5 covers Modern Oral Nicotine Pouches, which consist of white pre-portioned pouches containing nicotine derived from tobacco. Users place a pouch between the upper lip and gum and leave it there while the nicotine and taste are being released. At the end of the use, the user can dispose of the pouch. Nicotine pouches are inherently smoke-free as they are consumed orally, and no combustion process occurs during use. Our nicotine pouches do not contain tobacco. Instead, they contain primarily nicotine, flavors, and a cellulose substrate. The nicotine used in the pouches is of pharmaceutical-grade like the nicotine used in medicinal products, such as gums and inhalers, while the flavors are approved for use in food in accordance with the product quality standards for nicotine pouches developed by the Swedish Institute for Standards. In 2021, PMI acquired AG Snus as well as Fertin Pharma, two companies manufacturing and/or marketing nicotine pouches.
We aim to expand our brand portfolio and market positions with additional RRPs. In addition, we are continuing to use our expertise, technology and capabilities to explore new growth opportunities beyond our current business, including products that do not contain nicotine or tobacco.
After we receive the results of our scientific studies, including those mentioned above, in accordance with standard scientific practices, we share the conclusions in scientific forums and submit them for inclusion in peer-reviewed publications.
The research and development expense for our smoke-free portfolio accounted for 99%, 99% and 98% of our total research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, is set forth in Item 8, Note 14. Additional Information to the consolidated financial statements.
Commercialization of RRPs: We are building a new product category and tailor our commercialization strategy to the characteristics of each specific market. We focus our commercialization efforts on consumer retail experience, guided consumer trials and customer care, and increasingly, digital communication programs and e-commerce. In order to accelerate switching to our Platform 1 products, our initial market introductions typically entail one-to-one consumer engagement (in person or by digital means) and device discounts. These initial commercialization efforts require substantial investment, which we believe will moderate over time and further benefit from the increased use of digital engagement capabilities. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated our investments in, and pivot to, digital consumer engagement.
As of December 31, 2021, PMI's smoke-free products are available for sale in 71 markets in key cities or nationwide.
In 2014, we introduced our Platform 1 product in pilot city launches in Nagoya, Japan, and in Milan, Italy. Since then, we have continuously expanded our commercialization activities.
We believe that only a very small percentage of adult smokers who convert to our Platform 1 product switch back to cigarettes.
We have integrated the production of our heated tobacco units into a number of our existing manufacturing facilities, are progressing with our plans to build manufacturing capacity for our other RRP platforms, and continue to optimize our manufacturing infrastructure.
An adequate supply chain for our RRP portfolio, including the supply of electronic devices, is important to our business. We work with four electronics manufacturing service providers for the supply of our Platform 1 and Platform 4 devices, and a small number of other providers for other products in our RRP portfolio and related accessories. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the operations of our two main electronic manufacturing service providers were temporarily suspended at different times. Even though these suspensions did not materially affect our operations, if one or more of these service providers were significantly constrained at the same time, the supply of the devices could be disrupted. Although we work closely with these service providers on monitoring their production capability and financial health, we cannot guarantee that they will remain capable of meeting their commitments, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic; if they will not, the commercialization of our RRPs could be adversely affected. The production of our RRP portfolio requires various metals, and we believe that there is an adequate supply of such metals in the world markets to satisfy our
current and anticipated production requirements. However, some components and materials necessary for the production of our RRPs, including those for the electronic devices, are obtained from single or limited sources, and can be subject to industry-wide shortages and price fluctuations. While we were successful in maintaining adequate supply of such components and materials so far, we may not be able to secure such supply going forward, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic; this could negatively impact the commercialization of our RRPs.
In addition, we are also exposed to a world-wide shortage of semiconductors, which continues to put constraints on our device supplies for RRPs. We believe, however, that the overall impact of this shortage remains manageable, and we have adjusted our device assortments to limit the effect on consumer availability of our RRPs.
We discuss product warranties in more detail in Item 8, Note 5. Product Warranty. The significance of warranty claims is dependent on a number of factors, including device version mix, product failure rates, logistics and service delivery costs, and warranty policies, and may increase with the number of devices sold.
Product quality may affect consumer acceptance of our RRPs.
Our near-term planned commercialization efforts for the other PMI-developed RRP platforms are as follows:
•We started commercializing an improved version of our IQOS MESH product in Canada, Corsica, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Finland, Italy, Ukraine and New Zealand under the IQOS VEEV or VEEV brand names. We currently plan to launch this product in additional markets.
•With respect to TEEPS, our Platform 2 product, we finalized our improvements to this product and conducted a consumer test in the last quarter of 2021. As a result of the feedback from this consumer test, the design of our current Platform 2 technology has been discontinued. We are assessing alternative designs for this consumer segment.
•Following the consumer test conducted in 2020, and the results of the product use and adaptation study described above, we are incorporating our learnings into our plans to improve our Platform 3 product.
•We launched a Platform 5 product in Sweden in January 2022, that is a reformulated version of the already commercialized nicotine pouches bearing the Shiro brand by our newly acquired affiliate AG Snus.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, certain of these commercialization efforts could be delayed.
RRP Regulation and Taxation: RRPs contain nicotine and are not risk-free. As we describe in more detail above, we support science-based regulation and taxation of RRPs, and believe that regulation and taxation should differentiate between cigarettes and products that present, are likely to present, or have the potential to present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to these products versus continued smoking and should recognize a continuum of risk for tobacco and other nicotine-containing products. Regulation, as well as industry practices, should reflect the fact that youth should not consume nicotine in any form.
Some governments have banned or are seeking to ban or severely restrict emerging tobacco and nicotine-containing products such as our RRPs and communication of truthful and non-misleading information about such products.
These regulations might foreclose or unreasonably restrict adult consumer access even to products that might be shown to be a better consumer choice than continuing to smoke. During the COVID-19 pandemic, some governments have been and may continue to be temporarily unable to focus on the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs or on the enforcement or implementation of regulations that are significant to our business.
We oppose blanket bans and unreasonable restrictions of products that have the potential to present less risk of harm compared to continued smoking. By contrast, we support regulation that sets clear standards for all RRP categories and propels innovation to benefit adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke.
In the United States, an established regulatory framework for assessing “Modified Risk Tobacco Products” and “New Tobacco Products” exists under the jurisdiction of the FDA. We submitted to the FDA a Modified Risk Tobacco Product Application (“MRTPA”) for our Platform 1 product in December 2016, and a Premarket Tobacco Product Application (“PMTA”) for our Platform 1 product in March 2017.
On April 30, 2019, the FDA determined that a version of our Platform 1 product, namely, IQOS 2.4 and three related consumables, is appropriate for the protection of public health and authorized it for sale in the United States. The FDA’s decision followed its comprehensive assessment of our PMTA. On December 7, 2020, the FDA reached the same determination for the IQOS 3 device and authorized that version of our Platform 1 product for sale in the United States.
On July 7, 2020, the FDA determined that the available scientific evidence demonstrates that the issuance of an exposure modification order would be appropriate for the promotion of public health and authorized the marketing of a version of our Platform 1 product, namely IQOS 2.4 and three related consumables, as a "modified risk tobacco product." The FDA authorized the marketing of this product in the U.S. with the following information:
"AVAILABLE EVIDENCE TO DATE:
•the IQOS system heats tobacco but does not burn it.
•this significantly reduces the production of harmful and potentially harmful chemicals.
•scientific studies have shown that switching completely from conventional cigarettes to the IQOS system significantly reduces your body’s exposure to harmful or potentially harmful chemicals."
We must request and receive authorization from the FDA in order to continue marketing this product with the same modified exposure information after the present order expires in four years from the date of the orders.
On March 18, 2021, we submitted to the FDA a supplemental MRTPA ("sMRTPA") for IQOS 3 requesting authorization to market this version of the device as a Modified Risk Tobacco Product with reduced exposure information like IQOS 2.4. In June 2021, the FDA formally accepted and filed our sMRTPA for substantive scientific review and, already in May 2021, the FDA opened the period for the public to provide comments on our application. The public comment period, which was initially scheduled to be closed on August 2, 2021, was extended on July 20, 2021 to provide time for the public to review application materials that were not previously posted by FDA. The FDA closed the comment period for IQOS 3's sMRTPA on December 10, 2021.
There are two types of MRTP orders the FDA may issue: a “risk modification” order or an “exposure modification” order. We had requested both types of orders for IQOS 2.4 and an initial selection of 3 consumables' variants. After review, the FDA determined that the evidence did not support issuing a "risk modification" order at this time but that it did support issuing an "exposure modification" order for the product. This determination included a finding that issuance of the exposure modification order is expected to benefit the health of the population as a whole.
We look forward to working with the FDA to provide any additional information they may require in order to market this product with reduced risk claims.
The FDA’s PMTA and MRTP orders do not mean that the agency “approved” our Platform 1 product. These authorizations are subject to strict marketing, reporting and other requirements, and are not a guarantee that the product will remain authorized, particularly if there is a significant uptake in youth or non-smoker initiation. The FDA will monitor the marketing of the product.
Some states and municipalities in the U.S. have introduced severe restrictions for the sale of certain e-cigarettes and tobacco products, including those authorized by the FDA. We believe that such restrictions on FDA-authorized products will not advance public health and will unreasonably limit adult consumer access to products that are shown to be a better alternative to continued smoking.
In March 2020, we requested a clarification from the FDA regarding the applicability of its new health warning requirements to our heated tobacco units sold in the United States. In June 2021, the FDA responded to our letter and requested additional information regarding the applicability of the cigarette health warnings rule to the IQOS System and HeatSticks. Philip Morris Products S.A. is committed to providing adult consumers of tobacco products with complete, accurate and non-misleading information regarding the health risks associated with the use of the IQOS System and HeatSticks. We shared our views with the FDA on the applicability of new health warnings to our products in our submission on December 2, 2021.
In the U.S., tobacco and nicotine-containing products that were not commercially marketed as of February 15, 2007, are subject to review and authorization by the FDA. Manufacturers of all non-authorized products currently on the market were required to file a PMTA with the FDA by September 9, 2020. The FDA announced on September 9, 2020 that it will prioritize enforcement against any tobacco and nicotine-containing product sold without a PMTA. On October 5, 2021, FDA published its final PMTA rule in the Federal Register, which is effective November 4, 2021. All future applications will have to comply with the requirements in the PMTA rule, which is substantially similar to the version of the final PMTA rule which was posted on Advanced Federal Register on January 19, 2021.
FDA actions may influence the regulatory approach of other governments.
On September 29, 2021, the International Trade Commission ("ITC") issued its Final Determination ("FD"), Limited Exclusion Order ("LEO") and Cease and Desist Order ("CDO"). The ITC upheld the finding of infringement in the ID and found a subsequent violation. The ITC issued a LEO prohibiting the importation of infringing tobacco heating articles and components thereof and cease and desist orders against Philip Morris USA, Inc. and Altria Client Services, LLC, which went into effect at the end of the 60-day Presidential review period on November 28, 2021. We have appealed the patent issues. Furthermore, lawsuits based on the same patent families have been repeatedly and universally rejected in European courts and the European Patent Office. The decision has no bearing outside the United States.
Until recently, there were no countries with specific product standards for heat-not-burn products. Currently, national standards setting minimum quality and safety requirements for such products have been adopted in several countries with technical heat-not-burn specifications and/or methods for demonstrating the absence of combustion. They are mandatory in Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, the UAE, Uzbekistan and Bahrain, and voluntary in Armenia, Costa Rica, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, Vietnam, the U.K. and Ukraine. In Japan, a voluntary standard sets minimum safety requirements for tobacco heating devices. We expect other governments to consider similar product standards and encourage making them mandatory.
All EU member states have transposed the EU Tobacco Products Directive, including the provisions on novel tobacco products, such as heated tobacco units, and e-cigarettes. Most of the EU member states require a notification submitted six months before the intended placing on the market of such products, while some require pre-market authorizations for the introduction of such products. To date, we have filed a comprehensive dossier summarizing our scientific assessment of our Platform 1 product in over 20 member states.
In addition, in Italy, in April 2018, we submitted an application for HEETS, used with the IQOS device, requesting regulatory recognition of the reduction of toxic substances and potential risk reduction resulting from switching to this product compared to continued cigarette smoking. In January 2019, our application was not granted primarily on the grounds of insufficient data and questions of methodology. Due to the constraints of the review process, we had been unable to supplement the application with all the data we subsequently filed with the FDA and to address methodological questions during the review. We plan to submit a new application where we will clarify the concerns raised by the decision and further strengthen our application by submitting additional evidence that became available since we submitted our first application, consistent with our FDA filings. We are confident that our evidence supports our application.
On October 31, 2019, our Australian subsidiary, Philip Morris Limited (“PML”), submitted an application to the Scheduling Committee of the Therapeutic Goods Administration of Australia (“TGA”) seeking to exempt heated tobacco products from being prohibited in Australia. In August 2020, the TGA issued its decision denying the application and stating that it did not present compelling evidence to establish a public health benefit from greater access to nicotine in heated tobacco products.
To date, several governmental agencies have published their scientific findings that analyze the harm-reduction potential of certain RRPs versus continuing smoking, including:
In December 2017, at the request of the U.K. Department of Health and Public Health England, the U.K. Committee on Toxicity published its assessment of the risk of heat-not-burn products relative to cigarette smoking. This assessment included analysis of scientific data for two heat-not-burn products, one of which was our Platform 1 product. The assessment concluded that, while still harmful to health, compared with the known risks from cigarettes, heat-not-burn products are probably less harmful. Subsequently, in February 2018, Public Health England published a report stating that the available evidence suggests that heat-not-burn products may be considerably less harmful than cigarettes and more harmful than e-cigarettes.
In May 2018, the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (“BfR”) published a study on the Platform 1 aerosol relative to cigarette smoke using the Health Canada Intense Smoking Regimen. BfR found reductions in selected HPHCs in a range of 80-99%. This publication indicates that significant reductions in the levels of selected toxicants are likely to reduce toxicant exposure, which BfR stated might be regarded as a discrete benefit compared to combustible cigarettes.
In May 2018, the Dutch National Institute for Public Health and Environment (“RIVM”) published a factsheet on novel tobacco products that heat rather than burn tobacco, focusing on our Platform 1 product. RIVM analyzed the aerosol generated by our Platform 1 product and concluded that the use of this product, while still harmful to health, is probably less harmful than continued smoking.
In June 2018, the Korean Food and Drug Administration (“KFDA”) issued a statement on products that heat rather than burn tobacco. The KFDA tested three heat-not-burn products, one of which was our Platform 1 product. The KFDA confirmed that the levels of the nine HPHCs tested in the aerosol of these products were on average approximately 90% lower compared to those measured in the cigarette smoke of the top five cigarette brands in South Korea. However, the KFDA stated that it could not establish that the tested heat-not-burn products are less harmful than cigarettes. In October 2018, our Korean subsidiary filed a request with a local court seeking information underlying KFDA’s analysis, conclusions and public statements. In May 2020, the court ordered KFDA to produce certain records.
In August 2018, the Science & Technology Committee of the U.K. House of Commons published a report of its inquiry into e-cigarettes and heat-not-burn products. The report concluded that e-cigarettes are significantly less harmful to health than smoking tobacco. The report also observed that for those smokers who do not accept e-cigarettes, heat-not-burn products may offer a public health benefit despite their relative risk. The report called for a risk-proportionate regulatory environment for both e-cigarettes and heat-not-burn products and noted that e-cigarettes should remain the least taxed, cigarettes the most taxed, with heat-not-burn products falling between the two. The U.K. Committee on Advertising Practice announced the removal of a prohibition of health claims in the advertising of e-cigarettes in the U.K. effective November 2018.
In November 2018, the Eurasian Economic Commission (regulatory body of the Eurasian Union consisting of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia) published the results of its commissioned study on novel nicotine-containing products, including our Platform 1 product. The study confirms significantly lower levels of HPHCs in the aerosol generated by this product compared to cigarette smoke.
In January 2019, scientific media published the results of the study of the China National Tobacco Quality Supervision and Test Centre (“CNTQST”) comparing the aerosol generated by our Platform 1 product with cigarette smoke. The CNTQST found that the former contained fewer, and lower levels of, harmful constituents than the latter and concluded that the lower temperature of heating tobacco in our Platform 1 product contributed to the difference. The CNTQST stated that the reduction in emissions of harmful constituents cannot be interpreted as a harm/risk reduction for smokers in the same proportion.
In 2020, the Superior Health Council of Belgium (“SHC”) published results of its inquiry into heat-not-burn products. The SHC concluded that heat-not-burn products, while not safe, have a more favorable toxicity profile than cigarettes. However, in light of the uncertainty of such products’ short and long-term impacts, the toxic effects of the dual use with cigarettes, and the existence of approved smoking cessation tools, the SHC recommended that current regulations for cigarettes should apply to heat-not-burn products.
The foregoing scientific findings of government agencies may not be indicative of the measures that the relevant government authorities could take in regulating our products.
We make our scientific findings publicly available for scrutiny and peer review through several channels, including our websites. From time to time, adult consumers, competitors, members of the scientific community, and others inquire into our scientific methodologies, challenge our scientific conclusions or request further study of certain aspects of our RRPs and their health effects. We are committed to a robust and open scientific debate and believe that such debate should be based on accurate and reliable scientific information. We seek to provide accurate and reliable scientific information about our RRPs; nonetheless, we may not be able to prevent third-party dissemination of false, misleading or unsubstantiated information about these products. The dissemination of scientifically unsubstantiated information or studies with a strong confirmation bias by third parties may cause confusion among adult smokers and affect their decision to switch to better alternatives to continued smoking, such as our RRPs.
To date, we have been largely successful in demonstrating to regulators that our heated tobacco units are not cigarettes due to the absence of combustion, and as such they are generally taxed either as a separate category or as other tobacco products, which typically yields more favorable tax rates than cigarettes. Although we believe that this is sensible from the public health perspective, we cannot guarantee that regulators will continue this approach.
There can be no assurance that we will succeed in our efforts to replace cigarettes with RRPs or that regulation will allow us to commercialize RRPs in all markets, to communicate about our RRPs, including making scientifically substantiated risk-reduction claims, or to treat RRPs differently from cigarettes.
Legal Challenges to RRPs: We face various administrative and legal challenges related to certain RRP activities, including allegations concerning product classification, advertising restrictions, corporate communications, product coach activities, scientific substantiation, product liability, and unfair competition. While we design our programs to comply with relevant regulations, we expect these or similar challenges to continue as we expand our efforts to commercialize RRPs and to communicate publicly. The
outcomes of these matters may affect our RRP commercialization and public communication activities and performance in one or more markets.
Our RRP Business Development Initiatives: In December 2013, we established a strategic framework with Altria Group, Inc. (“Altria”) setting out terms on how the parties would collaborate to develop and commercialize e-vapor products and commercialize two of our RRPs in the U.S. In late 2018, Altria announced that it will participate in the e-vapor category only through another e-vapor company in which Altria acquired a minority interest. In September 2019, Altria's subsidiary, Philip Morris USA Inc. (“PM USA”), began commercialization of a version of our Platform 1 product in the U.S. Under the agreement, PM USA must achieve certain milestones to maintain its exclusive distribution right and additional milestones to extend the agreement after the initial 5-year term. PMI and Altria are currently discussing these milestones, the contractual obligations, and the impact of the United States International Trade Commission (“ITC”) Orders (For more details please refer to Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies).
In January 2020, we announced an agreement with KT&G, a leading tobacco and nicotine company in South Korea, for the commercialization of KT&G’s smoke-free products outside of South Korea on an exclusive basis. For more information, see Acquisitions and Other Business Arrangements below.
Other Developments: In September 2017, we announced our support of the Foundation for a Smoke-Free World. In September 2020, our pledge agreement with the Foundation was amended. We contributed $45 million in 2020, $40 million in 2021, and expect to contribute $35 million annually from 2022 through 2029, as specified in the amended pledge agreement. To date, we contributed a total of $249.5 million. The Foundation is an independent body and is governed by its independent Board of Directors. The Foundation’s role, as set out in its corporate charter, includes funding research in the field of tobacco harm reduction, encouraging measures that reduce the harm caused by smoking, and assessing the effect of reduced cigarette consumption on the industry value chain.
Governmental Investigations
From time to time, we are subject to governmental investigations on a range of matters, including tax, customs, antitrust, advertising, and labor practices. We describe certain matters pending in Russia, South Korea and Thailand in Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies.
In November 2010, a World Trade Organization ("WTO") panel issued its decision in a dispute relating to facts that arose from August 2006, between the Philippines and Thailand, concerning a series of Thai customs and tax measures affecting cigarettes imported by PM Thailand into Thailand (see Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies for additional information). The WTO panel decision, which was upheld by the WTO Appellate Body, concluded that Thailand had no basis to find that PM Thailand's declared customs values and taxes paid were too low, as alleged by the Department of Special Investigations of the government of Thailand (“DSI”) in 2009. The decision also created obligations for Thailand to revise its laws, regulations, or practices affecting the customs valuation and tax treatment of future cigarette imports. Thailand agreed in September 2011 to fully comply with the decision by October 2012. The Philippines asserts that to date Thailand has not fully complied with the WTO panel decision and commenced challenges at the WTO Appellate Body. The WTO Appellate Body is not operational, and the appeals by Thailand are suspended indefinitely. In December 2020, the Philippines and Thailand agreed to pursue facilitator-assisted discussions aimed at progressing and resolving outstanding issues. It is not possible to predict any future developments in these proceedings or the outcome of these discussions.
The Public Prosecutor’s office of Rome, Italy, notified our Italian subsidiary, Philip Morris Italia S.r.l. (“PM Italia”), as well as three former or current employees and a former external consultant of PM Italia in July 2020 and March 2020, respectively, that it concluded a preliminary investigation against them for alleged contravention of anti-corruption laws and related disruption of trade freedom. The Public Prosecutor alleges that the individuals involved promised certain personal favors to government officials from January to July of 2018 in exchange for favorable treatment for PM Italia, and that PM Italia lacked appropriate organizational controls to prevent the alleged actions by the individuals. At the first trial hearing held on September 22, 2021, BAT filed a civil claim against PM Italia claiming vicarious liability for any wrongdoing of its former or current employees. BAT claims EUR 50 million in damages. The court admitted the claim as a matter of course and issued summons for PM Italia to appear as civil party in the case. The next trial hearing is scheduled for April 8, 2022. PM Italia believes the charges brought against it by the Public Prosecutor are without merit and will defend them vigorously.
Asset Impairment and Exit Costs
We discuss asset impairment and exit costs in Item 8, Note 19. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs to our consolidated financial statements.
Acquisitions and Other Business Arrangements
We discuss our 2021 acquisitions in Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions to our consolidated financial statements.
Turkey
On January 5, 2022, we acquired the remaining 25% stake of our holding in Philsa Philip Morris Sabancı Sigara ve Tütüncülük Sanayi ve Ticaret A.Ş. ("PHILSA") and 24.75% stake in Philip Morris SA, Philip Morris Sabancı Pazarlama ve Satış A.Ş. ("PMSA") from our Turkish partners, Sabanci Holding for an acquisition price of $205 million (TRY 2,747 million). This amount was paid on January 5th 2022, but the final acquisition price remains subject to certain predetermined adjustments based on the audited financial results of PHILSA and PMSA for fiscal years 2021 and 2022. As a result of this acquisition, PMI now owns 100% of these Turkish subsidiaries.
Global Collaboration Agreement with KT&G
In January 2020, PMI announced a global collaboration agreement with the leading tobacco and nicotine company in South Korea, KT&G, to commercialize KT&G’s smoke-free products outside of the country. The agreement will run for an initial period of three years. The two companies plan for global collaboration with the intention to actively expand to cover many markets, based on commercial success. The agreement allows PMI to distribute current KT&G smoke-free products, and their evolutions, on an exclusive basis, and does not restrict PMI from distributing its own or third-party products. KT&G’s smoke-free product brand portfolio includes heat-not-burn tobacco products (e.g., LIL Mini and LIL Plus), hybrid technologies that combine heat-not-burn tobacco and e-vapor technologies (e.g., LIL HYBRID), and e-vapor products (e.g., LIL Vapor). PMI will be responsible for the commercialization of smoke-free products supplied under the agreement.
Products sold under the agreement are subject to careful assessment to ensure they meet the regulatory requirements in the markets where they are launched, as well as our standards of quality and scientific substantiation to confirm the absence of combustion and significant reductions of emissions of harmful chemicals compared to cigarettes. PMI and KT&G will seek any necessary regulatory approvals that may be required on a market-by-market basis. There are no current plans to commercialize KT&G products in the United States.
Since the third quarter of 2020, we have launched commercial initiatives for licensed KT&G products in select markets.
Equity Investments
We discuss our equity investments in Item 8, Note 4. Related Parties - Equity Investments and Other to our consolidated financial statements.
Trade Policy
We are subject to various trade restrictions imposed by the U.S. and countries in which we do business (“Trade Sanctions”), including the trade and economic sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control and the U.S. Department of State. It is our policy to comply fully with these Trade Sanctions.
Tobacco products are agricultural products under U.S. law and are not technological or strategic in nature. From time to time, we make sales in countries subject to Trade Sanctions, either where such sanctions do not apply to our business or pursuant to exemptions or licenses.
From time to time, a subsidiary sells products to distributors that, in turn, sell those products to duty free customers that supply U.N. peacekeeping forces around the world, including those in the U.N. peacekeeping mission located in Abyei, a special administrative territory in Sudan. We do not believe that these sales, which are not subject to Trade Sanctions, and are de minimis in volume and value, present a material risk to our shareholders, our reputation or the value of our shares. We have no employees, operations or assets in Sudan.
We do not sell products in Iran, North Korea and Syria. From time to time, we explore opportunities to sell our products in one or more of these countries, as permitted by law.
We sell cigarettes in Cuba under a distribution agreement. These sales are permitted by U.S. law under a License Exception for Agricultural Commodities, issued by the United States Department of Commerce (Bureau of Industry and Security), granted to our
distributor.
Certain states within the U.S. have enacted legislation permitting or requiring state pension funds to divest or abstain from future investment in stocks of companies that do business with certain countries that are sanctioned by the U.S. Because we do business in certain of these countries, these state pension funds may have divested of our stock or may not invest in our stock. We do not believe such legislation has had a material effect on the price of our shares.
PMI is also subject to various Trade Sanctions imposed by the EU and other jurisdictions ("Trade Sanctions"). We comply fully with these Trade Sanctions.
The EU imposed new sanctions regarding the Republic of Belarus ("Belarus") on June 21, 2021, including the designation of additional EU sanctions targets (individuals and legal entities) in Belarus. On June 24, 2021, the EU council introduced additional sectoral economic sanctions aimed at specific sectors of the Belarus economy, including restrictions on the trade of goods used for the production or manufacture of tobacco products. Subsequently, six non-EU countries (Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, North Macedonia, Montenegro, and Albania) announced that they “aligned themselves” with the EU sanctions of June 21. On July 6, 2021, Switzerland imposed sanctions on Belarusian individuals and legal entities effective July 7, 2021. The Swiss sanctions are similar in scope to the EU sanctions of June 21, 2021.
Further, on August 9, 2021, the U.K. introduced sectoral economic sanctions similar in scope to the EU sectoral sanctions of June 24, 2021. Also on August 9, 2021, the U.S. imposed blocking sanctions on certain individuals and entities pursuant to an Executive Order adding them to the list of Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons (the "SDN List") issued by the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign Asset Control ("OFAC"). The Executive Order expanded the bases for the imposition of sanctions, including, among others, by authorizing the imposition by OFAC of blocking sanctions on persons operating in the tobacco sector of the Belarus economy, as well as for providing material support or assistance to any SDN. In December 2021, the U.S., the EU, the U.K. and Canada amended their respective sanctions lists by including additional Belarusian individuals, entities, and aircraft.
PMI complies with all applicable laws and regulations, including sanctions, in the markets where it operates. We have taken appropriate actions in response to the latest sanctions to ensure full compliance with the relevant restrictions.
2021 compared with 2020
The following discussion compares operating results within each of our geographical segments and Other category for 2021 with 2020.
Unless otherwise stated, references to total industry, total market, our shipment volume and our market share performance reflect cigarettes and heated tobacco units. Estimates for total industry volume and market share in certain geographies reflect limitations on the availability and accuracy of industry data.
European Union:
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 8.8%, reflecting: favorable volume/mix, mainly driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume (notably in Germany, Hungary, Italy and Poland), as well as higher device volume and favorable device mix (notably in Italy), partly offset by lower cigarette volume (notably in the Czech Republic, France and Germany) and unfavorable cigarette mix (primarily in Germany); and a favorable pricing variance, driven by higher combustible pricing (mainly in Germany and Portugal, partly offset by France and Poland) and higher heated tobacco unit pricing (notably in the Czech Republic and Germany, partially offset by Poland), partly offset by lower device pricing (notably in Germany and Italy).
Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 12.5%, primarily reflecting: favorable volume/mix, mainly driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume and favorable device mix, partly offset by lower cigarette volume and unfavorable cigarette mix (each primarily reflecting the same geographies as for net revenues noted above); lower manufacturing costs (driven by combustible and reduced-risk products); and a favorable pricing variance; partly offset by higher marketing, administration and research costs (due to combustible and reduced-risk products).
European Union - Total Market, PMI Shipment Volume and Market Share Commentaries
Total market and market share performance are shown in the table below:
The estimated total market in the EU increased by 1.0% to 478.2 billion units, primarily driven by:
•Italy, up by 4.4%, mainly reflecting the impact on adult smoker average daily consumption of the easing of pandemic-related measures; and
•Poland, up by 8.1%, primarily reflecting the impact on adult smoker average daily consumption and border sales of the easing of pandemic-related measures, as well as a lower prevalence of illicit trade;
partly offset by
•Czech Republic, down by 7.3%, mainly reflecting the impact of excise tax-driven price increases; and
•France, down by 6.2%, primarily reflecting the impact of excise tax-driven price increases and higher cross-border (non-domestic) purchases due to the easing of pandemic-related measures.
Our Regional market share decreased by 0.2 points to 38.6%, with declines in the Czech Republic, France and Germany, partly offset by gains in Greece and Italy.
Our total shipment volume increased by 1.5% to 186.1 billion units, primarily driven by:
•Italy, up by 11.5%, or by 6.1% excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, mainly reflecting the higher total market and a higher market share driven by heated tobacco units; and
•Poland, up by 3.7%, primarily reflecting the higher total market, partially offset by a lower market share due to cigarettes;
partly offset by
•Czech Republic, down by 9.7%, mainly reflecting the lower total market and a lower market share due to cigarettes; and
•France, down by 6.6%, primarily reflecting the lower total market and a lower market share due to cigarettes.
Eastern Europe:
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 5.9%, reflecting: favorable volume/mix, driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume (mainly in Russia and Ukraine), partly offset by lower cigarette volume (primarily in Russia and Ukraine), as well as unfavorable cigarette mix (mainly in Russia); and a favorable pricing variance, primarily driven by higher combustible pricing (mainly in Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine), partially offset by lower device pricing (primarily in Russia and Ukraine) and lower heated tobacco unit pricing (mainly in Ukraine, partly offset by Russia).
Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 38.5%, primarily reflecting: favorable volume/mix, mainly driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume, partly offset by lower cigarette volume and unfavorable cigarette mix (all primarily reflecting the same geographies as for net revenues noted above); lower manufacturing costs (mainly related to reduced-risk products, primarily in Russia); a favorable pricing variance; and lower marketing, administration and research costs.
Eastern Europe - Total Market, PMI Shipment Volume and Market Share Commentaries
The estimated total market in Eastern Europe decreased by 1.8% to 373.3 billion units, mainly due to:
•Russia, down by 1.0%, or by 2.7% excluding the net favorable impact of estimated trade inventory movements, primarily reflecting the impact of excise tax-driven price increases and a higher prevalence of illicit trade, partly offset by the impact on adult smoker average daily consumption of the easing of pandemic-related measures; and
•Ukraine, down by 9.8%, mainly reflecting the impact of excise tax-driven price increases and a higher prevalence of illicit trade.
Our Regional market share increased by 0.1 point to 30.6%.
Our total shipment volume was flat at 114.3 billion units, notably reflecting:
•Southeast Europe, up by 6.9%, primarily reflecting a higher total market and a higher market share (driven by heated tobacco units);
partly offset by
•Belarus, down by 43.9%, mainly reflecting the halt of shipments as of the third quarter due to international sanctions;
•Russia, down by 0.5%, or by 3.0% excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, mainly reflecting a lower market share (due to cigarettes, partly offset by heated tobacco units) and the lower total market; and
•Ukraine, down by 3.3%, mainly reflecting the lower total market, partly offset by a higher market share driven by heated tobacco units.
Excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, our total in-market sales volume decreased by 1.3%.
Middle East & Africa:
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 10.4%, despite the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments of $246 million, shown in "Cost/Other". Excluding the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments, unfavorable currency and acquisitions, net revenues increased by 18.3%, reflecting: favorable volume/mix, primarily driven by higher cigarette volume (predominantly in PMI Duty Free and Turkey, partly offset by the GCC and North Africa), higher heated tobacco unit volume (mainly in Egypt, Jordan and PMI Duty Free) and favorable cigarette mix (mainly in the GCC, PMI Duty Free and Turkey); and a favorable pricing variance, mainly driven by combustible pricing (primarily in Egypt and Turkey); partially offset by lower fees for certain distribution rights billed to customers in certain markets, shown in "Cost/Other".
Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 23.8%, mainly reflecting: a favorable pricing variance; favorable volume/mix, driven by the same factors and geographies as for net revenues noted above; and lower manufacturing costs (primarily related to combustible products); partly offset by the unfavorable impact of the Saudi Arabia customs assessments, as noted above for net revenues; higher marketing, administration and research costs; and lower fees for certain distribution rights, as noted above for net revenues.
Middle East & Africa - Total Market, PMI Shipment Volume and Market Share Commentaries
The estimated total market in the Middle East & Africa increased by 2.9% to 560.5 billion units, mainly driven by:
•Algeria, up by 6.2%, primarily reflecting the impact on adult smoker average daily consumption of the easing of pandemic-related measures, partly offset by the impact of price increases;
•Egypt, up by 8.8%, mainly reflecting a favorable comparison due to pandemic-related supply chain shortages for competitors' products in 2020, as well as the favorable impact of adult smoker in-switching to cigarettes (mainly in the low-tax tier) from other combustible tobacco products;
•South Africa, up by 13.2%, primarily reflecting a favorable comparison versus the second and third quarters of 2020, in which the total market was impacted by the pandemic-related ban on all tobacco sales from March 27th through August 17th, partly offset by a higher estimated prevalence of illicit trade stemming from the ban; and
•Turkey, up by 8.2%, mainly reflecting the impact on adult smoker average daily consumption of the easing of pandemic-related measures, coupled with increased in-bound tourism (particularly by Turkish expatriates), partially offset by a higher estimated prevalence of illicit trade;
partly offset by
•International Duty Free, down by 10.6%, primarily reflecting the impact of government travel restrictions and reduced passenger traffic since the start of the pandemic in March 2020; and
•Tunisia, down by 15.6%, mainly reflecting higher estimated prevalence of illicit trade (primarily due to market disruptions impacting product availability and the impact of price increases in July 2021).
Our Regional market share increased by 1.1 points to 23.1%.
Our total shipment volume increased by 9.3% to 130.1 billion units, notably driven by:
•PMI Duty Free, up by 56.9%. Excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements (principally due to cigarettes), PMI in-market sales volume was up by 4.1%, primarily reflecting a higher market share driven by Marlboro, partly offset by the lower total market; and
•Turkey, up by 17.2%, mainly reflecting a higher market share driven by adult smoker up-trading (mainly benefiting Marlboro and Parliament) and the higher total market;
partly offset by
•Egypt, down by 5.2%, mainly reflecting a lower market share (due primarily to adult smoker down-trading to products in the low-tax tier), partly offset by the higher total market; and
•Kuwait, down by 23.4%, or by 12.3% excluding the net unfavorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, primarily reflecting a lower total market.
South & Southeast Asia:
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 2.3%, primarily reflecting: an unfavorable pricing variance, mainly due to lower pricing for combustible products (primarily in Indonesia, partly offset by the Philippines). Volume/mix was slightly unfavorable, mainly due to lower cigarette volume (primarily in the Philippines, partly offset by India and Indonesia), largely offset by favorable cigarette mix (mainly in Indonesia and the Philippines).
Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 14.0%, primarily reflecting: an unfavorable pricing variance; unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to lower cigarette volume (primarily in the Philippines, partly offset by India and Indonesia), partially offset by favorable cigarette mix (mainly in Indonesia and the Philippines); and higher marketing, administration and research costs (mainly in Indonesia and the Philippines).
South & Southeast Asia - Total Market, PMI Shipment Volume and Market Share Commentaries
The estimated total market in South & Southeast Asia increased by 7.2% to 722.6 billion units, notably driven by:
•Bangladesh, up by 12.9%, primarily reflecting a favorable comparison versus the prior year, during which pandemic-related restrictions impacted tobacco product availability;
•India, up by 13.6%, mainly reflecting a favorable comparison versus the prior year, during which pandemic-related restrictions impacted the movement of certain products, including tobacco;
•Indonesia, up by 7.2%, primarily reflecting the growth of the tax-advantaged 'below tier one' segment and the impact on adult smoker consumption of the easing of pandemic-related measures;
•Pakistan, up by 17.3%, notably reflecting a lower prevalence of illicit trade (partly due to pandemic-related supply disruptions for illicit products); and
•Vietnam, up by 10.0%, mainly reflecting a lower prevalence of illicit trade due to pandemic-related supply disruptions for illicit products;
partly offset by:
•the Philippines, down by 10.7%, primarily reflecting the impact of industry-wide price increases in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Our Regional market share decreased by 1.7 points to 19.7%.
Our total shipment volume decreased by 1.8% to 142.2 billion units, primarily due to:
•the Philippines, down by 17.6%, mainly reflecting the lower total market and a lower market share (predominantly due to mid-price Fortune, reflecting the impact of price increases in the fourth quarter of 2020, partly offset by Marlboro); and
•Thailand, down by 4.7%, primarily reflecting a lower total market, partly offset by a higher market share driven by L&M 7.1;
partly offset by
•India, up by 43.2%, mainly reflecting a higher market share (driven by Marlboro) and the higher total market;
•Indonesia, up by 4.3%, primarily reflecting the higher total market, partly offset by a lower market share (mainly due to adult smoker down-trading to the 'below tier one' segment as a result of significantly lower retail prices, partly offset by share growth for PMI's premium and hand-rolled portfolio); and
•Pakistan, up by 10.1%, mainly reflecting the higher total market, partly offset by a lower market share.
East Asia & Australia:
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 8.5%, reflecting: a favorable pricing variance, primarily driven by higher heated tobacco, combustible and device net pricing in Japan, partly offset by lower combustible pricing in Australia; and favorable volume/mix, mainly driven by higher heated tobacco unit volume and favorable device volume/mix in Japan (driven by the launch of IQOS ILUMA), partly offset by unfavorable cigarette mix (mainly in Australia and Japan), lower cigarette volume (primarily in Australia, Japan and South Korea) and unfavorable heated tobacco unit mix in Japan
Operating income, excluding currency acquisitions, increased by 8.7%, mainly reflecting: a favorable pricing variance; and lower manufacturing costs (primarily related to reduced-risk products in Japan and South Korea); partly offset by higher marketing, administration and research costs (notably due to the launch of IQOS ILUMA in Japan and higher asset impairment and exit costs, mainly related to product distribution restructuring in South Korea). Volume/mix was slightly unfavorable, primarily reflecting unfavorable cigarette mix (mainly in Australia and Japan), lower cigarette volume (primarily in Australia, Japan and South Korea), as well as unfavorable heated tobacco unit mix and device mix in Japan, largely offset by higher heated tobacco unit volume in Japan.
East Asia & Australia - Total Market, PMI Shipment Volume and Market Share Commentaries
The estimated total market in East Asia & Australia, excluding China, decreased by 1.4% to 284.7 billion units, mainly due to:
•Australia, down by 11.3%, primarily reflecting the impact of the ending of the pandemic-related wage subsidy by the government, coupled with the impact of pandemic-related restrictions; and
•Japan, down by 2.4%, mainly reflecting the impact of the October 2020 and 2021 excise tax-driven price increases.
Our Regional market share, excluding China, increased by 0.3 points to 27.5%.
Our total shipment volume increased by 3.9% to 82.1 billion units, mainly driven by:
•Japan, up by 8.0%, or by 1.3% excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, primarily reflecting a higher market share (driven by heated tobacco units), partly offset by the lower total market;
partly offset by
•South Korea, down by 4.7%, mainly reflecting a lower market share due mainly to Parliament.
Excluding the net favorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, our total in-market sales volume declined by 0.4%.
Americas:
Net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 5.6%, mainly reflecting: a favorable pricing variance, driven by higher combustible pricing (mainly in Argentina and Colombia); and favorable volume/mix, primarily driven by higher cigarette volume (mainly in Brazil and Mexico, partly offset by Argentina) and higher device volume, partially offset by unfavorable cigarette mix (primarily in Brazil).
Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 16.8%, mainly reflecting an unfavorable comparison related to the Brazil indirect tax credit of $119 million in 2020 and higher manufacturing costs (due to reduced-risk and combustible products), partly offset by a favorable pricing variance and lower marketing, administration and research costs. Volume/mix was slightly unfavorable, mainly reflecting unfavorable cigarette mix (notably in Brazil), largely offset by higher cigarette volume (primarily in Brazil and Mexico, partly offset by Argentina).
Americas - Total Market, PMI Shipment Volume and Market Share Commentaries
The estimated total market in Americas, excluding the U.S., increased by 2.2% to 193.9 billion units, mainly driven by:
•Argentina, up by 7.4%, primarily reflecting a lower estimated prevalence of illicit trade and a favorable comparison related to retail out-of-stock in the second quarter of 2020 (due to temporary factory shutdowns related to the pandemic), partly offset by the impact of price increases;
•Brazil, up by 3.1%, mainly reflecting a lower estimated prevalence of illicit trade due to reduced price gaps with legal products and the impact of social incentives provided by the government to mitigate the effects of the pandemic; and
•Mexico, up by 4.2%, primarily reflecting the impact on adult smoker average daily consumption of the easing of pandemic-related measures coupled with the impact of increased in-bound tourism;
partly offset by
•Canada, down by 9.3%, notably reflecting the impact of price increases and out-switching from cigarettes to e-vapor products.
Our Regional market share, excluding the U.S., decreased by 0.4 points to 33.4%.
Our total shipment volume increased by 1.5% to 65.2 billion units, primarily driven by:
•Brazil, up by 5.2%, mainly reflecting the higher total market and a higher market share driven by Chesterfield; and
•Mexico, up by 4.7%, primarily reflecting the higher total market, as well as a higher market share driven by Marlboro;
partly offset by
•Argentina, down by 2.9%, mainly reflecting a lower market share (primarily due to adult smoker down-trading to ultra-low-price brands produced by local manufacturers).
Other:
Following the acquisitions of Fertin Pharma A/S, Vectura Group plc. and OtiTopic, Inc., we added the "Other" category in the third quarter of 2021. Business operations for the Other category are managed and evaluated separately from the geographical segments.
We recorded net revenues of $101 million in the Other category, with approximately 39% of the total coming from Fertin Pharma's nicotine replacement therapy and nicotine-containing oral products businesses.
The operating loss of $52 million primarily reflected a pre-tax charge of $51 million in the third quarter of 2021 related to the OtiTopic, Inc. transaction. The charge was recorded to research and development costs (within marketing, administration and research costs) and reflected PMI's accounting for the OtiTopic transaction as an asset acquisition, since the in-process research and development of the dry powder inhalation aspirin treatment represented substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired and had no alternative future use. For further details, see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions and Item 8, Note 12. Segment Reporting.
2020 compared with 2019
For a discussion comparing our consolidated operating results within each of our geographical segments for the year ended December 31, 2020, with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Operating Results by Business Segment in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 9, 2021.
Financial Review
2021 compared with 2020
•Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $2.2 billion compared with 2020. Excluding favorable currency movements of $0.8 billion, net cash provided by operating activities increased by $1.4 billion, due primarily to higher net earnings and lower working capital requirements of $0.5 billion, partially offset by higher pension plan contributions.
The lower working capital requirements in 2021 as compared with 2020 were primarily due to more cash provided by the net impact of both inventories and accrued liabilities and other current assets mainly reflecting COVID-19 pandemic related build-up of inventory levels in our supply chain in 2020, and the timing of excise tax-paid inventory movements and excise tax payments, as well as higher cash provided by accounts payable primarily reflecting higher IQOS device purchases in 2021. More cash used in accounts receivable was mainly due to the lower usage of our factoring arrangements to sell trade receivable, partially offset by the Brazil indirect tax credit recovered in 2021. For further details on our factoring arrangements to sell trade receivables and our Brazil indirect tax credit recovered in 2021, see Item 8, Note 18. Sale of Accounts Receivable and Item 8, Note 12. Segment Reporting, respectively.
•Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $2.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $1.2 billion from the comparable 2020 period. This increase was primarily due to $2.1 billion of cash used in 2021 for our acquisitions, net of acquired cash, partially offset by favorable movements of $1.0 billion in cash collateral exchanged with financial institutions to secure derivatives designated as net investment hedges of Euro assets principally related to changes in exchange rates between the Euro and
the U.S. dollar. For further detail on our 2021 acquisitions and derivatives designated as net investment hedges, see Item 8, Note 6. Acquisitions and Item 8, Note 15. Financial Instruments.
Our capital expenditures were $0.7 billion in 2021 and $0.6 billion in 2020. The 2021 expenditures were primarily related to our ongoing investments in RRPs. We expect total capital expenditures in 2022 of approximately $1.0 billion (including capital expenditures related to our ongoing investment in RRPs), to be funded by operating cash flows.
•Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities of $12.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $3.5 billion from the comparable 2020 period. The change was primarily due to the proceeds we received in 2020 from long-term U.S. dollar debt issuances ($3.7 billion), share purchases in 2021 under the new share repurchase program and higher dividend payments, partially offset by lower repayments of long-term debt and lower payments to noncontrolling interests.
Dividends paid in 2021 and 2020 were $7.6 billion and $7.4 billion, respectively.
2020 compared with 2019
For a discussion comparing our net cash activities (operating, investing and financing) for the year ended December 31, 2020, with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation - Financial Review in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission on February 9, 2021.
Debt and Liquidity
We define cash and cash equivalents as short-term, highly liquid investments, readily convertible to known amounts of cash that mature within a maximum of three months and have an insignificant risk of change in value due to interest rate or credit risk changes. As a policy, we do not hold any investments in structured or equity-linked products. Our cash and cash equivalents are predominantly held with institutions that have investment-grade long-term credit rating. As part of our cash management strategy and in order to manage counterparty exposure, we also enter into reverse repurchase agreements. Such agreements are collateralized with government or corporate securities held by a custodial bank and, at maturity, cash is paid back to PMI, and the collateral is returned to the bank. For 2021 and 2020, the activities for such reverse repurchase agreements were not material.
In August 2021, we published a business transformation-linked financing framework (“Framework”), which integrates the company’s smoke-free transformation into its financing strategy. The Framework outlines the guidelines that we will follow in issuing business transformation-linked financing instruments in the debt capital and loan markets, which may include public notes offerings, private placements, loans, and other relevant financing instruments.
Credit Ratings - The cost and terms of our financing arrangements as well as our access to commercial paper markets may be affected by applicable credit ratings. At February 10, 2022, our credit ratings and outlook by major credit rating agencies were as follows:
Credit Facilities - On January 28, 2022, we entered into an agreement to amend and extend the term of our $1.8 billion 364-day revolving credit facility from February 1, 2022, to January 31, 2023.
At February 10, 2022, our committed credit facilities were as follows:
(1) On January 28, 2022, we entered into an agreement, effective February 10, 2022, to amend and extend the term of our $2.0 billion multi-year revolving credit facility, for an additional year covering the period February 11, 2026 to February 10, 2027, in the amount of $1.9 billion.
(2) Includes business transformation-linked pricing adjustments that may result in the reduction or increase in both the interest rate and commitment fee under the credit agreement if PMI achieves, or fails to achieve, certain specified targets based on its business transformation goals.
At February 10, 2022, there were no borrowings under the committed credit facilities, and the entire committed amounts were available for borrowing. Subject to market conditions, PMI currently expects to request a further extension of the terms of its $2.5 billion multi-year revolving credit facility for an additional one-year period, in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of the relevant revolving credit facility agreement.
All banks participating in our committed credit facilities have an investment-grade long-term credit rating from the credit rating agencies. We continuously monitor the credit quality of our banking group, and at this time we are not aware of any potential non-performing credit provider.
These facilities do not include any credit rating triggers, material adverse change clauses or any provisions that could require us to post collateral. We expect to continue to meet our covenants.
In addition to the committed credit facilities discussed above, certain of our subsidiaries maintain short-term credit arrangements to meet their respective working capital needs. These credit arrangements, which amounted to approximately $2.3 billion at December 31, 2021 and approximately $2.7 billion at December 31, 2020, are for the sole use of our subsidiaries. Borrowings under these arrangements and other bank loans amounted to $225 million at December 31, 2021, and $244 million at December 31, 2020.
Commercial Paper Program - We continue to have access to liquidity in the commercial paper market through programs in place in the U.S. and in Europe having an aggregate issuance capacity of $8.0 billion. At December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had no commercial paper outstanding. The average commercial paper balance outstanding during 2021 and 2020 was $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
Sale of Accounts Receivable - To mitigate credit risk and enhance cash and liquidity management, we sell trade receivables to unaffiliated financial institutions. These arrangements allow us to sell, on an ongoing basis, certain trade receivables without recourse. The trade receivables sold are generally short-term in nature and are removed from the consolidated balance sheets. We sell trade receivables under two types of arrangements, servicing and nonservicing.
Our operating cash flows were positively impacted by the amount of the trade receivables sold and derecognized from the consolidated balance sheets, which remained outstanding with the unaffiliated financial institutions. The trade receivables sold that remained outstanding under these arrangements as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, were $0.9 billion, $1.2 billion and $0.9 billion, respectively. The net proceeds received are included in cash provided by operating activities in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
For further details, see Item 8, Note 18. Sale of Accounts Receivable to our consolidated financial statements.
Debt - Our total debt was $27.8 billion at December 31, 2021, and $31.5 billion at December 31, 2020. Our total debt is primarily fixed rate in nature. The weighted-average all-in financing cost of our total debt was 2.4% in 2021 and 2020. For further details,
including the fair value of our debt, see Item 8, Note 7. Indebtedness. The amount of debt that we can issue is subject to approval by our Board of Directors.
On February 11, 2020, we filed a shelf registration statement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, under which we may from time to time sell debt securities and/or warrants to purchase debt securities over a three-year period.
During 2021, we had no public debt issuances.
The weighted-average time to maturity of our long-term debt was approximately 10 years at the end of 2021 and 2020.
Cash Requirements - At December 31, 2021, our material short-term and long-term cash requirements for various contractual obligations and commitments primarily consisted of the following:
•principal payments related to long-term debt and the associated interest payments. For further details, see Item 8, Note 7. Indebtedness to our consolidated financial statements;
•accounts payable and accrued liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet (primarily short-term in nature);
•purchase obligations for inventory and production costs to be utilized in the normal course of business such as raw materials, electronic devices, indirect materials and supplies, packaging, co-manufacturing arrangements, storage and distribution, as well as capital expenditures. These purchase obligations are expected to be approximately $2.7 billion in 2022 and approximately $1.6 billion for years beyond;
•operating lease liabilities, on an undiscounted basis, which were included in our consolidated balance sheets. For further details, see Item 8, Note 21. Leases to our consolidated financial statements; and
•other long-term liabilities mainly related to transition tax. For further details, see Item 8, Note 11. Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements.
We utilize long-term and short-term debt financing, including a commercial paper program that is regularly used to finance ongoing liquidity requirements, as part of our overall cash management strategy. Our ability to access the capital and credit markets as well as overall dynamics of these markets may impact borrowing costs. We expect that the combination of our long-term and short-term debt financing, the commercial paper program and the committed credit facilities, coupled with our operating cash flows, will enable us to meet our liquidity requirements.
•Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements, including special purpose entities, other than guarantees, and cash requirements discussed above.
Guarantees - At December 31, 2021, we have guarantees of our own performance, which are primarily related to excise taxes on the shipment of our products. There is no liability in the consolidated financial statements associated with these guarantees. These guarantees have not had, and are not expected to have, a significant impact on PMI’s liquidity. In October 2020, we guaranteed an obligation for an equity method investee. For further details, see Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements.
Equity and Dividends
We discuss our stock awards as of December 31, 2021, in Item 8, Note 9. Stock Plans to our consolidated financial statements.
During 2020 and the first six months of 2021, we did not repurchase any shares under a share repurchase program. On June 11, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $7 billion, with target spending of $5 billion to $7 billion over a three-year period. On July 22, 2021, we began repurchasing shares under this new share repurchase program. From July 22, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we repurchased 8.5 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $785 million.
Dividends paid in 2021 were $7.6 billion. During the third quarter of 2021, our Board of Directors approved a 4.2% increase in the quarterly dividend to $1.25 per common share. As a result, the present annualized dividend rate is $5.00 per common share.
Market Risk
Counterparty Risk - We predominantly work with financial institutions with strong short- and long-term credit ratings as assigned by Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s. These banks are also part of a defined group of relationship banks. Non-investment grade institutions are only used in certain emerging markets to the extent required by local business needs. We have a conservative approach when it comes to choosing financial counterparties and financial instruments. As such we do not invest or hold investments in any structured or equity-linked products. The majority of our cash and cash equivalents is currently invested with maturities of less than 30 days.
We continuously monitor and assess the credit worthiness of all our counterparties.
Derivative Financial Instruments - We operate in markets outside of the United States of America, with manufacturing and sales facilities in various locations throughout the world. Consequently, we use certain financial instruments to manage our foreign currency and interest rate exposure. We use derivative financial instruments principally to reduce our exposure to market risks resulting from fluctuations in foreign exchange and interest rates by creating offsetting exposures. We are not a party to leveraged derivatives and, by policy, do not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.
See Item 8, Note 15. Financial Instruments to our consolidated financial statements for further details on our derivative financial instruments and the related collateral arrangements.
Value at Risk - We use a value at risk computation to estimate the potential one-day loss in the fair value of our interest-rate-sensitive and foreign currency price-sensitive derivative financial instruments. This computation includes our debt and foreign currency forwards, swaps and options. Anticipated transactions, foreign currency trade payables and receivables, and net investments in foreign subsidiaries, which the foregoing instruments are intended to hedge, were excluded from the computation.
The computation estimates were made assuming normal market conditions, using a 95% confidence interval and a one-day holding period using a "parametric delta-gamma" approximation technique to determine the observed interrelationships between movements in interest rates and various currencies and in calculating the risk of the underlying positions in the portfolio. These interrelationships were determined by observing interest rate and forward currency rate movements primarily over the preceding quarter for determining value at risk at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and primarily over each of the four preceding quarters for the calculation of average, high and low value at risk amounts during each year.
The significant year-over-year decrease in "average" and "high" impact on the value at risk computation above was primarily due to an increase in interest rate and foreign currency volatility during the first quarter of 2020 resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The value at risk computation is a risk analysis tool designed to statistically estimate the maximum probable daily loss from adverse movements in interest and foreign currency rates under normal market conditions. The computation does not purport to represent actual losses in fair value or earnings to be incurred by us, nor does it consider the effect of favorable changes in market rates. We
cannot predict actual future movements in such market rates and do not present these results to be indicative of future movements in market rates or to be representative of any actual impact that future changes in market rates may have on our future results of operations or financial position.
Contingencies
See Item 3 and Item 8, Note 17. Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of contingencies.
Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements
We may from time to time make written or oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in filings with the SEC, in reports to stockholders and in press releases and investor webcasts. You can identify these forward-looking statements by use of words such as "strategy," "expects," "continues," "plans," "anticipates," "believes," "will," "aspires," "estimates," "intends," "projects," "aims," "goals," "targets," "forecasts" and other words of similar meaning. You can also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts.
We cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized, although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions. Our RRPs constitute a new product category in its early stages that is less predictable than our mature cigarette business. Achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and inaccurate assumptions. Should known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could vary materially from those anticipated, estimated or projected. Investors should bear this in mind as they consider forward-looking statements and whether to invest in or remain invested in our securities. In connection with the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we are identifying important factors that, individually or in the aggregate, could cause actual results and outcomes to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements made by us; any such statement is qualified by reference to the following cautionary statements. We elaborate on these and other risks we face throughout this document, particularly in Item 1A. Risk Factors and Business Environment of this section. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all risk factors. Consequently, you should not consider this discussion of potential risks or uncertainties to be complete. We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement that we may make from time to time, except in the normal course of our public disclosure obligations.