Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together with the more detailed business information and financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. This annual report may contain certain “forward-looking” information within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. This information involves risks and uncertainties. Actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Item 1A - Risk Factors.
Overview
Psychemedics Corporation is the world’s largest provider of hair testing for drugs of abuse, utilizing a patented hair analysis method involving digestion of hair, enzyme immunoassay technology and confirmation by mass spectrometry to analyze human hair to detect abused substances. The Company’s customers include Fortune 500 companies, as well as small to mid-size corporations, schools and governmental entities, located in the United States and internationally. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated $24.9 million in revenue, while realizing a gross profit of 41% and incurring a net loss of $0.7 million and diluted net loss per share of $0.12 for the year ended December 31, 2021, versus diluted net loss per share of $0.70 from the prior year. One-time legal settlements of $3.2 million and other non-routine activity significantly contributed to the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During 2020 and 2021, our volumes were materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Beginning in March 2020, the Company experienced a material decline in volumes driven by the federal, state, and local governmental policies and initiatives to reduce the transmission of COVID-19. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company began to experience a recovery in volumes, which continued into 2021. The recovery has been driven by people returning back to work, general condition of the economy and vaccination efforts.
As the Company disclosed in its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the third quarter of 2021, and more recently in a Current Report on Form 8-K filed on December 10, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized the Company to explore shareholder enhancement opportunities, including strategic alternatives, such as the potential sale or merger of the Company, capitalization optimization and dividend strategies. The Company continues to explore such opportunities. There can be no assurances that the shareholder enhancement review process will result in a transaction or other strategic change or outcome. The Company has not set a timetable for the conclusion of its review of strategic alternatives, and it does not intend to comment further unless and until the Board has approved a specific course of action or the Company has otherwise determined that further disclosure is appropriate or required by law. The Company’s Board of Directors has designated a subcommittee of the Board to review shareholder enhancement opportunities. The Company has retained investment banking firms and corporate transaction legal advisors in connection with its exploration of shareholder enhancement opportunities.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, the selected statements of operations data as a percentage of total revenue:
Revenue by Geographic Region
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2021, Compared to Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands)
Revenue: The revenue increase of 17% was primarily due to a 9% increase in volume, compounded by an 8% increase in average revenue per sample, primarily as a result of business mix and increased domestic volumes. Domestic revenues increased by 21% compared to the prior year period, due to an increase in volume and growth in the base business. International revenues decreased by 29% from 2020 to 2021, due to decline in volume from unfavorable market forces in Brazil and the COVID-19 pandemic. See geographic breakdown of revenue above. The Company does not expect any material change in its Brazil driver license business as this market continues to be considerably uncertain.
Gross profit: The 110% increase in gross profit was due to higher sales volume and lower personnel costs. Higher volume and lower personnel costs was the primary factor in the gross profit percentage increase from 23% in 2020 to 41% in 2021. The decrease in lower labor and related costs was primarily due to the recognition of the refundable employee retention tax credits in 2021 and the retention of certain laboratory employees during 2020, to qualify for PPP Loan forgiveness with no offsetting proportional revenue.
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses: G&A expenses decreased 1% from 2020 to 2021, primarily driven by reductions in personnel costs after the PPP Loan covered period expired, cost-savings initiatives, including salary reductions; in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and refundable employee retention tax credits in 2021. These decreases were partially offset by higher legal expenses related to the exploration of possible strategic alternatives in an effort to enhance shareholder value. As a percentage of revenue, G&A expenses represented 24.6% in 2021 compared to 28.5% in 2020.
Marketing and selling expenses: Marketing and selling expenses decreased 22% from 2020 to 2021, primarily driven by cost reduction initiatives; specifically, lower personnel related costs (including less travel and meals) and in addition refundable employee retention tax credits. As a percentage of revenue, marketing and selling expenses represented 11.2% in 2021 compared to 16.7% in 2020.
Income Taxes: During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $0.2 million representing a tax rate of 19% compared to a tax rate of 38% in 2020. For information regarding additional matters related to our taxes, please see Note 5 - "Income Taxes" to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2020, Compared to Results for the Year Ended December 31, 2019 (in thousands)
Revenue: The revenue decline of 43% was primarily due to a 56% decrease in volume, offset by a 13% increase in average revenue per sample. International revenue was down 82% from 2019 to 2020, due to decline in volume from unfavorable market forces in Brazil and the COVID-19 pandemic and domestic revenue was down 29% from 2019 to 2020, also due primarily to the COVID-19 pandemic. See geographic breakdown of revenue above. The Company does not expect any change in the decline it has experienced in its Brazil driver license business as this market continues to be considerably uncertain.
Gross profit: The 70% decrease in gross profit was primarily due to lower sales volume. This lower volume was the primary factor in the gross profit percentage reduction from 44% in 2019 to 23% in 2020. In addition, gross profit was also adversely impacted by a requirement that we retain certain levels of personnel to qualify for PPP Loan forgiveness with no offsetting proportional revenue. The staffing levels we maintained did not support the volume sales noted above.
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses: G&A expenses decreased 16% from 2019 to 2020, primarily driven by reductions in personnel costs after the PPP Loan covered period expired, cost-savings initiatives, including salary reductions, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and lower international tax expense. These decreases were partially offset by higher legal expenses related to the exploration of possible strategic alternatives in an effort to enhance shareholder value. As a percentage of revenue, G&A expenses represented 28.5% in 2020 compared to 19.2% in 2019.
Marketing and selling expenses: Marketing and selling expenses decreased 23% from 2019 to 2020, primarily driven by cost reduction initiatives; specifically, lower personnel related costs (including less travel and meals). In addition, lower recruiting fees and commissions from volume decline contributed to the comparative decrease. As a percentage of revenue, marketing and selling expenses represented 16.7% in 2020 compared to 12.4% in 2019.
Income Taxes: During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a tax benefit of $2.3 million representing a tax rate of 38% compared to a tax rate of 50% in 2019. For information regarding additional matters related to our taxes, please see Note 5 - "Income Taxes" to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company had $2.0 million and $2.8 million of cash as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. The Company’s operating activities generated net cash of $0.4 million in 2021, used net cash of $4.1 million in 2020 and generated net cash $4.3 million in 2019. Investing activities used net cash of $0.2 million and $0.9 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, and generated net cash of $2.1 million in 2019. Financing activities used net cash of $1.0 million in 2021, provided net cash of $0.5 million in 2020 and used $3.0 million in 2019.
Operating cash generated in operations of $0.4 million in 2021 primarily reflected the net loss of $0.7 million adjusted for PPP Loan forgiveness of $2.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.8 million and stock compensation expense of $0.7 million. Cash generated in operations was also affected by the following changes in assets and liabilities: an increase in accounts receivable of $0.8 million and an increase in accrued expenses of $1.4 million. The $4.5 million change in operating cash from a negative $4.1 million in 2020 to a positive $0.4 million in 2021 was primarily driven by improved operating results in 2021.
Operating cash used in operations of $4.1 million in 2020 primarily reflected the net loss of $3.9 million adjusted for depreciation and amortization of $2.7 million, stock compensation expense of $0.6 million, and a decrease in net deferred tax liabilities of $0.3 million. Cash used in operations was also affected by the following changes in assets and liabilities: a decrease in accounts receivable of $0.4 million, a decrease in accrued expenses of $1.8 million, and a decrease in prepaid expenses (and other current assets) of $1.6 million. The $8.4 million change in operating cash from a positive $4.3 million in 2019 to a negative $4.1 million in 2020 was primarily driven by lower net income in 2020.
Cash used in investing activities primarily reflected the purchase of capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were $0.2 million, $1.0 million and $1.7 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In 2021, the expenditures related principally to laboratory equipment, machinery, and computer software. Marketable securities transactions consisted of the sale of one certificate of deposit (“CD”) for $3.8 million in 2019.
Financing cash flow in 2021 primarily reflected repayments under the Equipment Loan Arrangement of $0.7 million. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company did not repurchase any shares of common stock for treasury. The Company has authorized 750,000 shares for repurchase since June of 1998, of which 250,000 shares of common stock were authorized in March of 2008 for repurchase. Since 1998, a total of 550,684 shares have been repurchased. The Company also distributed cash dividends to its shareholders of $0.3 million in 2021, $1.0 million in 2020 and $4.0 million in 2019.
The Company’s current intention is to continue to declare and pay dividends to the extent funds are available and not required for operating purposes or capital requirements, and only then, upon approval by the Board of Directors. There can be no assurance that in the future the Company will pay dividends.
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s principal sources of liquidity included $2.0 million of cash on hand. Management currently believes that such funds, together with future operating profits, should be adequate to fund anticipated working capital requirements, including debt obligations, and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. Depending upon the Company’s results of operations, its future capital needs and available marketing opportunities, the Company may use various financing sources to raise additional funds. Such sources could include but are not limited to, issuance of common stock or debt financing, lines of credit, or equipment leasing; although there is no assurance that such financings will be available to the Company on terms it deems acceptable, if at all.
On May 4, 2020, the Company borrowed $2.2 million from Bank of America, N.A., pursuant to the PPP, established under the CARES Act. These funds were used to maintain operations, including the employment of both exempt and non-exempt employees, in order to meet the drug testing needs of our customers and adhere to strict quality standards in the midst of the worldwide COVID-19 pandemic.
During the third quarter of 2021, the PPP Loan and accrued interest was 100% forgiven by the SBA. The PPP Loan exceeded $2.0 million audit threshold established by the SBA, and therefore, also will be subject to audit by the SBA in the future.
Purchase Commitment
Operating leases consist of rent obligations for the company’s facilities and corporate office. The Company has no significant contractual obligation for supply agreements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. Management believes the most critical accounting policies are as follows:
Revenue Recognition
The Company is in the business of performing drug testing services and reporting the results thereof. The Company’s services are primarily drug and alcohol testing for its customers for an agreed-upon fee per unit tested. The revenues are recognized when the drug test is performed and reported to the customer.
The Company records revenue for the shipping of samples from the customer or independent hair collection facility to the laboratory for customers that choose to use the Company’s shipping account. The Company also records revenue for the collection of the hair sample for customers that choose to have the Company manage this process at the same time the sample test is completed and results reported to the customer. The associated costs incurred in connection with these services is recorded as costs of revenue. The Company records revenue for these services on a gross basis as it has determined it is the principal under these arrangements.
The Company also provides expert testimony, when and if necessary, to support the results of the tests, which is generally billed separately and recognized as the services are provided.
Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates, including legal contingencies, bad debts, long-lived asset lives, income tax valuation, stock-based compensation and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Capitalized Development Cost
We capitalize costs related to significant software projects developed or obtained for internal use in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting standards. Costs incurred during the preliminary project work stage or conceptual stage, such as determining the performance requirements, system requirements and data conversion, are expensed as incurred. Costs incurred in the application development phase, such as coding, testing for new software and upgrades that result in additional functionality, are capitalized and are amortized using the straight-line method over the useful life of the software for between three to five years. Costs incurred during the post-implementation/operation stage, including training costs and maintenance costs, are expensed as incurred. We capitalized internally developed software costs of $99 thousand, $213 thousand and $234 thousand during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The software development is for primarily for two projects. Determining whether particular costs incurred are more properly attributable to the preliminary or conceptual stage, and thus expensed, or to the application development phase, and thus capitalized and amortized, depends on subjective judgments about the nature of the development work, and our judgments in this regard may differ from those made by other companies. General and administrative costs related to developing or obtaining such software are expensed as incurred.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on management’s assessment of the ability to collect amounts owed to it by its customers. Management reviews its accounts receivable aging for doubtful accounts and uses a methodology based on calculating the allowance using a combination of factors including the age of the receivable along with management’s judgment to identify accounts that may not be collectible. The Company routinely assesses the financial strength of its customers and, as a consequence, believes that its accounts receivable credit risk exposure is limited. The Company maintains an allowance for potential credit losses but historically has not experienced any significant losses related to individual customers or groups of customers in any particular industry or geographic area. Bad debt expense has been within management’s expectations.
Contingencies
In the normal course of business, we are subject to contingencies, such as legal proceedings and claims arising out of our business, which include class action allegations, that cover a wide range of matters, including, among others, government investigations, product liability, contractual claims and tax matters. In general, we do not have insurance coverage for class action lawsuits. We are also involved in various other legal actions arising in the normal course of business, for which insurance coverage may or may not be available depending on the nature of the action. We recognize accruals for such contingencies when it is probable that a liability will be incurred, and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. These estimates are subject to uncertainties that are difficult to predict and, as such, actual results could vary from these estimated.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the liability method, which requires the Company to recognize a current tax liability or asset for current taxes payable or refundable and a net deferred tax liability for the estimated future tax effects of temporary differences between the financial statement and tax reporting bases of assets and liabilities to the extent that they are realizable. Deferred tax expense (benefit) results from the net change in deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year. A deferred tax valuation allowance is required if it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company operates within multiple taxing jurisdictions and could be subject to audit in these jurisdictions. These audits may involve complex issues, which may require an extended period of time to resolve. The Company has provided for its estimated taxes payable in the accompanying financial statements. The Company did not have any interest or penalties accrued as of December 31, 2021, or 2020. The Company does not expect the unrecognized tax benefits to change significantly over the next twelve months.
The above listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of the Company’s accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the accompanying Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report for further detail on recent accounting pronouncements.