Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on November 17, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”).
Our Sponsor is Priveterra Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on February 8, 2021. On February 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $276,000,000, and incurring offering costs of approximately $5,520,000, inclusive of approximately $9,660,000 in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 5,213,333 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to us of approximately $7,820,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $276,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in the Trust Account and was invested in permitted United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act that invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
We will only have 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or February 11, 2023, to complete our initial Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If we do not complete a Business Combination within this period of time, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purposes of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares for a per share pro rata portion of the Trust Account, including interest and not previously released to us to fund our working capital requirements (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of such net interest to pay dissolution expenses) and (iii) as promptly as possible following such redemption, dissolve and liquidate the balance of our net assets to our remaining stockholders, as part of our plan of dissolution and liquidation. Our Sponsor and our executive officers and independent director nominees (the “initial stockholders”) entered into a letter agreement with us, pursuant to which they have waived their rights to participate in any redemption with respect to their Founder Shares; however, if the initial stockholders or any of our officers, directors or affiliates acquire shares of common stock in or after the Initial Public Offering, they will be entitled to a pro rata share of the Trust Account upon our redemption or liquidation in the event we do not complete a Business Combination within the required time period. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the residual assets remaining available for distribution (including Trust Account assets) will be less than the Initial Public Offering price per Unit in the Initial Public Offering.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $497,412 in our operating bank account and working capital of $731,279 (excluding taxes payable which is funded by earnings from the Trust Account).
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through a capital contribution from the Sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares and loans under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $73,295. On February 15,
2021, we issued an unsecured convertible promissory note to our Sponsor, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $1,500,000 from our sponsor for ongoing expenses reasonably related to our business and the consummation of an initial business combination. All unpaid principal under the convertible note will be due and payable in full on the earlier of (i) February 11, 2023 and (ii) the effective date of our initial business combination. Our Sponsor will have the option, at any time on or prior to such maturity date, to convert any amounts outstanding under the convertible note into warrants to purchase shares of our Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, at a conversion price of $1.50 per warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder to purchase one share of our Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to the same adjustments applicable to the private placement warrants sold concurrently with our initial public offering. In June 2021 we had $100,000 of Working Capital Loans outstanding which were converted into 66,667 Working Capital Warrants. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, there were no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
We have approximately $497,000 in cash and approximately $835,000 in current liabilities as of December 31, 2021, and have incurred and expects to incur additional significant costs in pursuit of financing and acquisition plans. Additionally, we have until February 11, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements- Going Concern,” we have determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We intend to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after February 11, 2023.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheets. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income and dividends on investments held in Trust Account. Additionally, we will recognize unrealized gains or loss related to our Warrants. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $8,200,831, which is driven by an unrealized gains of $10,712,133 on our warrants and $79,687 in interest income from investments held in our Trust Account. Partially offsetting our income is $1,935,943 in formation and operating costs and warrant issue costs of $655,046.
For the period from November 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $3,588, which consists of formation and operating costs.
Going Concern
We have approximately $497,000 in cash and approximately $835,000 in current liabilities as of December 31, 2021, and have incurred and expects to incur additional significant costs in pursuit of financing and acquisition plans. Additionally, we have until February 11, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements- Going Concern,” we have determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We intend to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after February 11, 2023.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities are first listed on the Nasdaq Stock Market, we agreed to pay the Sponsor up to $25,000 per month for administrative and other services, of which $10,000 per month will be paid to the Sponsor for office space and administrative
services provided to members of the management team and up to $15,000 will be used to compensate the Company’s Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer and Chief Legal Officer and Secretary for a portion of their time spent on the Company’s affairs. Upon completion of the Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The initial stockholders and holders of the Private Placement Warrants will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional Units to cover any over-allotments, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The warrants that were issued in connection with the 3,600,000 over-allotment Units are identical to the public warrants and have no net cash settlement provisions.
We paid an underwriting discount of 2% of the per Unit offering price, or approximately $5,520,000 million in the aggregate at the closing of the Initial Public Offering, and agreed to pay an additional fee (the “Deferred Underwriting Fees”) of 3.5% of the gross offering proceeds, or approximately $9,660,000 in the aggregate upon the Company’s completion of an Initial Business Combination. The Deferred Underwriting Fees will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event the Company completes its initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified in the balance sheets as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined the warrants are a derivative instrument.
FASB ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options addresses the allocation of proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt into its equity and debt components. We apply this guidance to allocate IPO proceeds from the Units between Class A common stock and warrants, using the residual method by allocating IPO proceeds first to fair value of the warrants and then the Class A common stock.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheets at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in gain on marketable securities, dividends and interest held in Trust Account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account were determined using available market information.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that is considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ (deficit) equity section of the balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share
We have two classes of common shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock. Private and public warrants to purchase 14,480,000 Class A common stock at $11.50 per share were issued on February 8, 2021. No warrants were exercised during the year ended December 31, 2021. The calculation of diluted income per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) IPO, (ii) exercise of over-allotment, and (iii) Private Placement since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income per common share is the same as basic net income per common share for the periods. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt --Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging --Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.