Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, some of which are not within our control. See "Risk Factors" and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Company Overview
We are a payment technology company and leading provider of comprehensive Financial Payment Card solutions in the United States. We define “Financial Payment Cards” as credit, debit and Prepaid Debit Cards issued on the networks of the “Payment Card Brands” (Visa, Mastercard®, American Express® and Discover® in the United States and Interac, in Canada). We define “Prepaid Debit Cards” as debit cards issued on the networks of the Payment Card Brands, but not linked to a traditional bank account. We also offer an instant card issuance solution, which provides card issuing bank customers the ability to issue a personalized debit or credit card within the bank branch to individual cardholders. We have established a leading position in the Financial Payment Card solutions market through more than 20 years of experience.
We serve a diverse set of several thousand customers which includes direct customers and indirect customer relationships whereby CPI provides Financial Payment Card solutions to a customer through a Group Service Provider (as defined below). Our customers include some of the largest issuers of debit and credit cards in the United States, the largest Prepaid Debit Card program managers in the United States, numerous financial technology companies (“FinTechs”), as well as independent community banks, credit unions and Group Services Providers. We define “Group Service Providers” as reseller or card processor organizations that assist small card issuers, such as credit unions, with managing their credit and debit card programs, including managing the Financial Payment Card issuance process, core banking operations and other financial services.
We serve our customers through a network of high-security production and card services facilities in the United States, each of which is audited for compliance with the standards of the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council (the “PCI Security Standards Council”) by one or more of the Payment Card Brands. Many of our customers require us to comply with PCI Security Standards Council requirements that relate to the provision of our products and services. Our leading network of high-security production facilities allows us to optimize our solutions offerings and to serve the needs of our diverse customer base.
Driven by a combination of our strong relationships, quality, technology, and innovation, we believe we have strong positions in the following markets:
● the U.S. prepaid debit market, serving many of the top U.S. Prepaid Debit Card program managers;
● the U.S. small to mid-sized issuer market, which includes independent community banks and credit unions;
● the U.S. large issuer market, serving some of the largest U.S. debit and credit card issuers; and
● the U.S. FinTech market, where we produce and personalize Financial Payment Cards for financial technology companies.
Trends and Key Factors Affecting our Financial Performance
We believe the following key factors may have a meaningful impact on our business performance and may negatively influence our financial and operating results:
● We have experienced, and expect to continue to experience, labor availability issues, particularly in the Company’s production facilities. In the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company incurred increased employee compensation and recruiting expenses in Cost of Sales and Operating Expenses, which we expect to continue to increase throughout 2022 and possibly beyond as the Company continues to actively recruit additional employees. Also as a result of labor shortages and supply chain constraints, as described below, the Company has experienced extended production lead times in some areas of the business and difficulty meeting some customers’ delivery expectations. We continue to proactively monitor, assess and take steps to minimize disruptions and delays in production; however, these disruptions and delays have caused the Company to lose or delay customer opportunities, and are likely to continue throughout 2022 and possibly beyond.
● Surges in demand for certain raw materials and components, as well as other factors such as staffing challenges, have continued to strain the global supply chain network, which has resulted in increased costs of certain raw materials and components, increased shipping costs, freight and logistics delays, longer lead times and unpredictability. In particular, shortages of raw materials and components that we use in many of our products is expected to continue for the foreseeable future and may adversely affect our ability to meet customer demand for our products. Although we strive to place orders for materials and components sufficiently in advance, to compile buffer stock to mitigate the impacts of freight and logistics delays and to bolster our access to raw materials and components, it is difficult to predict the ability of our suppliers to continue to fulfill such orders or to do so in a timely manner, and it is likely that such delays as well as costs to obtain such raw materials and components will increase in 2022 and possibly beyond. Additionally, certain microchip manufacturers recently indicated they plan to limit the types of microchips that they manufacture, which will affect our ability to continue to provide lower-cost contact microchips for certain of our customers. This could cause us and affected customers to migrate programs to more expensive microchip options or to contactless cards at a faster pace than expected, which may be costly and disruptive for the Company and affected customers. While we may be able to pass on some of our increased labor and material costs to our customers, we expect these factors will impact profitability in 2022 and possibly beyond. In addition, given that raw materials inventory is recognized on a first-in, first-out basis, we expect the impact of increasing raw materials costs to be realized into our statement of operations in 2022 and possibly beyond.
● Our Second Wave® payment cards feature a core made with recovered ocean-bound plastic (“ROBP”), which we source from Haiti and process using single source suppliers. Due to political instability and other factors in Haiti as well as the supply chain constraints described above, there is an increased likelihood that we may face challenges in obtaining an adequate supply of ROBP, which is necessary to meet customer demand for our Second Wave cards. The Company actively monitors and manages its supply chain, including compiling buffer stock of materials and seeking alternative suppliers and sources for ROBP, but it is uncertain how the current political climate in Haiti and other factors in the ROBP supply chain will affect our ability to continue obtaining sufficient ROBP. Additionally, to the extent we are able to secure one or more alternative suppliers of ROBP, we may be subject to increased shipping and materials costs, which we may not be able to pass through to our customers.
● As of June 30, 2021, the market value of outstanding shares of our common stock owned by non-affiliates exceeded $75 million, which triggered the Company being classified as an accelerated filer with respect to SEC regulations and filing requirements effective with the year ended December 31, 2021. As a result, our
annual assessment of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting must be audited by our external audit firm in compliance with the provisions of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. Preparations to comply and continued compliance with this new requirement has significantly increased our compensation expense, professional fees and other administrative costs during the year ended December 31, 2021. We expect these increased costs to continue in 2022 and possibly beyond. In connection with our evaluation and testing during 2021, management identified deficiencies that they determined resulted in material weaknesses in internal controls. For additional information, see Part II, Item 9A, Controls and Procedures in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
2021 Summary of Financial Performance
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net sales increased 20.2% from the prior year, to $375.1 million, and we recorded income from operations of $59.5 million, compared to net sales of $312.2 million and income from operations of $38.4 million during 2020. Our operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 15.9% compared to 12.3% in the prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded net income of $15.9 million, compared to $16.1 million in 2020, a decrease of $0.2 million.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $20.2 million, representing a decrease of $1.9 million compared to $22.1 million in the prior year.
Segment Overview
Our business consists of the following reportable segments:
● Debit and Credit;
● Prepaid Debit; and
● Other.
Debit and Credit Segment
Our Debit and Credit segment primarily produces Financial Payment Cards and provides integrated card services to card-issuing banks primarily in the United States. Products manufactured by this segment primarily include EMV and non-EMV Financial Payment Cards, including contact and contactless (dual-interface) cards and plastic and encased metal cards, and Second Wave payment cards featuring a core made with ROBP. We also sell Card@Once, our proprietary and patented instant card issuance system and software-as-a-service, and other private label credit cards that are not issued on the networks of the Payment Cards Brands. We provide CPI On-Demand services, where we produce images, personalized payment cards and related collateral on a one-by-one, on-demand basis for our customers. This segment also provides a variety of integrated card services, including card personalization and fulfillment services. The Debit and Credit segment operations are each audited for compliance by one or more of the Payment Card Brands. Many of our customers require us to comply with the standards of the PCI Security Standards Council.
Prepaid Debit Segment
Our Prepaid Debit segment primarily provides integrated prepaid card services to Prepaid Debit Card providers in the United States, including tamper-evident security packaging. This segment also produces Financial Payment Cards issued on the networks of the Payment Card Brands that are included in the tamper-evident security packages. The Prepaid Debit segment operation is audited for compliance by one or more of the Payment Card Brands. Many of our customers require us to comply with the standards of the PCI Security Standards Council.
Other
Our Other segment includes corporate general and administrative expenses.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Set forth below is a brief description of key line items of our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income.
Net Sales
Net sales reflect our revenue generated from the sale of products and services. Product net sales include the design and production of Financial Payment Cards, including contact and contactless cards, and Second Wave® ROBP cards. Contactless EMV cards have additional technology to process contactless transactions and generally have a higher selling price than contact-only EMV cards. We also generate product revenue from the sale of our Card@Once instant issuance system and consumables, private label credit cards and retail gift cards. Services net sales include revenue from the personalization and fulfillment of Financial Payment Cards, including CPI On-Demand services, tamper-evident security packaging, fulfillment services and software as a service personalization of instant issuance Financial Payment cards. See Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” and Part II, Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Revenue Recognition” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information and timing of revenue recognition for net sales. We include gross shipping and handling revenue in net sales.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the direct and indirect costs of the products we sell and the services that we provide. Product costs include the cost of raw materials, including microchips and antennas for contactless EMV cards, labor costs, equipment and facilities costs, operation overhead, depreciation and amortization, leases and rental charges and transport costs. Product costs also include Card@Once instant issuance printer costs. Services costs include the cost of labor, raw materials in the case of tamper-evident security packaging, equipment and facilities costs, operation overhead, depreciation and amortization, leases and rental charges and transport costs. Cost of sales can be impacted by many factors, including volume, operational efficiencies, procurement costs, promotional activity, and employee relations. We include the costs of shipping and handling in cost of sales.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit consists of our net sales less our cost of sales. Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of net sales.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses are primarily comprised of selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) which generally consist of expenses for executive, finance, sales, marketing, legal, information technology, customer service, human resources, research and development and administrative personnel, including payroll, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, bad debt expense and outside legal and other advisory fees, including consulting, accounting, and software related fees. Operating expense also includes depreciation and amortization expense and may include impairment charges on tangible and intangible assets, when necessary.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
Income from operations consists of our gross profit less our net operating expenses. Operating margin is income from operations as a percentage of net sales.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net consists primarily of interest expense.
Income tax (expense) benefit
Income tax (expense) benefit consists of our U.S. federal and state income taxes at statutory rates, including the impact of other items such as valuation allowances, tax credits, permanent items, and foreign taxes.
Net Income
Net income consists of our income from operations, less other expense, net, and income taxes.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared With Year Ended December 31, 2020
The table below presents our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net Sales
Debit and Credit:
Net sales for Debit and Credit increased $45.8 million, or 18.3%, due primarily to the ongoing transition to contactless cards and new customer growth. Product net sales increased due to higher volumes of contactless cards and higher Card@Once instant issuance sales. Additionally, net sales from card personalization services increased due to higher volumes of contactless cards and higher CPI On-Demand sales. The increases in product and services net sales benefited from significant new customer onboarding volumes in the first half of the year. Contactless EMV cards have additional technology to process contactless transactions and generally have a higher selling price than contact-only
EMV cards, which contributed more to the current year sales increases compared to the prior year. Debit and Credit net sales in the prior year were impacted by lower customer demand than expected, which we believe was primarily attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Prepaid Debit:
Net sales for Prepaid Debit increased $15.6 million, or 24.6%, due primarily to higher volumes from existing customers which included the acquisition of new customer portfolios and the replenishment of inventory by our customers which had been maintained at lower levels in the prior year due to COVID-19 uncertainties.
Eliminations:
This includes the elimination of intercompany sales between segments in the consolidation of our financial statements. The decrease in eliminations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to lower sales between segments.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Debit and Credit
Gross profit for Debit and Credit increased $24.2 million, or 28.2%, driven primarily by the net sales increase described above. The increase in net sales was partially offset by higher labor costs in the current year. Gross profit margin increased to 37.1% during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 34.3% in the prior year, due primarily to operating leverage from higher net sales, partially offset by labor cost increases.
Prepaid Debit
Gross profit for Prepaid Debit increased $6.9 million, or 28.4%, compared to the prior year. Gross profit margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 39.7% compared to 38.5% for the prior year. Gross profit and gross profit margin were driven primarily by the net sales increase described above and operating leverage, partially offset by increased labor costs.
Operating Expenses, net
* Not meaningful
Debit and Credit
Debit and Credit operating expenses decreased $0.4 million, or 1.4%, compared to the prior year, due primarily to a benefit recorded in 2021 relating to estimated sales taxes, which is further described in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 15, “Commitments and Contingencies” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, partially offset by increased compensation expense.
Prepaid Debit
Prepaid Debit operating expenses were essentially flat and decreased less than $0.1 million, or 0.5%, compared to the prior year.
Other
Other operating expenses increased $10.5 million, or 28.9%, due primarily to $7.4 million of compensation expenses including $3.3 million of salaries, payroll taxes, and other compensation related expenses, $1.6 million of healthcare expenses, $1.4 million of employee performance incentive compensation due to strong business performance, and $1.1 million of stock-based compensation expense, in addition to $2.7 million of increased professional fees and other compliance costs.
Income from Operations and Operating Margin
Debit and Credit
Income from operations for Debit and Credit increased $24.6 million, or 44.9%, due primarily to higher net sales and related gross profit as described above. Operating margins for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 26.8% compared to 21.9% for the prior year, due to primarily higher net sales and operating leverage, partially offset by increased labor costs.
Prepaid Debit
Income from operations for Prepaid Debit increased $7.0 million, or 34.9%, due primarily to higher net sales and gross margin as described above. Operating margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 34.0% from 31.4% in 2020, due primarily to higher net sales and favorable operating leverage, partially offset by increased labor costs.
Other
The loss from operations in Other increased $10.5 million, or 28.9%, due to the increases in operating expenses discussed above.
Interest, net
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $5.2 million to $30.6 million compared to $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense was higher in 2021 primarily due to higher interest rates on the Senior Notes (as defined below) issued in 2021, compared to the interest rates on our previous credit facilities in the prior year, and the “make-whole” interest premium of $2.6 million paid in connection with the termination of the Senior Credit Facility (as defined below). This increase was partially offset by lower debt principal outstanding in the current year compared to the prior year, and from interest income received of approximately $0.4 million in 2021 related to income tax refunds.
Income tax expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded income tax expense of $7.9 million on pre-tax income of $23.8 million, representing an effective income tax rate of 33.1%. The effective tax rate differs from the federal U.S. statutory rate in 2021 primarily due to state income taxes, which had a tax rate impact of 7.4%. Other items impacting the effective tax rate in 2021 include permanent items and unrecognized tax benefits. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $3.3 million on pre-tax income of $12.9 million, representing an effective tax rate of (25.6)%. The CARES Act allowed net operating losses (“NOLs”) generated in 2018, 2019, or 2020 to be carried back for five years and temporarily eliminated the tax law provision that limits the use of NOLs to 80% of taxable income. The CARES Act increased the Internal Revenue Code Section 163(j) interest deduction limit for 2020 and 2019, and allowed for the acceleration of refunds of alternative minimum tax credits. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a tax benefit for certain provisions in the CARES Act including the carryback of losses and the increase to the interest deduction limitation, resulting in a tax rate benefit of 20.9%. In addition, we applied the 2018 proposed regulations relating to the Section 163(j) interest deduction limitation which contributed to a valuation allowance change and tax rate benefit of 41.1%.
Net income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $15.9 million, compared to net income of $16.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to increases in income tax expense, operating expenses, interest and the loss on debt extinguishment, partially offset by higher net sales and gross profit.
Fourth Quarter
Our net sales increased 10.8% in the fourth quarter of 2021 to $93.2 million, compared to $84.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. Net sales for Debit and Credit increased by $7.8 million to $77.4 million, or 11.3%, in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily due to higher net sales volumes from contactless EMV cards, including Second Wave cards.
Net sales for our Prepaid Debit segment increased $1.0 million, or 6.4%, to $15.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $14.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. This increase in sales is primarily due to higher volumes from existing customers, including the acquisition of new portfolios, as compared to the prior year fourth quarter period.
Gross profit decreased slightly to $30.9 million in the fourth quarter of 2021, compared to $31.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. Gross profit margin decreased to 33.2% during the fourth quarter of 2021, compared to 36.8% in the prior year period, due primarily to increased labor costs, partially offset by increased operating leverage from higher net sales.
Selling, general and administrative (exclusive of depreciation and amortization) expenses increased $3.4 million to $20.3 million in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to $16.9 million in the fourth quarter 2020. The increase was due primarily to increased compensation expenses, including increased stock compensation and healthcare expenses, and professional fees and compliance costs.
During the fourth quarter of 2021 we earned income from operations of $9.2 million compared to $12.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2020. The decrease in income from operations was due to increased operating expenses described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $20.7 million of cash and cash equivalents.
Our ability to make investments in and grow our business, service our debt and improve our debt leverage ratios, while maintaining strong liquidity, will depend upon our ability to generate excess operating cash flows through our operating subsidiaries. Although we can provide no assurances, we believe that our cash flows from operations, combined with our current cash levels, will be adequate to fund debt service requirements and provide cash, as required, to support our ongoing operations, capital expenditures, lease obligations and working capital needs.
On March 15, 2021, we completed a private offering of $310 million aggregate principal amount of 8.625% senior secured notes due 2026 (the “Senior Notes”) and related guarantees at an issue price of 100%. In addition, we entered into a credit agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as lender, administrative agent and collateral agent, providing for an ABL revolver of up to $50 million (the “ABL Revolver”), subject to a borrowing base.
The Senior Notes bear interest at a rate of 8.625% per annum and mature on March 15, 2026. Interest is payable on the Senior Notes on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on September 15, 2021. The ABL Revolver matures on the earliest to occur of March 15, 2026 and the date that is 90 days prior to the maturity of the Senior Notes. Borrowings under the ABL Revolver bear interest at a rate per annum that ranges from the LIBOR Rate plus 1.25% to the LIBOR Rate plus 1.75%, or the Base Rate plus 0.25% to the Base Rate plus 0.75%, based on the average daily borrowing capacity under the ABL Revolver over the most recently completed month. The Base Rate as defined in the ABL Revolver is the greater of the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.5%, the LIBOR Rate for a one month interest period plus 1.0%, or the Wells Fargo Bank, National Association “prime rate”. We may elect to apply either the LIBOR Rate or Base Rate interest to borrowings at our discretion. The unused portion of the ABL Revolver commitment accrues a commitment fee, which ranges from 0.375% to 0.50% per annum, based on the average daily borrowing capacity under the ABL Revolver over the immediately preceding month.
While not impacting the year ended December 31, 2021, the ABL Revolver includes limitations on our ability to borrow in certain situations, including during periods in which the amount available to borrow under the ABL Revolver is less than $5 million. Commencing with the month immediately following a date on which borrowing availability is below $5 million until such time that borrowing availability equals or exceeds $5 million for 30 consecutive days, in order to borrow under the ABL Revolver, we must maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio (as defined in the credit agreement for the ABL Revolver) of at least 1.00 to 1.00, calculated for the trailing 12 months, tested monthly during such period. Borrowings under the ABL Revolver are also subject to limitations based on the borrowing base.
The Senior Notes and the ABL Revolver also contain covenants limiting the ability of the Company, the borrower and the Company’s restricted subsidiaries to, among other things, incur or guarantee additional indebtedness or issue disqualified stock or certain preferred stock; create or incur liens; pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions; make certain investments; pay dividends to the Company or make other intercompany transfers; transfer or sell assets; merge or consolidate; and enter into certain transactions with affiliates, subject to a number of important exceptions and qualifications, as set forth in the respective agreements.
Prior to March 15, 2023, the Company may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes at a “make-whole” redemption price, and on or after March 15, 2023, the Company may redeem some or all of the Senior Notes at a redemption price initially set at 104.313% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, and reducing over time to 100%, in each case plus accrued and unpaid interest. Additionally, prior to March 15, 2023, the Company may redeem, on one or more occasions, up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes with the proceeds of certain equity offerings, at a redemption price equal to 108.625% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest. Furthermore, prior to March 15, 2023, but not more than once during each consecutive twelve-month, the Company may also redeem up to 10% of the aggregate principal amount of the Senior Notes at a redemption price equal to 103% of the principal amount of the notes being redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The Company has obligations to make an offer to repay the Senior Notes, requiring prepayment in advance of the maturity date, upon the occurrence of certain events including a change of control, certain asset sales and based on an annual excess cash flow calculation. The annual excess cash flow calculation is determined pursuant to the terms of the related indenture, with any required payments to be made after the issuance of the Company’s annual financial statements. No such payment is required based on the Company’s 2021 operating results.
In connection with the issuance of the Senior Notes and entry into the ABL Revolver, we terminated our previous credit facilities, consisting of a $30 million senior credit agreement (the “Senior Credit Facility”), and a $435 million first lien term loan (the “First Lien Term Loan”). Net proceeds from the Senior Notes, together with cash on hand and initial borrowings of $15 million under the ABL Revolver, were used to pay in full and terminate the Senior Credit Facility and First Lien Term Loan on March 15, 2021, and to pay related fees and expenses. During the three months ended March 31, 2021, prior to the termination of the First Lien Term Loan, we paid an excess free cash flow balance of $7.8 million pursuant to the terms of the debt agreements. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $310 million aggregate principal amount outstanding on the Senior Notes, plus accrued and unpaid interest. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no borrowings outstanding and $50 million available for borrowing under the ABL Revolver.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $20.2 million compared to $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash generated by earnings was offset by a cash usage of $33.4 million and $6.1 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to our investment in additional inventory to mitigate potential supply chain constraints and in anticipation of future demand. Additionally, the company had cash inflows related to income taxes of $10.0 million in 2021 compared to a cash usage from income taxes of $6.3 million in 2020, primarily due to federal tax refunds received in 2021. We had working capital cash benefits related to accounts payable and accrued expenses of $6.6 million and $10.4 million, respectively, in 2021, compared to $1.7 million and $3.0 million, respectively, in 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $9.9 million, compared to a usage of $7.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities was related primarily to capital expenditures of $10.1 million and $7.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which included investments to support the business, such as machinery and equipment, including information technology equipment. As presented in our supplemental disclosures of non-cash information on the statement of cash flows, finance leases were executed for the acquisition of right-of-use machinery and equipment assets totaling $1.9 million and $1.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. We anticipate capital expenditures to be higher in 2022 as compared to 2021 in order to increase production capacity, gain efficiencies, and expand capabilities to meet the emerging needs of our customers.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities was $47.2 million compared to a cash inflow of $24.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Proceeds from the new Senior Notes and ABL Revolver, net of discount, were $310 million and $14.8 million, respectively. We used proceeds from the Senior Notes and ABL Revolver, plus cash on hand from our balance sheet, to pay in full and terminate the Senior Credit Facility balance of $30 million and the First Lien Term Loan balance of $304.7 million on March 15, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid $9.5 million of debt issuance costs and $2.7 million of debt extinguishment costs, which included an early termination “make-whole” interest premium of $2.6 million on the Senior Credit Facility. During the year ended December 31, 2021, prior to the termination of the First Lien Term Loan, we made an excess free cash flow payment of $7.8 million pursuant to the terms of the debt agreement.
During the second quarter of 2021 we used $15 million of cash on hand to pay down the ABL Revolver to zero and had no borrowings thereunder as of December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we entered into the Senior Credit Facility which provided $29.1 million of cash, net of discount, partially offset by $2.5 million of associated debt issuance costs. We also paid $2.2
million and $2.6 million of principal on finance leases during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Working Capital
Our working capital as of December 31, 2021 was $80.9 million, compared to $95.6 million as of December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, accounts receivable increased by $6.4 million, our inventory balance increased $33.2 million to support the business, and the current portion of long-term debt decreased by $8.0 million as this balance was paid entirely in the first quarter of 2021. Partially offsetting these increases to working capital was a decrease in our cash balance of $36.9 million and increases in accounts payable of $7.6 million and accrued expenses of $9.0 million.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include interest payments on our long-term debt, operating and finance lease payments, and purchase obligations to support our operations.
Debt Service Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, the total projected principal and interest payments on our borrowings were $431.4 million, primarily related to the Senior Notes, of which $27.0 million of interest is expected to be paid in the next 12 months. The remaining interest payments are expected to be paid over the remaining term of the Senior Notes which mature in 2026, and the principal is due upon maturity. We have estimated our future interest payments assuming no borrowings under the ABL Revolver, no early redemptions of principal, and no debt issuances or renewals upon the maturity dates of our notes. However, we may borrow under the ABL Revolver, redeem principal on the Senior Notes early or refinance all or a portion of our borrowings in future periods.
Leases
We lease real property for production and services, in addition to equipment. Refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplemental Data, Note 10, “Financing and Operating Leases” for details on our leasing arrangements, including future maturities of our operating lease liabilities.
Purchase Obligations
A purchase obligation is an agreement to purchase goods or services that is enforceable, legally binding, and specifies all significant terms. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $33.7 million of outstanding purchase obligations, of which approximately $33.4 million is expected to be paid in the next 12 months.
Cyclical and Seasonal Nature of Business
Financial Payment Cards are generally influenced by broader cyclical changes in the economy, with economic downturns potentially resulting in decreases in the demand for our products and services and economic upturns potentially resulting in increases in demand. In particular, prolonged economic downturns typically have resulted in significant reductions in the demand for general purpose credit cards due to tightening credit conditions. Our net sales are also influenced by Financial Payment Card renewal cycles and demand for new products, such as contactless cards. Additionally, we historically have generated higher net sales in the third quarter of the year, as our sales of Prepaid Debit Card solutions are more heavily weighted toward the second half of the year when consumers tend to purchase more of these products and services in anticipation of the holiday season in the United States.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. In preparing our financial statements, we make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on our reported net sales, results of operations and net income, as well as on the value
of certain assets and liabilities on our balance sheet during and as of the reporting periods. These estimates, assumptions and judgments are necessary because future events and their effects on our results and the value of our assets cannot be determined with certainty and are made based on our historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur or additional information is obtained, and we may periodically be faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within our control and may not be known for a prolonged period of time. Because the use of estimates is inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Products Net Sales: “Products” net sales are recognized when obligations under the terms of a contract with a customer are satisfied. In most instances, this occurs over time as cards are manufactured for specific customers and have no alternative use and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for work performed. For work performed but not completed and unbilled, we estimate net sales by taking actual costs incurred and applying historical margins for similar types of contracts. Margins across each business with similar contracts have been relatively consistent and we have not made changes to our methods and assumptions during 2021. Items included in “Products” net sales are manufactured Financial Payment Cards, including contact-EMV, Contactless EMV, Second Wave, contactless and magnetic stripe cards, private label credit cards and retail gift cards. Card@Once printers and consumables are also included in “Products” net sales, and their associated revenues are recognized at the time of shipping.
Services Net Sales: Net sales are recognized for “Services” as the services are performed. Items included in “Services” net sales include the personalization and fulfillment of Financial Payment Cards, providing tamper-evident secure packaging and fulfillment services to Prepaid Debit Card program managers, and software-as-a-service personalization of instant issuance debit and credit cards. For work performed but not completed and billed, we estimate revenue by taking actual costs incurred and applying historical margins for similar types of contracts. Margins across each business with similar contracts have been relatively consistent and we have not made changes to our methods and assumptions during 2021.
Customer Contracts: The Company often enters into Master Services Agreements (“MSAs”) with its customers. Generally, enforceable rights and obligations for goods and services occur only when a customer places a purchase order or statement of work to obtain goods or services under an MSA. Usually our contractual arrangements include neither exclusivity clauses nor commitments from our customers to order any given quantities of products on a medium or long-term basis. The contract term as defined by ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, is the length of time it takes to deliver the goods or services promised under the purchase order or statement of work. As such, the Company's contracts are generally considered short term in nature.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed annually for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in taxable or deductible amounts in the future based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income.
The Company has deferred tax assets and liabilities and maintains valuation allowances where it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. The determination of the amount of valuation allowance to be provided on recorded deferred tax assets involves consideration of estimates regarding the timing and amount of the reversal of taxable temporary differences, expected future taxable income, and the impact of tax planning strategies. Changes in the relevant facts can significantly impact the judgment or need for valuation allowances. In the event we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
During the ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. We establish reserves for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. The reserves are established when we believe that certain positions are
likely to be challenged and may not be fully sustained on review by tax authorities. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or refinement of an estimate. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final outcome of these matters will be consistent with what is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the current provision for income taxes. We recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as a component of income tax expense.
The Company’s valuation allowance recorded as of December 31, 2021 relates primarily to a capital loss realized on the sale of a foreign subsidiary whereby the Company does not anticipate a capital gain in the foreseeable future that would allow for the recognition of the capital loss carryover. In addition, the Company has a partial valuation allowance on certain state interest deduction limitations, which the Company estimates may not be fully utilized. As of December 31, 2021 the Company does not have a valuation allowance recorded on federal interest deduction limitations. However, the deductibility of interest expense becomes more limited beginning in 2022 as a result of Internal Revenue Code Section 163(j) provisions, which may require a partial valuation allowance to be recorded by the Company in future years. Additionally, other changes to the federal and state tax regulations can lead to variability in allowable deductions, which can impact the valuation allowance.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.