ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto which are included in “Item” 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a special purpose acquisition company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 18, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to a particular industry or geographic location, although we are currently focusing our search for target businesses in the consumer industry. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in a business combination:
● may significantly reduce the equity interest of our stockholders;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of common stock if we issue shares of preferred stock with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
● will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after a business combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand; and
● our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, described below, and searching for a target business with which to complete a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $5,034,465, which consists of general and administrative costs of $494,342, income related to the change in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $5,660,155, and franchise tax expense of $200,000, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $68,652.
For the period from March 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $961,729, which consists of general and administrative costs of $130,891, a charge for a change in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of $333,500, offering costs associated with warrants recorded as liabilities of $379,848 (net of excess proceeds from private placement warrants over fair value of $123,000), and franchise tax expense of $158,000, offset by interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $40,510.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On September 24, 2020, we consummated the IPO of 17,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $175,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 6,150,000 Private Warrants to our Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,150,000.
Including payments for certain prepaid assets such as liability insurance, total payments paid on or soon after the IPO totaled $4,169,772 which was materially in line with our estimated amount of $4,626,000. However, miscellaneous costs were overestimated by $274,584.
Following the IPO and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $175,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $9,957,390 in transaction costs, consisting of $3,500,000 of underwriting fees, $6,125,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $507,390 of other offering costs, of which $175,000 was offset with a credit paid by the Underwriter.
As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020 we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $175,109,162 and $175,040,510, respectively, (including approximately $109,162 and $40,510 of accumulated interest income, respectively) consisting primarily of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had cash of $1,512,496 and $2,005,228, respectively, held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $492,732. Net income of $5,034,465 was affected by the change in fair value of warrants of $5,660,155, and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $68,652. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $201,610 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from March 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $337,382. Net loss of $961,729 was affected by the change in the fair value of the warrants of $333,500, the offering costs charged to expense of $379,848 (net of excess proceeds from private placement warrants over fair value of $123,000), and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $40,510. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $48,491 of cash for operating activities.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, there were no loans outstanding.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that if the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by September 24, 2022, then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after September 24, 2022. The Company intends to complete a Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on September 24, 2020, and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $6,125,000. The deferred fee will be forfeited by the underwriters solely in the event that we fail to complete a business combination within the required time period, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our IPO and Private Placement in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation approach.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value.
Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. Changes in redemption value are reflected in additional paid in capital, or in the absence of additional capital, in accumulated deficit. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity.
Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, 17,500,000 Class A common shares subject to possible redemption, respectively, are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company has not considered the effect of warrants to purchase 14,900,000 shares of Class A common stock that were sold in the Initial Public Offering and the private placement in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and average market price of the Company’s Class A common stock for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, was below the Warrants’ $11.50 exercise price. As a result, diluted income (loss) per common share is the same as basic income (loss) per common share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.