ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Financial Condition & Results of Operations
General
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to assist in understanding the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of the Company. The information contained in this section should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accounting and reporting policies of Patriot conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and to general practices within the financial services industry. A summary of Patriot’s significant accounting policies is included in the Notes to consolidated financial statements that are referenced in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Although all of Patriot’s policies are integral to understanding its consolidated financial statements, certain accounting policies involve management to exercise judgment, develop assumptions, and make estimates that may have a material impact on the financial information presented in the consolidated financial statements or Notes thereto. The assumptions and estimates are based on historical experience and other factors representing the best available information to management as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, up to and including the date of issuance or availability for issuance. As the basis for the assumptions and estimates incorporated in the consolidated financial statements may change, as new information comes to light, the consolidated financial statements could reflect different assumptions and estimates.
Due to the judgments, assumptions, and estimates inherent in the following policies, management considers such accounting policies critical to an understanding of the Consolidated Financial Statements and Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses (ALLL)
The Company maintains an ALLL at a level management believes is sufficient to absorb estimated credit losses incurred as of the report date. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the ALLL is based on periodic evaluations of the loan portfolio and other relevant factors. However, this evaluation is inherently subjective as it requires significant estimates by management. As applicable, consideration is given to a variety of factors in establishing these estimates including historical losses, peer and industry data, current economic conditions, the size and composition of the loan portfolio, delinquency statistics, criticized and classified assets and impaired loans, results of internal loan reviews, borrowers’ perceived financial and management strengths, the adequacy of underlying collateral, the dependence on collateral, and the strength of the present value of future cash flows and other relevant factors. These factors may be susceptible to significant change.
To the extent actual outcomes differ from management’s estimates, additional provisions for loan losses may be required, which may adversely affect the Company’s results of operations in the future. Subsequent to acquisition of purchased-credit-impaired loans, estimates of cash flows expected to be collected are updated each reporting period based on updated assumptions regarding default rates, loss severities, and other factors that are reflective of current market conditions. Subsequent decreases in expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for loan losses; subsequent increases in expected cash flows may result in a reversal of the provision for loan losses to the extent of prior charges.
Unrealized Gains and Losses on Securities Available-for-sale
The Company receives estimated fair values of debt securities from independent valuation services and brokers. In developing these fair values, the valuation services and brokers use estimates of cash flows based on historical performance of similar instruments in similar rate environments. Available-for-sale debt securities consist primarily of U.S. Government agency debt and mortgage-backed securities issued by the U.S. government, corporate bonds, subordinated notes and SBA loan pools. The Company uses various indicators in determining whether a security is other-than-temporarily impaired including, for debt securities, when it is probable that the contractual interest and principal will not be collected, or for equity securities, whether the market value is below its cost for an extended period of time with low expectation of recovery. The debt securities are monitored for changes in credit ratings because adverse changes in credit ratings could indicate a change in the estimated cash flows of the underlying collateral or issuer. The Company also considers the volatility of a security’s price in comparison to the market as a whole and any recoveries or declines in fair value subsequent to the balance sheet date. If management determines that the impairment is other-than-temporary, the entire amount of the impairment, as of the balance sheet date, is recognized in earnings, even if the decision to sell the security has not been made.
The fair value of the security becomes the new amortized cost basis of the investment and is not adjusted for subsequent recoveries in fair value. Available-for-sale debt securities were not considered to be other-than-temporarily impaired as of December 31, 2021, 2020, or 2019 because the unrealized losses were related to changes in interest rates and did not affect the expected cash flows to be received, or indicate a loss of value on the underlying collateral, or a loss of financial stability on the part of the issuer. Management concluded that the declines in fair value of the investment portfolio as of the reporting dates is temporary and that values would recover by way of increases in market price or positive changes in market interest rates.
Deferred Income Taxes
The Company uses the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on temporary differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax laws is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts that are more likely than not expected to be realized based on the weighting of positive and negative evidence. Future realization of deferred tax assets ultimately depends on the existence of sufficient taxable income of the appropriate character (for example, ordinary income or capital gain) within the carryback or carryforward periods available under the applicable tax law. The Company regularly reviews the deferred tax assets for recoverability based on historical taxable income, projected future taxable income, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences and tax planning strategies. The Company’s judgments regarding future profitability may change due to many factors, including future market conditions and the ability to successfully execute its business plans. Should there be a change in the ability to recover deferred tax assets, the tax provision would increase or decrease in the period in which the assessment is changed.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over the identifiable net assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill is recognized as an asset and is to be reviewed for impairment annually and between annual tests when events and circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Impairment is a condition that exists when the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value.
Intangible assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, are amortized to expense over their estimated useful lives in a manner consistent with that in which the related benefits are expected to be realized, and are periodically reviewed by management to assess recoverability. Impairment losses on other intangibles are recognized as a charge to expense if carrying amounts exceed fair values.
Servicing Assets
A servicing asset related to SBA loans is initially recorded when these loans are sold and the servicing rights are retained. The servicing asset is recorded on the balance sheet and included in other assets. Fair value is determined using prices for similar assets with similar characteristics, when available, or based upon discounted cash flows using market-based assumptions. Impairment is evaluated based on stratifying the underlying financial assets by date of origination and term. Any impairment, if temporary, would be reported as a valuation allowance.
Derivatives Instruments and Hedging Activities
The Company enters into interest rate swap agreements as part of the Company’s interest rate risk management strategy. The Company has derivatives not designated as hedges. Derivatives not designated as hedges are not speculative and result from a service the Company provides to certain loan customers. The Company executes interest rate swaps with commercial banking customers to facilitate their respective risk management strategies. Those interest rate swaps are simultaneously hedged by offsetting derivatives that the Company executes with a third party, such that the Company minimizes its net risk exposure resulting from such transactions. The swaps are reported at fair value in other assets or other liabilities. The interest rate swaps qualify as derivatives, but are not designated as hedging instruments, thus any net gain or loss resulting from changes in the fair value is recognized in other noninterest income.
The Company also had derivatives designated as cash flow hedges. Cash flow hedges are used to hedge exposures, or to modify interest rate characteristics, for certain balance sheet accounts under its interest rate risk management strategy. Changes in the fair value of these cash flow hedges are initially recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income and subsequently reclassified into earnings when the forecasted transaction affects earnings. If a hedge relationship were no longer highly effective, hedge accounting would be discontinued.
Further discussion of the derivatives is set forth in Note 1, Note 11, and Note 21 to the consolidated financial statements.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
Assets
The Company’s total assets increased $67.8 million, or 7.7%, from $880.7 million at December 31, 2020 to $948.5 million at December 31, 2021, primarily due to an increase in available-for-sale securities of $45.1 million. Net loans increased from $719.6 million as of December 31, 2020, to $729.6 million at December 31, 2021. Total deposits increased from $685.7 million at December 31, 2020, to $748.6 million at December 31, 2021.
Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents increased $12.4 million or 35.8%, from $34.6 million at December 31, 2020 to $47.0 million as of December 31, 2021. The increase as of December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to increase in deposits. The Company’s liquidity position is strong with liquid assets rising to 11.4% of total assets as of December 31, 2021.
Investment securities
The following table is a summary of the Company’s available-for-sale securities portfolio and other investments at the dates shown:
Total investments increased $45.1 million or 83.9%, from $53.7 million at December 31, 2020 to $98.8 million at December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to the purchases of $112.0 million U.S. Government agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, $18.2 million corporate bonds, and $5.9 million SBA loan pools, which was offset by $58.8 million sales of available-for-sales securities, $18.9 million maturity, and $11.7 million in repayments of principal on available-for-sale securities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Bank recognized net gain on sale of securities of $76,000. There were no sales of available-for-sales securities during the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Loans held for investment
The following table provides the composition of the Company’s loan held for investment portfolio as of December 31, for each of the years shown:
The gross loans receivable increased $9.3 million or 1.3%, from $730.2 million at December 31, 2020 to $739.5 million at December 31, 2021. The increase in loans was primarily attributable to $89.3 million in purchases of loans receivable which was partially offset by a net decrease in internal loan originations of $77.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Patriot originates SBA 7(a) loans, on which the SBA has historically provided guarantees of 75% of the principal balance. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, the SBA temporarily increased the guarantees to 90% and reverted to 75% on October 1, 2021. The guaranteed portion of the Company’s SBA loans is generally sold in the secondary market with the unguaranteed portion held in the portfolio as a loan held for investment.
SBA loans held for investment were included in the commercial real estate loans and commercial and industrial loan classifications above. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, SBA loans included in the commercial real estate loans were $9.7 million and $5.7 million, respectively. SBA loans included in the commercial and industrial loan were $17.4 million and $15.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2021, the net loan to deposit ratio was 97% and the net loan to total assets ratio was 77%. At December 31, 2020, these ratios were 105% and 82%, respectively.
Maturities and Sensitivities of Loans to Changes in Interest Rates
The following table presents loans receivable, gross by portfolio segment, by contractual maturity as of December 31, 2021:
All variable rate loans account for 66.2% of the total loan portfolio. Approximately 29.6% of the variable rate loan portfolio reprices with changes in interest rates within three months of the rate change. The balance of the loan portfolio has an initial rate for a fixed period, for example 1, 3 or 5 years and then reprice annually after the initial fixed period. These repricing characteristics are reflected in the Bank’s aggregate analysis of net interest sensitivity included in