ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for PNMR is presented on a combined basis, including certain information applicable to PNM and TNMP. This report uses the term “Company” when discussing matters of common applicability to PNMR, PNM, and TNMP. The MD&A for PNM and TNMP is presented as permitted by Form 10-K General Instruction I (2) as amended by the FAST Act. For additional information related to the earliest of the two years presented please refer to the Company’s 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. A reference to a “Note” in this Item 7 refers to the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8, unless otherwise specified. Certain of the tables below may not appear visually accurate due to rounding.
MD&A FOR PNMR
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Overview and Strategy
PNMR is a holding company with two regulated utilities serving approximately 806,000 residential, commercial, and industrial customers and end-users of electricity in New Mexico and Texas. PNMR’s electric utilities are PNM and TNMP. PNMR strives to create a clean and bright energy future for customers, communities, and shareholders. PNMR’s strategy and decision-making are focused on safely providing reliable, affordable, and environmentally responsible power built on a foundation of Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) principles.
Recent Developments
Merger
On October 20, 2020, PNMR, Avangrid and Merger Sub entered into the Merger Agreement pursuant to which Merger Sub will merge with and into PNMR, with PNMR surviving the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Avangrid. The proposed Merger has been unanimously approved by the Boards of Directors of PNMR, Avangrid and Merger Sub and approved by PNMR shareholders at the Special Meeting of Shareholders held on February 12, 2021.
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, each issued and outstanding share of the common stock of PNMR (other than (i) the issued shares of PNMR common stock that are owned by Avangrid, Merger Sub, PNMR or any wholly-owned subsidiary of Avangrid or PNMR, which will be automatically cancelled at the Effective Time and (ii) shares of PNMR common stock outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time and held by a holder who has not voted in favor of, or consented in writing to, the Merger who is entitled to, and who has demanded, payment for fair value of such shares) at the Effective Time will be converted into the right to receive $50.30 in cash.
The Merger Agreement provided that it may be terminated if the Effective Time shall not have occurred by the End Date; however, either PNMR or Avangrid could extend the End Date to April 20, 2022 if all conditions to closing have been satisfied other than the obtaining of all required regulatory approvals. On December 8, 2021, the NMPRC issued an order rejecting the stipulation agreement relating to the Merger and the approval of the Merger from the NMPRC has not yet been obtained.
In light of the NMPRC ruling, on January 3, 2022, PNMR, Avangrid and Merger Sub entered into an Amendment to the Merger Agreement pursuant to which PNMR and Avangrid each agreed to extend the End Date to April 20, 2023. The parties acknowledge in the Amendment that the required regulatory approval from the NMPRC has not been obtained and that the parties have reasonably determined that such outstanding approval will not be obtained by April 20, 2022. As amended, the Merger Agreement may be terminated by each of PNMR and Avangrid under certain circumstances, including if the Merger is not consummated by April 20, 2023.
With respect to the NMPRC proceedings, on April 20, 2021, the Joint Applicants, the NMAG, WRA, the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers Local 611, Dine, Nava Education Project, the San Juan Citizens Alliance and To Nizhoni Ani, had entered into a stipulation and agreement in the Joint Application for approval of Merger pending before the NMPRC. Subsequently, CCAE, Onward Energy Holdings LLC, Walmart Inc., Interwest Energy Alliance, M-S-R Power and the Incorporated County of Los Alamos joined an amended stipulation. An evidentiary hearing was held in August 2021. On November 1, 2021, a Certification of Stipulation was issued by the hearing examiner, which recommended against approval of the amended stipulation. On December 8, 2021, the NMPRC issued an order adopting the Certification of Stipulation, rejecting the amended stipulation reached by the parties. On January 3, 2022, PNMR and Avangrid filed a notice of appeal with the NM Supreme Court. On February 2, 2022, PNMR and Avangrid filed a statement of issues outlining the argument for appeal.
With respect to other regulatory proceedings related to the Merger, in January 2021, the FTC notified PNMR and Avangrid that early termination of the waiting period under the HSR Act in connection with the Merger was granted. In February 2021, CFIUS completed its review of the Merger and concluded that there are no unresolved national security concerns with respect to the Merger. In March 2021, PNMR and Avangrid received FCC approval of the transfer of operating
A - 27
licenses related to the Merger. In April 2021, FERC issued an order authorizing the Merger. In May 2021, the PUCT issued an order authorizing the Merger, and the NRC approved the Merger. As a result of the delay in closing of the Merger due to the need to obtain NMPRC approval, PNMR and Avangrid are required to make a new filing under the HSR Act and request extensions of approvals previously received from the FCC and NRC. On February 9, 2022, the request for extension was filed with the NRC. On February 24, 2022, the requests for a 180-day extension were granted by the FCC. No additional filings will be required with CFIUS, FERC or the PUCT.
Consummation of the Merger remains subject to the satisfaction or waiver of certain customary closing conditions, including, without limitation, the absence of any material adverse effect on PNMR, the receipt of required regulatory approval from the NMPRC, and the agreements relating to the divestiture of Four Corners being in full force and effect and all applicable regulatory filings associated therewith being made. The agreement relating to the divestiture of Four Corners has been entered into and is in full force and effect and related filings have been made with the NMPRC.
EIM
On April 1, 2021, PNM joined and began participating in the EIM. The EIM is a real-time wholesale energy trading market operated by the CAISO that enables participating electric utilities to buy and sell energy. The EIM aggregates the variability of electricity generation and load for multiple balancing authority areas and utility jurisdictions. In addition, the EIM facilitates greater integration of renewable resources through the aggregation of flexible resources by capturing diversity benefits from the expanding geographic footprint and the expanded potential uses for those resources. PNM completed a cost-benefit analysis, which indicated participation in the EIM would provide substantial benefits to retail customers. In 2018, PNM filed an application with the NMPRC requesting, among other things, to recover initial capital investments and authorization to establish a regulatory asset to recover other expenses that would be incurred in order to join the EIM. The NMPRC approved the establishment of a regulatory asset but deferred certain rate making issues, including but not limited to issues related to implementation and ongoing EIM costs and savings, the prudence and reasonableness of costs to be included in the regulatory asset, and the period over which costs would be charged to customers until PNM’s next general rate case filing. PNM has already experienced $12.5 million of costs savings to customers through participation in the EIM. See Note 17.
Texas Winter Storm
In mid-February 2021, Texas experienced a severe winter storm delivering the coldest temperatures in 100 years for many parts of the state. As a result, the ERCOT market was not able to deliver sufficient generation load to the grid resulting in significant, statewide outages as ERCOT directed transmission operators to curtail thousands of firm load megawatts. TNMP complied with ERCOT directives to curtail the delivery of electricity in its service territory and did not experience significant outages on its system outside of the ERCOT directed curtailments. TNMP has deferred bad debt expense from defaulting REPs to a regulatory asset totaling $0.8 million at December 31, 2021, and will seek recovery in a general rate case. At this time, the Company does not expect significant financial impacts related to this event. For additional information on the Texas winter storm, see Note 16.
Financial and Business Objectives
PNMR is focused on achieving three key financial objectives:
•Earning authorized returns on regulated businesses
•Delivering at or above industry-average earnings and dividend growth
•Maintaining investment grade credit ratings
In conjunction with these objectives, PNM and TNMP are dedicated to:
•Maintaining strong employee safety, plant performance, and system reliability
•Delivering a superior customer experience
•Demonstrating environmental stewardship in business operations, including transitioning to an emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040
•Supporting the communities in their service territories
Earning Authorized Returns on Regulated Businesses
PNMR’s success in accomplishing its financial objectives is highly dependent on two key factors: fair and timely regulatory treatment for its utilities and the utilities’ strong operating performance. The Company has multiple strategies to achieve favorable regulatory treatment, all of which have as their foundation a focus on the basics: safety, operational excellence, and customer satisfaction, while engaging stakeholders to build productive relationships. Both PNM and TNMP seek cost recovery for their investments through general rate cases, periodic cost of service filings, and various rate riders.
Fair and timely rate treatment from regulators is crucial to PNM and TNMP in earning their allowed returns and critical for PNMR to achieve its financial objectives. PNMR believes that earning allowed returns is viewed positively by credit rating
A - 28
agencies and that improvements in the Company’s ratings could lower costs to utility customers. Additional information about rate filings is provided in Note 17.
State Regulation
The rates PNM and TNMP charge customers are subject to traditional rate regulation by the NMPRC, FERC, and the PUCT.
New Mexico 2016 Rate Case - In January 2018, the NMPRC approved a settlement agreement that authorized PNM to implement an increase in base non-fuel rates of $10.3 million, which included a reduction to reflect the impact of the decrease in the federal corporate income tax rate and updates to PNM’s cost of debt (aggregating $47.6 million annually). This order was on PNM’s application for a general increase in retail electric rates filed in December 2016 (the “NM 2016 Rate Case”). The key terms of the order include:
•A ROE of 9.575%
•A requirement to return to customers over a three-year period the benefit of the reduction in the New Mexico corporate income tax rate to the extent attributable to PNM’s retail operations (Note 18)
•A disallowance of PNM’s ability to collect an equity return on certain investments aggregating $148.1 million at Four Corners, but allowing recovery of a debt-only return
•An agreement to not implement non-fuel base rate changes, other than changes related to PNM’s rate riders, with an effective date prior to January 1, 2020
•A requirement to consider the prudency of PNM’s decision to continue its participation in Four Corners in PNM’s next general rate case filing
PNM implemented 50% of the approved increase for service rendered beginning February 1, 2018 and implemented the rest of the increase for service rendered beginning January 1, 2019.
On December 29, 2020, Sierra Club filed a motion to re-open the NM 2016 Rate Case. The motion requests that the NMPRC re-open the NM 2016 Rate Case for the limited purpose of conducting a prudence review of certain Four Corners capital expenditures that the NMPRC deferred in its order approving the settlement agreement. Alternatively, Sierra Club requested that the deferred prudence review be conducted, and given weight as appropriate, in the Four Corners Abandonment Application. On February 10, 2021, the NMPRC rejected Sierra Club’s motion to re-open the NM 2016 Rate Case and stated that issues on whether the terms of the ETA provide an opportunity for consideration of prudence for Four Corners undepreciated investments included in a financing order or what effects the rates approved in the NM 2016 Rate Case may have on determining energy transition cost should be considered in the Four Corners Abandonment Application. For additional information on the Four Corners Abandonment Application see Note 17.
2020 Decoupling Petition - On May 28, 2020, PNM filed a petition for approval of a rate adjustment mechanism that would decouple the rates of its residential and small power rate classes. Decoupling is a rate design principle that severs the link between the recovery of fixed costs of the utility through volumetric charges. If approved, customer bills would not be impacted until January 1, 2022. On October 2, 2020, PNM requested an order to vacate the public hearing and stay the proceeding until the NMPRC decides whether to entertain a petition to issue a declaratory order resolving the issues raised in the motions to dismiss. On October 7, 2020, the hearing examiner approved PNM's request to stay the proceeding and vacate the public hearing and on October 30, 2020 PNM filed a petition for declaratory order asking the NMPRC to issue an order finding that full revenue decoupling is authorized by the EUEA. On March 17, 2021, the NMPRC issued an order granting PNM's petition for declaratory order which commences a proceeding to address petitions. Oral arguments were made on July 15, 2021. On January 14, 2022, the hearing examiner issued a recommended decision recommending the NMPRC find that the EUEA does not mandate the NMPRC to authorize or approve a full decoupling mechanism, defining full decoupling as limited to energy efficiency and load management measures and programs. The recommended decision also states that a utility may request approval of a rate adjustment mechanism to remove regulatory disincentives to energy efficiency and load management measures and programs through a stand-alone petition, as part of the utility’s triennial energy efficiency application or a general rate case and that PNM is not otherwise precluded from petitioning for a rate adjustment mechanism prior to its next general rate case. Finally, the recommended decision stated that the EUEA does not permit the NMPRC to reduce a utility’s ROE based on approval of a disincentive removal mechanism founded on removing regulatory disincentives to energy efficiency and load management measures and programs. The recommended decision does not specifically prohibit a downward adjustment to a utility’s capital structure, based on approval of a disincentive removal mechanism. See Note 17. PNM cannot predict the outcome of this matter.
PVNGS Leased Interest Abandonment Application - On April 2, 2021, PNM filed the PVNGS Leased Interest Abandonment Application. In the application, PNM requested NMPRC authorization to decertify and abandon its Leased Interest and to create regulatory assets for the associated remaining undepreciated investments with consideration of cost recovery of the undepreciated investments in a future rate case. PNM also sought NMPRC approval to sell and transfer the PNM-owned assets and nuclear fuel supply associated with the Leased Interest to SRP, which will be acquiring the Leased Interest from the lessors upon termination of the existing leases. In addition, PNM sought NMPRC approval for a 150 MW
A - 29
solar PPA combined with a 40 MW battery storage agreement and a stand-alone 100 MW battery storage agreement to replace the Leased Interest. To ensure system reliability and load needs are met in 2023, when a majority of the leases expire, PNM also requested NMPRC approval for a 300 MW solar PPA combined with a 150 MW battery storage agreement. On August 25, 2021, the NMPRC issued an order confirming PNM requires no further NMPRC authority to abandon the PVNGS Leased Interest and to sell and transfer the PNM-owned assets and nuclear fuel supply associated with the Leased Interest to SRP. The order bifurcated the issue of approval of the two PPAs and three battery storage agreements into a separate docket so it may proceed expeditiously and deferred a ruling on the other issues. On February 16, 2022, the NMPRC approved the two PPAs and three battery storage agreements. For additional information on PNM's Leased Interest and the associated abandonment application see Note 16 and Note 17.
Advanced Metering - Currently, TNMP has approximately 262,000 advanced meters across its service territory. Beginning in 2019, the majority of costs associated with TNMP’s AMS program are being recovered through base rates. On July 14, 2021, TNMP filed a request with the PUCT to consider and approve its final reconciliation of the costs spent on the deployment of AMS from April 1, 2018 through December 31, 2018 of $9.0 million and approve appropriate carrying charges until full collection. On September 13, 2021, the PUCT Staff filed a recommendation for approval of TNMP's application for substantially all costs. On October 2, 2020, TNMP filed an application with the PUCT for authorization to implement necessary technological upgrades of approximately $46 million to its AMS program by November 2022. On January 14, 2021, the PUCT approved TNMP’s application. TNMP will seek recovery of the investment associated with the upgrade in a future general rate proceeding or DCOS filing.
In February 2016, PNM filed an application with the NMPRC requesting approval of a project to replace its existing customer metering equipment with Advanced Metering Infrastructure (“AMI”), which was denied. As ordered by the NMPRC, PNM’s 2020 filing for energy efficiency programs to be offered in 2021, 2022, and 2023 included a proposal for an AMI pilot project, although PNM did not recommend the proposal due to the limited benefits that are cost-effective under a pilot structure. On September 17, 2020, the hearing examiner in the energy efficiency case issued a recommended decision recommending that PNM's proposed 2021 energy efficiency and load management program be approved, with the exception of the proposed AMI pilot program. On October 28, 2020, the NMPRC approved the recommended decision.
Rate Riders and Interim Rate Relief - The PUCT has approved mechanisms that allow TNMP to recover capital invested in transmission and distribution projects without having to file a general rate case. The PUCT also approved rate riders that allow TNMP to recover amounts related to energy efficiency and third-party transmission costs. The NMPRC has approved PNM recovering fuel costs through the FPPAC, as well as rate riders for renewable energy, energy efficiency, and the TEP. These mechanisms allow for more timely recovery of investments.
FERC Regulation
Rates PNM charges wholesale transmission customers are subject to traditional rate regulation by FERC. Rates charged to wholesale electric transmission customers, other than customers on the Western Spirit Line described below, are based on a formula rate mechanism pursuant to which rates for wholesale transmission service are calculated annually in accordance with an approved formula. The formula includes updating cost of service components, including investment in plant and operating expenses, based on information contained in PNM’s annual financial report filed with FERC, as well as including projected transmission capital projects to be placed into service in the following year. The projections included are subject to true-up. Certain items, including changes to return on equity and depreciation rates, require a separate filing to be made with FERC before being included in the formula rate.
In May 2019, PNM filed an application with FERC requesting approval to purchase and provide transmission service on the Western Spirit Line. All necessary approvals were obtained. In December 2021, PNM completed the purchase of the Western Spirit Line and service under related transmission agreements was initiated using an incremental rate that is separate from the formula rate mechanism described above. See Note 17.
On March 12, 2021, PNM filed four unexecuted TSAs with FERC totaling 145 MW with Leeward. The unexecuted TSAs provide long-term firm, point-to-point transmission service on PNM’s transmission system. The unexecuted TSAs are based on the pro-forma transmission service agreements with certain non-conforming provisions under Attachment A of PNM’s OATT and include PNM’s OATT rate. PNM filed the unexecuted TSAs at the request of Leeward because the parties were unable to reach an agreement on the terms and conditions for transmission service. On May 11, 2021, FERC issued an order accepting PNM's four unexecuted TSAs based on PNM's proposed pricing scheme included in its OATT rate. On June 10, 2021, Pattern Wind and Leeward both filed a request for rehearing of the FERC Order. On September 10, 2021, Leeward filed a petition in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for review of FERC's order accepting PNM's four unexecuted TSAs. On November 15, 2021, FERC issued an order denying the rehearing. On December 3, 2021, Leeward filed an Unopposed Motion for Voluntary Dismissal with the United States District Court for the District of Columbia of its petition for review. PNM is unable to predict the outcome of this matter. See Note 17.
Delivering At or Above Industry-Average Earnings and Dividend Growth
PNMR’s financial objective to deliver at or above industry-average earnings and dividend growth enables investors to
A - 30
realize the value of their investment in the Company’s business. Earnings growth is based on ongoing earnings, which is a non-GAAP financial measure that excludes from GAAP earnings certain non-recurring, infrequent, and other items that are not indicative of fundamental changes in the earnings capacity of the Company’s operations. PNMR uses ongoing earnings to evaluate the operations of the Company and to establish goals, including those used for certain aspects of incentive compensation, for management and employees.
PNMR targets a dividend payout ratio in the 50% to 60% range of its ongoing earnings. PNMR expects to provide at or above industry-average dividend growth in the near-term. The Board will continue to evaluate the dividend on an annual basis, considering sustainability and growth, capital planning, and industry standards.
Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, PNMR has agreed not to declare, set aside, make or pay any dividend or other distribution, payable in cash, stock, property or otherwise, with respect to any of its equity securities, or make any other actual, constructive or deemed distribution in respect of any equity securities (except (i) PNMR may continue the declaration and payment of planned regular quarterly cash dividends on PNMR common stock for each quarterly period ended after the date of the Merger Agreement, which for any fiscal quarter in 2022 shall not exceed $0.3475, with usual record and payment dates in accordance with past dividend practice, and (ii) for any cash dividend or cash distribution by a wholly-owned subsidiary of PNMR to PNMR or another wholly-owned subsidiary of PNMR).
The Board approved the following increases in the indicated annual common stock dividend:
Maintaining Investment Grade Credit Ratings
The Company is committed to maintaining investment grade credit ratings in order to reduce the cost of debt financing and to help ensure access to credit markets, when required. On February 10, 2022, Moody’s downgraded TNMP’s issuer rating from A3 to Baa1 and changed the outlook from negative to stable. See the subheading Liquidity included in the full discussion of Liquidity and Capital Resources below for the specific credit ratings for PNMR, PNM, and TNMP. All of the credit ratings issued by both Moody’s and S&P on the Company’s debt continue to be investment grade.
Business Focus
To achieve its business objectives, focus is directed in key areas: Safe, Reliable and Affordable Power; Utility Plant and Strategic Investments; Environmentally Responsible Power; and Customer, Stakeholders, and Community Engagement. The Company works closely with its stakeholders to ensure that resource plans and infrastructure investments benefit from robust public dialogue and balance the diverse needs of our communities. Equally important is the focus of PNMR’s utilities on customer satisfaction and community engagement.
Safe, Reliable, and Affordable Power
Safety is the first priority of our business and a core value of the Company. PNMR utilizes a Safety Management System to provide clear direction, objectives and targets for managing safety performance and minimizing risks and empowers employees to “Be the Reason Everyone Goes Home Safe”.
PNMR measures reliability and benchmark performance of PNM and TNMP against other utilities using industry-standard metrics, including System Average Interruption Duration Index (“SAIDI”) and System Average Interruption Frequency Index (“SAIFI”). PNM's and TNMP's investment plans include projects designed to support reliability and reduce the amount of time customers are without power.
PNMR and its utilities are aware of the important roles they play in enhancing economic vitality in their service territories. Management believes that maintaining strong and modern electric infrastructure is critical to ensuring reliability and supporting economic growth. When contemplating expanding or relocating their operations, businesses consider energy affordability and reliability to be important factors. PNM and TNMP strive to balance service affordability with infrastructure investment to maintain a high level of electric reliability and to deliver a safe and superior customer experience. Investing in PNM’s and TNMP’s infrastructure is critical to ensuring reliability and meeting future energy needs. Both utilities have long-established records of providing customers with safe and reliable electric service.
The Company continues to closely monitor developments and has taken and continues to take steps to mitigate the potential risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has assessed and updated its existing business continuity plans in response to the impacts of the pandemic through crisis team meetings and working with other utilities and operators. It has identified its critical workforce, staged backups and limited access to control rooms and critical assets. The Company has worked to protect the safety of its employees using a number of measures, including minimizing exposure to other employees
A - 31
and the public and supporting flexible arrangements for all applicable job functions. The Company is also working with its suppliers to manage the impacts to its supply chain and remains focused on the integrity of its information systems and other technology systems used to run its business. However, the Company cannot predict the extent or duration of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, its effects on the global, national or local economy, or on the Company's financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. The Company will continue to monitor developments related to COVID-19 and will remain focused on protecting the health and safety of its customers, employees, contractors, and other stakeholders, and on its objective to provide safe, reliable, affordable and environmentally responsible power. As discussed in Note 17, both PNM and TNMP suspended disconnecting certain customers for past due bills, waived late fees during the pandemic, and have been provided regulatory mechanisms to recover these and other costs resulting from COVID-19. See additional discussion below regarding the Company's customer, community, and stakeholder engagement in response to COVID-19 and in Item 1A. Risk Factors.
Utility Plant and Strategic Investments
Utility Plant Investments - During the 2020 and 2021 periods, PNM and TNMP together invested $1.6 billion in utility plant, including substations, power plants, nuclear fuel, and transmission and distribution systems. New Mexico’s clean energy future depends on a reliable, resilient, secure grid to deliver an evolving mix of energy resources to customers. PNM has launched a capital initiative, which emphasizes new investments in its transmission and distribution infrastructure with three primary objectives: delivering clean energy, enhancing customer satisfaction and increasing grid resilience. Projects are aimed at advancing the infrastructure beyond its original architecture to a more flexible and redundant system accommodating growing amounts of intermittent and distributed generation resources and integrating evolving technologies that provide long-term customer value. See the subheading Capital Requirements included in the full discussion of Liquidity and Capital Resources below for additional discussion of the Company’s projected capital requirements.
Strategic Investments - In 2017, PNMR Development and AEP OnSite Partners created NMRD to pursue the acquisition, development, and ownership of renewable energy generation projects, primarily in the state of New Mexico. Abundant renewable resources, large tracts of affordable land, and strong government and community support make New Mexico a favorable location for renewable generation. New Mexico ranks third in the Nation for energy potential from solar power according to the Nebraska Department of Energy & Energy Sun Index and ranks third in the Nation for land-based wind capacity according to the U.S. Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy. PNMR Development and AEP OnSite Partners each have a 50% ownership interest in NMRD. Through NMRD, PNMR anticipates being able to provide additional renewable generation solutions to customers within and surrounding its regulated jurisdictions through partnering with a subsidiary of one of the United States’ largest electric utilities. As of December 31, 2021, NMRD’s renewable energy capacity in operation was 135.1 MW, which includes 130 MW of solar-PV facilities to supply energy to the Meta data center located within PNM’s service territory, 1.9 MW to supply energy to Columbus Electric Cooperative located in southwest New Mexico, 2.0 MW to supply energy to the Central New Mexico Electric Cooperative, and 1.2 MW of solar-PV facilities to supply energy to the City of Rio Rancho, New Mexico. In addition, PNM’s February 8, 2021 application with the NMPRC for approval to service the Meta data center includes construction of a 50 MW solar facility owned by NMRD, which is expected to be operational in 2023. See Note 17. NMRD actively explores opportunities for additional renewable projects, including large-scale projects to serve future data centers and other customer needs.
Integrated Resource Plan
NMPRC rules require that investor-owned utilities file an IRP every three years. The IRP is required to cover a 20-year planning period and contain an action plan covering the first four years of that period.
NMPRC rules required PNM to file its 2020 IRP in July 2020. In April 2020, the NMPRC approved PNM ‘s request to extend the deadline to file its 2020 IRP until six months after the NMPRC issues a final order approving replacement resources in PNM’s SJGS Abandonment Application. On January 29, 2021, PNM filed its 2020 IRP. The plan focuses on a carbon-free electricity portfolio by 2040 that would eliminate coal at the end of 2024. This includes replacing the power from San Juan with a mix of approved carbon-free resources and the plan to exit Four Corners at the end of 2024. The plan highlights the need for additional investments in a diverse set of resources, including renewables to supply carbon-free power, energy storage to balance supply and demand, and efficiency and other demand-side resources to mitigate load growth. See additional discussion regarding PNM’s 2020 IRP filing in Note 17.
Environmentally Responsible Power
PNMR has a long-standing record of environmental stewardship. PNM’s environmental focus is in three key areas:
•Developing strategies to provide reliable and affordable power while transitioning to a 100% emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040
•Preparing PNM’s system to meet New Mexico’s increasing renewable energy requirements as cost-effectively as possible
•Increasing energy efficiency participation
PNMR’s corporate website (www.pnmresources.com) includes a dedicated section providing key environmental and other sustainability information related to PNM’s and TNMP’s operations and other information that collectively demonstrates
A - 32
the Company’s commitment to ESG principles. This information highlights plans for PNM to be coal-free by 2024 (subject to regulatory approval) and to achieve an emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040.
In February 2022 PNM named its first Chief Environmental Officer. The Chief Environmental Officer will be responsible for developing and implementing the Company’s business strategy and positions on environmental and sustainability policy issues and will be charged with establishing organization-wide policies, strategies, goals, objectives and programs that advance sustainability and ensure compliance with regulations. The role will serve as the Company’s primary contact with various regulatory and stakeholder agencies on environmental matters. In addition, the role will lead environmental justice work, incorporating impacts to tribal, worker and affected communities and advance ESG reporting.
On September 21, 2020, PNM announced an agreement to partner with Sandia National Laboratories in research and development projects focused on energy resiliency, clean energy, and national security. The partnership demonstrates PNMR's commitment to ESG principles and its support of projects that further its emissions-free generation goals and plans for a reliable, resilient, and secure grid to deliver New Mexico's clean energy future.
The Energy Transition Act (“ETA”)
On June 14, 2019, Senate Bill 489, known as the ETA, became effective. The ETA amends the REA and requires utilities operating in New Mexico to have renewable portfolios equal to 20% by 2020, 40% by 2025, 50% by 2030, 80% by 2040, and 100% zero-carbon energy by 2045. The ETA also amends sections of the REA to allow for the recovery of undepreciated investments and decommissioning costs related to qualifying EGUs that the NMPRC has required be removed from retail jurisdictional rates, provided replacement resources to be included in retail rates have lower or zero-carbon emissions. The ETA provides for a transition from fossil-fueled generating resources to renewable and other carbon-free resources by allowing utilities to issue securitized bonds, or “energy transition bonds,” related to the retirement of certain coal-fired generating facilities to qualified investors. PNM expects the ETA will have a significant impact on PNM’s future generation portfolio, including PNM’s planned retirement of SJGS in 2022 and the planned Four Corners exit in 2024. PNM cannot predict the full impact of the ETA on potential future generating resource abandonment and replacement filings with the NMPRC.
SJGS Abandonment Application - On July 1, 2019, PNM filed a Consolidated Application for the Abandonment and Replacement of SJGS and Related Securitized Financing Pursuant to the ETA (the “SJGS Abandonment Application”). The SJGS Abandonment Application sought NMPRC approval to retire PNM’s share of SJGS in mid-2022, and for approval of replacement resources and the issuance of approximately $361 million of Securitized Bonds as provided by the ETA. The application included several replacement resource scenarios including PNM’s recommended replacement scenario, which is consistent with PNM’s goal of having a 100% emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040 and would have provided cost savings to customers while preserving system reliability.
The NMPRC issued an order requiring the SJGS Abandonment Application be considered in two proceedings: one addressing SJGS abandonment and related financing and the other addressing replacement resources but did not definitively indicate if the abandonment and financing proceedings would be evaluated under the requirements of the ETA. After several requests for clarification and legal challenges, in January 2020, the NM Supreme Court ruled the NMPRC is required to apply the ETA to all aspects of PNM’s SJGS Abandonment Application, and that any previous NMPRC orders inconsistent with their ruling should be vacated.
In February 2020, the hearing examiners issued two recommended decisions recommending approval of PNM’s proposed abandonment of SJGS, subject to approval of the separate replacement resources proceeding, and approval of PNM’s proposed financing order to issue Securitized Bonds. The hearing examiners recommended, among other things, that PNM be authorized to abandon SJGS by June 30, 2022, to issue Securitized Bonds of up to $361 million, and to establish the Energy Transition Charge. The hearing examiners recommended an interim rate rider adjustment upon the start date of the Energy Transition Charge to provide immediate credits to customers for the full value of PNM’s revenue requirement related to SJGS until those reductions are reflected in base rates. In addition, the hearing examiners recommended PNM be granted authority to establish regulatory assets to recover costs that PNM will pay prior to the issuance of the Securitized Bonds, including costs associated with the bond issuances as well as for severances, job training, and economic development funds. On April 1, 2020, the NMPRC unanimously approved the hearing examiners' recommended decisions regarding the abandonment of SJGS and the Securitized Bonds. On April 10, 2020, CFRE and NEE filed a notice of appeal with the NM Supreme Court of the NMPRC’s approval of PNM’s request to issue securitized financing under the ETA. On January 10, 2022, the NM Supreme Court issued its decision rejecting CFRE’s and NEE’s constitutional challenges to the ETA and affirmed the NMPRC final order.
On June 24, 2020, the hearing examiners issued a second recommended decision on PNM's request for approval of replacement resources that addressed the entire portfolio of replacement resources. On July 29, 2020 the NMPRC issued an order approving resource selection criteria identified in the ETA that include PPA's for 650 MW of solar and 300 MW of battery storage. Throughout 2021 and continuing into 2022, PNM provided notices of delays and status updates to the NMPRC for the approved SJGS replacement resource projects, which coupled with the abandonment of SJGS Units 1 and 4 present a risk that PNM will have insufficient operational resources to meet the 2022 summer peak to reliably serve its customers. PNM
A - 33
entered into three agreements to purchase power from third parties in the second half of 2021 to minimize potential impacts to customers and on February 17, 2022, PNM provided a notice and request with the NMPRC that PNM had obtained agreement from the SJGS owners and WSJ LLC to extend operation of Unit 4 until September 30, 2022. SJGS Unit 4 will provide 327 MW of capacity and improve PNM’s projected system reserve margin to meet the 2022 summer peak. On February 23, 2022, the NMPRC issued an order finding that PNM did not require NMPRC approval to extend operation of SJGS Unit 4 for an additional three-month period. On February 25, 2022, the amended SJGS participation agreement was filed with FERC. See additional discussion of the ETA and PNM’s San Juan Abandonment Application in Notes 16 and 17.
Four Corners Abandonment Application - On January 8, 2021, PNM filed the Four Corners Abandonment Application, which seeks NMPRC approval to exit PNM’s 13% share of Four Corners as of December 31, 2024, and issuance of approximately $300 million of energy transition bonds as provided by the ETA. As ordered by the hearing examiner in the case, PNM filed an amended application and testimony on March 15, 2021. The amended application provided additional information to support PNM's request, provided background on the NMPRC's consideration of the prudence of PNM's investment in Four Corners in the NM 2016 Rate Case and explained how the proposed sale and abandonment provides a net public benefit. On December 15, 2021, the NMPRC issued a final order denying approval of the Four Corners Abandonment Application and the corresponding request for issuance of securitized financing. On December 22, 2021, PNM filed a Notice of Appeal with the NM Supreme Court of the NMPRC decision to deny the application. See additional discussion of the ETA and PNM’s Four Corners Abandonment Application in Notes 16 and 17.
PNM enhanced its plan to exit Four Corners and emphasized its ESG strategy to reduce carbon emissions on March 12, 2021 with an announcement for additional plans for seasonal operations at Four Corners beginning in the fall of 2023, subject to the necessary approvals. The solution for seasonal operations ensures the plant will be available to serve each owners' customer needs during times of peak energy use while minimizing operations during periods of low demand. This approach results in an estimated annual 20 to 25 percent reduction in carbon emissions at the plant and retains jobs and royalty payments for the Navajo Nation.
The Community Solar Act
On June 18, 2021, Senate Bill 84, known as the Community Solar Act, became effective. The Community Solar Act establishes a program that allows for the development of community solar facilities and provides customers of a qualifying utility with the option of accessing solar energy produced by a community solar facility in accordance with the Community Solar Act. The NMPRC is charged with administering the Community Solar Act program, establishing a total maximum capacity of 200 MW community solar facilities (applicable until November 2024) and allocating proportionally to the New Mexico electric investor-owned utilities and participating cooperatives. As required under the Community Solar Act, the NMPRC opened a docket on May 12, 2021 to adopt rules to establish a community solar program no later than April 1, 2022. See Note 17.
Electric Vehicles
PNMR is building upon its ESG goal of 100% emissions-free generation by 2040 with plans for additional emissions reductions through the electrification of its vehicle fleet. Growing the number of electric vehicles within the Company's fleet will benefit the environment and lower fuel costs furthering the commitment to ESG principles. Under the commitment, existing fleet vehicles will be replaced as they are retired with an increasing percentage of electric vehicles. The new goals call for 25% of all light duty fleet purchases to be electric by 2025 and 50% to be electric by 2030.
To demonstrate PNMR’s commitment to increase the electrification of vehicles in its service territory, PNM filed a TEP with the NMPRC on December 18, 2020. The TEP supports customer adoption of electric vehicles by focusing on addressing the barriers to electric vehicle adoption and encourage use. PNM’s proposed program budget will be dedicated to low and moderate income customers by providing rebates to both residential and non-residential customers towards the purchase of chargers and/or behind-the-meter infrastructure. On November 10, 2021, the NMPRC issued a final order approving PNM’s TEP program. See Note 17.
In December 2021, PNM announced that it will be joining the National Electric Highway Coalition, which plans to build fast-charging ports along major U.S. travel corridors. The coalition, with approximately 50 investor-owned electric companies is committed to providing electric vehicle (EV) fast charging ports that will allow the public to drive EVs with confidence throughout the country’s major roadways by the end of 2023.
Other Environmental Matters
Four Corners may be required to comply with environmental rules that affect coal-fired generating units, including regional haze rules and the ETA. On June 19, 2019, EPA repealed the Clean Power Plan, promulgated the ACE Rule, and revised the implementing regulations for all emission guidelines issued under the CAA Section 111(d). On January 19, 2021, the DC Circuit issued an opinion vacating and remanding the ACE Rule, holding that it was based on a misconstruction of Section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act, but stayed its mandate for vacatur of the repeal of the Clean Power Plan to ensure that the now-outdated rule would not become effective. The U.S. Supreme Court granted four petitions for certiorari seeking review of
A - 34
the DC Circuit’s decision, and oral arguments in the case were held on February 28, 2022. A decision is expected in June 2022. In addition, on January 27, 2021, President Biden signed an executive order requiring a review of environmental regulations issued under the Trump Administration, which will include a review of the ACE rule.
Renewable Energy
PNM’s renewable procurement strategy includes utility-owned solar capacity, as well as solar, wind, and geothermal energy purchased under PPAs. As of December 31, 2021, PNM has 158 MW of utility-owned solar capacity in operation. In addition, PNM purchases power from a customer-owned distributed solar generation program that had an installed capacity of 201.2 MW at December 31, 2021. PNM also owns the 500 KW PNM Prosperity Energy Storage Project. The project was one of the first combinations of battery storage and solar-PV energy in the nation and involved extensive research and development of advanced grid concepts. The facility also was the nation’s first solar storage facility fully integrated into a utility’s power grid. PNM also purchases the output from New Mexico Wind, a 200 MW wind facility, and the output of Red Mesa Wind, an existing 102 MW wind energy center. PNM’s 2020 renewable energy procurement plan was approved by the NMPRC in January 2020 and includes a PPA to procure 140 MW of renewable energy and RECs from La Joya Wind II that became operational in June 2021. The NMPRC approved the portfolio to replace the planned retirement of SJGS resulting in PNM executing solar PPAs of 650 MW combined with 300 MW of battery storage agreements. In addition, the PVNGS Leased Interest Abandonment Application approved by the NMPRC includes solar PPAs of 450 MW combined with 290 MW of battery storage agreements. The majority of these renewable resources are key means for PNM to meet the RPS and related regulations that require PNM to achieve prescribed levels of energy sales from renewable sources, including those set by the recently enacted ETA, without exceeding cost requirements.
As discussed in Strategic Investments above, PNM is currently purchasing the output of 130 MW of solar capacity from NMRD that is used to serve the Meta data center which includes two 25-year PPAs to purchase renewable energy and RECs from an aggregate of approximately 100 MW of capacity from two solar-PV facilities constructed by NMRD to supply power to Meta, Inc. The first 50 MW of these facilities began commercial operations in November 2019 and the second 50 MW facility began commercial operations in July 2020. Additionally, PNM has entered into three separate 25-year PPAs to purchase renewable energy and RECs to be used by PNM to supply additional renewable power to the Meta data center. These PPAs include the purchase of power and RECs from a 50 MW wind project, which was placed in commercial operation in November 2018, a 166 MW wind project which became operational in February 2021, and a 50 MW solar-PV project to be operational in 2022. In addition, the NMPRC issued an order that will allow PNM to service the Meta data center for an additional 190 MW of solar PPA combined with 50 MW of battery storage and a 50 MW solar PPA expected to be operational in 2023. See Note 17.
In March 2020, the NMPRC approved the PNM Solar Direct program under which qualified governmental and large commercial customers could participate in a voluntary renewable energy procurement program. The costs of the program would be recovered directly from subscribing customers through a rate rider, including the costs to procure renewable energy from 50 MW of solar-PV facilities under a 15-year PPA. These facilities are expected to be placed in commercial operation in 2022.
PNM will continue to procure renewable resources while balancing the impact to customers’ electricity costs in order to meet New Mexico’s escalating RPS and carbon-free resource requirements.
Energy Efficiency
Energy efficiency plays a significant role in helping to keep customers’ electricity costs low while meeting their energy needs and is one of the Company’s approaches to supporting environmentally responsible power. PNM’s and TNMP’s energy efficiency and load management portfolios continue to achieve robust results. In 2021, incremental energy saved as a result of new participation in PNM’s portfolio of energy efficiency programs is estimated to be approximately 95 GWh. This is equivalent to the annual consumption of approximately 11,245 homes in PNM’s service territory. PNM’s load management and annual energy efficiency programs also help lower peak demand requirements. As discussed above, in April 2020, PNM filed an application for energy efficiency and load management programs to be offered in 2021, 2022, and 2023. On September 17, 2020, the hearing examiner in the case issued a recommended decision recommending that PNM's proposed 2021 energy efficiency and load management program be approved, with the exception of the proposed AMI pilot program. On October 28, 2020, the NMPRC issued an order adopting the recommended decision in its entirety. In 2021, TNMP’s incremental energy saved as a result of new participation in TNMP’s energy efficiency programs is estimated to be approximately 19 GWh. This is equivalent to the annual consumption of approximately 2,469 homes in TNMP’s service territory. TNMP’s High-Performance Homes residential new construction energy efficiency program was honored for the sixth year in a row by ENERGY STAR. This recognition includes the program’s fourth straight Partner of the Year Sustained Excellence Award. For information on PNM's and TNMP's energy efficiency filing with the NMPRC and PUCT see Note 17.
Water Conservation and Solid Waste Reduction
PNM continues its efforts to reduce the amount of fresh water used to make electricity (about 35% more efficient than in 2007). Continued growth in PNM’s fleet of solar and wind energy sources, energy efficiency programs, and innovative uses
A - 35
of gray water and air-cooling technology have contributed to this reduction. Water usage has continued to decline as PNM has substituted less fresh-water-intensive generation resources to replace SJGS Units 2 and 3 starting in 2018, as water consumption at that plant has been reduced by approximately 50%. As the Company moves forward with its mission to achieve 100% carbon-free generation by 2040, it expects that more significant water savings will be gained. PNM has set a goal to reduce freshwater use 80% by 2035 and 90% by 2040 from 2005 levels. Focusing on responsible stewardship of New Mexico’s scarce water resources improves PNM’s water-resilience in the face of persistent drought and ever-increasing demands for water to spur the growth of New Mexico’s economy.
In addition to the above areas of focus, the Company is working to reduce the amount of solid waste going to landfills through increased recycling and reduction of waste. In 2021, 18 of the Company’s 23 facilities met the solid waste diversion goal of a 65% diversion rate. The Company expects to continue to do well in this area in the future.
Customer, Stakeholder, and Community Engagement
Another key element of the Company’s commitment to ESG principles is fostering relationships with its customers, stakeholders, and communities. The Company strives to deliver a superior customer experience. Through outreach, collaboration, and various community-oriented programs, the Company has demonstrated a commitment to building productive relationships with stakeholders, including customers, community partners, regulators, intervenors, legislators, and shareholders. In December 2021, PNM Resources was named for the second consecutive year to Newsweek’s list of America’s Most Responsible Companies highlighting companies in areas of ESG. PNM continues to focus its efforts to enhance the customer experience through customer service improvements, including enhanced customer service engagement options, strategic customer outreach, and improved communications. These efforts are supported by market research to understand the varying needs of customers, identifying and establishing valued services and programs, and proactively communicating and engaging with customers. As a result, PNM continues to experience steady performance in customer satisfaction in both the J.D. Power Electric Utility Residential Customer Satisfaction StudySM and its own proprietary relationship surveys. In the 2021 fourth quarter J.D. Power overall customer satisfaction results PNM outperformed the West Midsize industry average by one point.
The Company has leveraged a number of communications channels and strategic content to better serve and engage its many stakeholders. PNM’s website www.pnm.com, provides the details of major regulatory filings, including general rate requests, as well as the background on PNM’s efforts to maintain reliability, keep prices affordable, and protect the environment. The Company’s website is also a resource for information about PNM’s operations and community outreach efforts, including plans for building a sustainable energy future for New Mexico and to transition to an emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040. PNM has also leveraged social media in communications with customers on various topics such as education, outage alerts, safety, customer service, and PNM’s community partnerships in philanthropic projects. As discussed above, PNMR’s corporate website, www.pnmresources.com, includes a dedicated section providing additional information regarding the Company’s commitment to ESG principles and other sustainability efforts.
With reliability being the primary role of a transmission and distribution service provider in Texas’ deregulated market, TNMP continues to focus on keeping end-users updated about interruptions and to encourage consumer preparation when severe weather is forecasted. In the third quarter of 2021, TNMP provided a 30-person team in support of another utility that experienced significant damage to their transmission and distribution system as a result of Hurricane Ida. TNMP has been honored by the Edison Electric Institute four times since 2012 for its assistance to out-of-state utilities affected by hurricanes. TNMP has also been honored twice for hurricane response in its own territory.
Local relationships and one-on-one communications remain two of the most valuable ways both PNM and TNMP connect with their stakeholders. Both companies maintain long-standing relationships with governmental representatives and key electricity consumers to ensure that these stakeholders are updated on Company investments and initiatives. Key electricity consumers also have dedicated Company contacts that support their important service needs.
Another demonstration of the Company’s commitment to ESG principles is the Company’s tradition of supporting the communities it serves in New Mexico and Texas. This support extends beyond corporate giving and financial donations from the PNM Resources Foundation to also include collaborations on community projects, customer low-income assistance programs, and employee volunteerism. In response to COVID-19, additional efforts were made in each of these areas and exhibit the Company’s core value of caring for its customers and communities.
During the three years ending December 31, 2021, corporate giving contributed $10.4 million to civic, educational, environmental, low income, and economic development organizations. PNMR recognizes its responsibility to support programs and organizations that enrich the quality of life across its service territories and seeks opportunities to further demonstrate its commitment in these areas as needs arise. In response to COVID-19 community needs, PNMR donated to an Emergency Action Fund in partnership with key local agencies to benefit approximately ninety nonprofits and small businesses facing challenges due to lack of technology, shifting service needs, and cancelled fundraising events. Additionally, employee teams have supported first responders and other front-line workers through the delivery of food and other supplies often procured from local businesses struggling during stay-at-home orders. PNM also donated to the Pueblo Relief Fund and delivered personal protective supplies to pueblo areas and tribal nations throughout New Mexico. While its service territory does not include the Navajo Nation, PNM’s operations include generating facilities and employees in this region that has been
A - 36
disproportionately affected by the pandemic. In response, employee teams focused efforts to this region and also provided available supplies of personal protective equipment. PNM has also collaborated with the Navajo Tribal Utility Authority Wireless (“NTUAW”) to set up wireless “hot spots” throughout the Navajo Nation in areas without internet access to assist first responders and support continued education opportunities amidst school closures. These actions supplement PNM’s continued support for the Navajo Nation. The PNM Navajo Nation Workforce Training Scholarship Program provides support for Navajo tribal members and encourages the pursuit of education and training in existing and emerging jobs in the communities in which they live. In 2019, PNM invested an additional $500,000 into this scholarship program to further assist in the development and education of the Navajo Nation workforce. PNM has invested in paid summer college engineering internship programs for American Indian students available in the greater Albuquerque area and established the PNM Pueblo Education Scholarship Endowment to invest in higher education for Native American Pueblo Indian students. PNM also continues to partner in the Light up Navajo project, piloted in 2019 and modeled after mutual aid to connect homes without electricity to the power grid. In a more active role in 2021, PNM also partnered with key local organizations to initiate funding for programs focused on diversity, equity and inclusion.
Another important outreach program is tailored for low-income customers and includes the PNM Good Neighbor Fund to provide customer assistance with their electric utility bills. COVID-19 has increased the needs of these customers along with customers who may not otherwise need to seek assistance. In addition to the suspension of residential customer disconnection from April 2020 through August 2021 and the expansion of customer payment plans, PNM responded with increased communications through media outlets and customer outreach to connect customers with nonprofit community service providers offering financial assistance, food, clothing, medical programs, and services for seniors. As a result of these communication efforts, 4,147 families in need received emergency assistance through the PNM Good Neighbor Fund during 2021. Additionally, PNM has worked closely with the New Mexico Department of Finance and Administration to implement strategies ensuring customers receive rent benefits, including utility bill assistance, from the Emergency Rental Assistance Program (“ERAP”). As a result of these efforts, the ERAP has paid over $6 million in customer arrears since the launch of the program in March 2021.
Additionally, as a part of corporate giving, on October 1, 2020, PNM introduced $2.0 million in funding for new COVID Customer Relief Programs to support income-qualified residential customers and small business customers who have been impacted by the financial challenges created by COVID-19 and have past due electric bills. Qualified customers that pay a portion of their past-due balance can receive assistance toward their remaining balance.
Volunteerism is also an important facet of employee culture, keeping our communities safer, stronger, smarter and more vibrant. In 2021, new programs were launched to provide employees with COVID-safe projects through virtual, hybrid, and limited group gatherings. Employees and nonprofits remained resilient, creative, and innovative and responded to community need and selflessly gave their time and talents to organizations throughout New Mexico and Texas completing 8,741 volunteer hours with nonprofits and other community organizations. Volunteers also participate in a company-wide annual Day of Service at nonprofits across New Mexico and Texas along with participation on a variety of nonprofit boards and independent volunteer activities throughout the year. In addition, the Company facilitated employee and customer Earth Day cleanups across PNM’s service territory resulting in over 2,200 gallons of trash collected.
In addition to the extensive engagement both PNM and TNMP have with nonprofit organizations in their communities, the PNM Resources Foundation provides nearly $1.6 million in grant funding each year across New Mexico and Texas. These grants help nonprofits innovate or sustain programs to grow and develop business, develop and implement environmental programs, and provide educational opportunities. Beginning in 2020, the PNM Resources Foundation is funding grants with a three-year focus on decreasing homelessness, increasing access to affordable housing, reducing carbon emissions, and increasing community safety with an emphasis on COVID-19 programs. As part of this emphasis, $0.5 million is awarded annually to nonprofits in New Mexico and Texas to assist with work being done on the front lines of the pandemic for community safety, with a focus on helping senior citizens and people currently experiencing homelessness during the shelter-in-place directives. The PNM Resources Foundation continued to expand its matching donation program to offer 2-to-1 matching on employee donations made to social justice nonprofits and increased the annual amount of matching donations available to each of its employees. PNM Resources Foundation awarded $0.3 million of additional grants to non-profits supporting TNMP communities following the winter storm in February 2021.
Economic Factors
PNM - In 2021, PNM experienced a decrease in weather normalized residential load of 0.9%, more than offset by an increase in weather normalized commercial load of 4.4% compared to 2020, signaling a return to pre-COVID-19 levels. PNM did not experience significant impacts to its other customer classes.
TNMP - In 2021, TNMP experienced a decrease in volumetric weather normalized retail load of 0.8% compared to 2020. Weather normalized demand-based load, excluding retail transmission consumers, increased 1.8% in 2021 compared to 2020. The shift back to lower volumetric weather normalized retail load and higher weather normalized demand-based commercial and industrial load reflects a return to pre-COVID-19 trends.
A - 37
Although the Company has experienced signs of recovery from state restrictions related to COVID-19, it is unable to determine the duration or final impacts from COVID-19 as discussed in more detail in Item 1A Risk Factors. The Company has not experienced, nor does it expect significant negative impacts to customer usage at PNM and TNMP resulting from the economic impacts of COVID-19. However, if current economic conditions worsen, the Company may be required to implement additional measures such as reducing or delaying operating and maintenance expenses and planned capital expenditures.
Results of Operations
Net earnings attributable to PNMR were $195.8 million, or $2.27 per diluted share in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $172.8 million, or $2.15 per diluted share in 2020. Among other things, earnings in 2021 benefited from higher weather normalized retail load at PNM, higher demand-based load at TNMP, higher transmission rates at PNM and TNMP, higher distribution rates at TNMP, lower surface mine reclamation expense and lower accretion expense at PNM, lower interest expense at PNM and Corporate and Other, higher equity AFUDC at PNM, and lower costs related to the Merger at Corporate and Other. These increases were partially offset by milder weather conditions at PNM and TNMP, lower volumetric load at TNMP, increased operational and maintenance expense, including higher plant maintenance and administrative costs at PNM, higher employee related, outside service and vegetation management expense at PNM and TNMP, increased depreciation and property taxes at PNM and TNMP due to increased plant in service, higher interest charges at TNMP, and decreased performance on PNM's NDT and coal mine reclamation investment securities. Diluted earnings per share increased in 2021 due to higher net earnings, partially offset by the dilutive impact of additional shares issued under the PNMR 2020 Forward Equity Sale Agreements on December 15, 2020. Additional information on factors impacting results of operations for each segment is discussed below under Results of Operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
PNMR and PNM have revolving credit facilities with capacities of $300.0 million and $400.0 million that currently expire in October 2023. Both facilities provide for short-term borrowings and letters of credit and can be extended through October 2024, subject to approval by a majority of the lenders. In addition, PNM has a $40.0 million revolving credit facility with banks having a significant presence in New Mexico that expires in December 2022, and TNMP has a $75.0 million revolving credit facility, which expires in September 2022 and contains two one-year extension options, subject to approval by a majority of the lenders. Total availability for PNMR on a consolidated basis was $799.8 million at February 18, 2022. The Company utilizes these credit facilities and cash flows from operations to provide funds for both construction and operational expenditures. PNMR also has intercompany loan agreements with each of its subsidiaries.
PNMR projects that its consolidated capital requirements, consisting of construction expenditures and dividends, will total $4.8 billion for 2022-2026. These construction expenditures include expenditures for PNM’s capital initiative that includes investments in transmission and distribution infrastructure to deliver clean energy, enhance customer satisfaction, and increase grid resilience.
To fund capital spending requirements to meet growth that balances earnings goals, credit metrics and liquidity needs, the Company has entered into a number of other financing arrangements in 2021. For further discussion on these financing arrangements see Liquidity and Capital Resources discussion below as well as Note 7.
After considering the effects of these financings and the Company’s short-term liquidity position as of February 18, 2022, the Company has consolidated maturities of long-term and short-term debt aggregating $194.7 million in the period from January 1, 2022 through February 28, 2023. In addition to internal cash generation, the Company anticipates that it will be necessary to obtain additional long-term financing in the form of debt refinancing, new debt issuances, and/or new equity in order to fund its capital requirements during the 2022-2026 period. The Company currently believes that its internal cash generation, existing credit arrangements, and access to public and private capital markets will provide sufficient resources to meet the Company’s capital requirements for at least the next twelve months. As of December 31, 2021 and February 18, 2022, the Company was in compliance with its debt covenants.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto. Trends and contingencies of a material nature are discussed to the extent known. Also, refer to Disclosure Regarding Forward Looking Statements in Part I, Item 1 and to Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A.
A - 38
A summary of net earnings attributable to PNMR is as follows:
The components of the changes in net earnings attributable to PNMR by segment are:
Information regarding the factors impacting PNMR’s operating results by segment are set forth below.
Segment Information
The following discussion is based on the segment methodology that PNMR’s management uses for making operating decisions and assessing performance of its various business activities. See Note 2 for more information on PNMR’s operating segments.
PNM
PNM defines utility margin as electric operating revenues less cost of energy, which consists primarily of fuel and purchase power costs. PNM believes that utility margin provides a more meaningful basis for evaluating operations than electric operating revenues since substantially all fuel and purchase power costs are offset in revenues as those costs are passed through to customers under PNM’s FPPAC. Utility margin is not a financial measure required to be presented under GAAP and is considered a non-GAAP measure.
The following table summarizes the operating results for PNM:
A - 39
The following table shows GWh sales, including the impacts of weather, by customer class and average number of customers:
(1)PNM purchases energy for a large customer on the customer’s behalf and delivers the energy to the customer’s location through PNM’s transmission system. PNM charges the customer for the cost of the energy as a direct pass through to the customer with only a minor impact in utility margin resulting from providing ancillary services.
(2)Increase in other sales for resale is the result of participation in the EIM beginning in April 2021. See Note 4 and Note 17.
Operating results - 2021 compared to 2020
The following table summarizes the significant changes to utility margin:
A - 40
The following tables summarize the primary drivers for operating expenses, depreciation and amortization, other income (deductions), interest charges, and income taxes:
A - 41
TNMP
TNMP defines utility margin as electric operating revenues less cost of energy, which consists of costs charged by third-party transmission providers. TNMP believes that utility margin provides a more meaningful basis for evaluating operations than electric operating revenues since all third-party transmission costs are passed on to customers through a transmission cost recovery factor. Utility margin is not a financial measure required to be presented under GAAP and is considered a non-GAAP measure.
The following table summarizes the operating results for TNMP:
The following table shows total GWh sales, including the impacts of weather, by retail tariff consumer class and average number of consumers:
(1)Volumetric load consumers are billed on KWh usage.
(2)Demand-based load includes consumers billed on a monthly KW peak and retail transmission customers that are primarily billed under rate riders.
(3)TNMP provides transmission and distribution services to REPs that provide electric service to customers in TNMP’s service territories. The number of consumers above represents the customers of these REPs. Under TECA, consumers in Texas have the ability to choose any REP to provide energy.
A - 42
Operating results - 2021 compared to 2020
The following table summarizes the significant changes to utility margin:
The following tables summarize the primary drivers for operating expenses, depreciation and amortization, other income (deductions), interest charges, and income taxes:
A - 43
Corporate and Other
The table below summarizes the operating results for Corporate and Other:
Corporate and Other operating expenses shown above are net of amounts allocated to PNM and TNMP under shared services agreements. The amounts allocated include certain expenses shown as depreciation and amortization and other income (deductions) in the table above. The change in operating expenses includes a decrease of $4.7 million in costs related to the Merger that were not allocated to PNM or TNMP. Substantially all depreciation and amortization expense is offset in operating expenses as a result of allocation of these costs to other business segments.
Operating results - 2021 compared to 2020
The following tables summarize the primary drivers for other income (deductions), interest charges, and income taxes:
A - 44
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Statements of Cash Flows
The information concerning PNMR’s cash flows is summarized as follows:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Changes in PNMR’s cash flow from operating activities result from net earnings, adjusted for items impacting earnings that do not provide or use cash. See Results of Operations above. Certain changes in assets and liabilities resulting from normal operations, including the effects of the seasonal nature of the Company’s operations, also impact operating cash flows.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The changes in PNMR’s cash flows from investing activities relate primarily to changes in utility plant additions. Cash flows from investing activities also include activity related to the purchase of the Western Spirit Line, Four Corners Purchase and Sale Agreement, and NMRD. Major components of PNMR’s cash inflows and (outflows) from investing activities are shown below:
A - 45
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
The changes in PNMR’s cash flows from financing activities include:
•Short-term borrowings increased $30.7 million in 2021 compared to a decrease of $153.1 million in 2020, resulting in a net increase in cash flows from financing activities of $183.8 million in 2021
•In 2021, PNMR had net amounts received under transmission interconnection arrangements of $70.4 million compared to $5.5 million in 2020
•In 2020, PNM borrowed $250.0 million under the PNM 2020 Term Loan and used the proceeds to repay the PNM 2019 $250.0 million Term Loan
•In 2020, PNM issued $200.0 million of PNM 2020 SUNs and used $100.0 million of proceeds to pay $100.0 million of the PNM 2020 Term Loan. The remaining $100.0 million of proceeds from the PNM 2020 SUNs were used to repay borrowings on the PNM Revolving Credit Facility and for other corporate purposes.
•In 2020, PNM prepaid without penalty the remaining $150.0 million balance of the PNM 2020 Term Loan
•In 2020, PNM purchased PCRBs totaling $100.3 million that were subject to mandatory tender on June 1, 2020, utilizing borrowings under the PNM Revolving Credit Facility. On July 1, 2020, these bonds were remarketed to investors in the weekly mode. On October 1, 2021, PNM converted these bonds to a fixed rate and remarketed them to new investors.
•In 2020, PNM notified bondholders that it was calling PCRBs aggregating $302.5 million, purchased the bonds in lieu of redemption, and remarketed them to new investors
•In 2020, TNMP issued $185.0 million of TNMP 2020 Bonds and used the proceeds to reduce short-term debt and for other corporate purposes
•In 2020, PNMR physically settled all shares under the PNMR 2020 Forward Equity Sale Agreements by issuing 6.2 million shares to the forward purchasers at a price of $45.805 per share, aggregating net proceeds of $283.1 million
•In 2020, PNMR borrowed $150.0 million under the PNMR 2020 Term Loan and used the proceeds to repay the $50.0 million PNMR 2018 Two-Year Term Loan and for other corporate purposes
•In 2020, PNMR executed a $300.0 million delayed-draw term loan (the “PNMR 2020 Delayed-Draw Term Loan”) and drew $80.0 million under its terms
•In 2020, the PNMR Development Term Loan was amended to reduce the balance by $25.0 million
•In 2021, PNMR borrowed the remaining $220.0 million under the PNMR 2020 Delayed-Draw Term Loan and repaid $300.0 million SUNs
•In 2021, PNMR borrowed $900.0 million under the PNMR 2021 Delayed-Draw Term Loan and repaid the $150.0 million PNMR 2019 Term Loan, the $300.0 million PNMR 2020 Delayed-Draw Term Loan, the $150.0 million PNMR 2020 Term Loan, $92.1 million in borrowings under the PNMR Revolving Credit Facility, $40.0 million in borrowings under the PNMR Development Revolving Credit Facility, and the $65.0 million PNMR Development Term Loan
•In 2021, PNM entered into a $75.0 million term loan and used the funds to repay the PNM 2019 $40.0 million Term Loan and for other corporate purposes
•In 2021, PNM issued $160.0 million of PNM 2021 SUNs and used the proceeds to repay $160.0 million of PNM’s 5.35% SUNs that were due October 2021
•In 2021, PNM remarketed $146.0 million of outstanding PCRBs to new investors
•In 2021, PNM issued $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of PNM September 2021 SUNs and used the proceeds to partially fund the purchase of the Western Spirit Line
•In 2021, TNMP issued $65.0 million aggregate principal amount of TNMP 2021 Bonds and used the proceeds to repay existing debt and for other corporate purposes
Financing Activities
See Note 7 for additional information concerning the Company’s financing activities. PNM must obtain NMPRC approval for any financing transaction having a maturity of more than 18 months. In addition, PNM files its annual informational financing filing and short-term financing plan with the NMPRC. The Company’s ability to access the credit and capital markets at a reasonable cost is largely dependent upon its:
•Ability to earn a fair return on equity
•Results of operations
•Ability to obtain required regulatory approvals
•Conditions in the financial markets
•Credit ratings
The Company is closely monitoring developments and is taking steps to mitigate the potential risks related to COVID-19. The Company currently believes it has adequate liquidity but cannot predict the extent or duration of the outbreak, its effects on the global, national or local economy, including the Company's ability to access capital in the financial markets, or on the Company's financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
A - 46
Each of the Company’s revolving credit facilities and term loans contain a single financial covenant that requires the maintenance of a debt-to-capitalization ratio. For the PNMR agreements, this ratio must be maintained at less than or equal to 70%, and for the PNM and TNMP agreements, this ratio must be maintained at less than or equal to 65%. The Company’s revolving credit facilities, term loans, and other debt agreements generally also contain customary covenants, events of default, cross-default provisions, and change-of-control provisions. The Company is in compliance with its debt covenants.
In August 2020, PNMR entered into the WFB LOC Facility aggregating $30.3 million that was issued to facilitate the posting of reclamation bonds currently held by WSJ LLC (who assumed all the obligations of SJCC post-bankruptcy). The reclamation bonds were required to be posted in connection with permits relating to the operation of the San Juan mine. See Note 16.
As discussed in Note 7, at December 31, 2020, PNMR Development had $10.0 million outstanding under the PNMR Development Revolving Credit Facility that was expected to mature on February 23, 2021. On February 22, 2021, PNMR Development extended the facility to January 31, 2022 but ultimately decided to terminate it on May 18, 2021 as discussed below.
On December 31, 2020, PNMR had $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.25% SUNs outstanding (the “PNMR 2018 SUNs”), which were set to mature on March 9, 2021. On December 22, 2020, PNMR entered into the $300.0 million PNMR 2020 Delayed-Draw Term Loan that was set to mature in January 2022 and drew $80.0 million to refinance existing indebtedness and for other corporate purposes. On March 9, 2021, PNMR utilized the remaining $220.0 million of capacity under the PNMR 2020 Delayed-Draw Term Loan to repay an equivalent amount of the PNMR 2018 SUNs. The remaining $80.0 million repayment of the PNMR 2018 SUNs was funded through borrowings under the PNMR Revolving Credit Facility.
On May 18, 2021, PNMR entered into a $1.0 billion delayed-draw term loan agreement (the “PNMR 2021 Delayed-Draw Term Loan”), among PNMR, the lenders party thereto, and Wells Fargo Bank, N. A., as administrative agent. Initially PNMR drew $850.0 million to repay and terminate existing indebtedness, including the $150.0 million PNMR 2019 Term Loan, the $300.0 million PNMR 2020 Delayed-Draw Term Loan, the $150.0 million PNMR 2020 Term Loan, the $65.0 million PNMR Development Term Loan, and $40.0 million in borrowings under the PNMR Development Revolving Credit Facility. Additionally, PNMR repaid the $92.1 million in borrowings under the PNMR Revolving Credit Facility. On December 2, 2021, PNMR drew an additional $50.0 million under the PNMR 2021 Delayed-Draw Term Loan. Draws on the PNMR 2021 Delayed-Draw Term Loan bear interest at a variable rate, which was 0.95% at December 31, 2021, and mature on May 18, 2023. On January 24, 2022, PNMR drew the remaining $100.0 million available under the PNMR 2021 Delayed-Draw Term Loan.
On June 18, 2021, PNM entered into a $75.0 million term loan (the “PNM 2021 Term Loan”) between PNM and Bank of America, N.A., as lender. The PNM 2021 Term Loan was used to repay the PNM 2019 $40.0 million Term Loan and for other corporate purposes. The PNM 2021 Term Loan bears interest at a variable rate, which was 0.93% at December 31, 2021 and matures on December 18, 2022.
On July 14, 2021, PNM entered into an agreement (the “PNM 2021 Note Purchase Agreement”) with institutional investors for the sale and issuance of $160.0 million aggregate principal amount of two series of senior unsecured notes (the “PNM 2021 SUNs”) offered in private placement transactions. The PNM 2021 SUNs were issued on July 14, 2021. PNM issued $80.0 million of the PNM 2021 SUNs at 2.59%, due July 15, 2033, and another $80.0 million at 3.14%, due July 15, 2041. Proceeds from the PNM 2021 SUNs were used to repay the total amount of $160.0 million of PNM's 5.35% SUNs, at par, earlier than their scheduled maturity of October 1, 2021. The PNM 2021 Note Purchase Agreement includes the customary covenants discussed above. In the event of a change of control, PNM will be required to offer to prepay the PNM 2021 SUNs at par. Although there are customary change of control provisions in the PNM debt agreements, the change of control provisions in these agreements, including the PNM 2021 Note Purchase Agreement, are not triggered by the closing of the Merger. PNM has the right to redeem any or all of the PNM 2021 SUNs prior to their maturities, subject to payment of a customary make-whole premium.
On July 14, 2021, TNMP entered into an agreement (the “TNMP 2021 Bond Purchase Agreement”) with institutional investors for the sale of $65.0 million aggregate principal amount of one series of TNMP first mortgage bonds (the “TNMP 2021 Bonds”) offered in private placement transactions. On August 16, 2021, TNMP issued all $65.0 million of the TNMP 2021 Bonds at 2.44% with a maturity of August 15, 2035 and used the proceeds to repay existing debt and for other corporate purposes. The TNMP 2021 Bonds are subject to continuing compliance with the representations, warranties and covenants set forth in the supplemental indenture governing the TNMP 2021 Bonds. The terms of the supplemental indenture governing the TNMP 2021 Bonds include the customary covenants discussed above. In the event of a change of control, TNMP will be required to offer to prepay the TNMP 2021 Bonds at par. However, the definition of change of control in the supplemental indenture governing the TNMP 2021 Bonds will not be triggered by the closing of the Merger. TNMP has the right to redeem any or all of the TNMP 2021 Bonds prior to their maturity, subject to payment of a customary make-whole premium.
A - 47
On September 23, 2021, PNM entered into an agreement (the “PNM September 2021 Note Purchase Agreement”) with institutional investors for the sale and issuance of $150.0 million aggregate principal amount of two series of senior unsecured notes (the “PNM September 2021 SUNs”) offered in private placement transactions. On December 2, 2021, PNM issued $50.0 million of the PNM September 2021 SUNs at 2.29%, due December 30, 2031, and another $100.0 million at 2.97%, due December 30, 2041. Proceeds from the PNM September 2021 SUNs were used for funding of capital expenditures, including the purchase of the Western Spirit Line, repayment of existing indebtedness, and for general corporate purposes. The PNM September 2021 Note Purchase Agreement includes the customary covenants discussed above. In the event of a change of control, PNM will be required to offer to prepay the PNM September 2021 SUNs at par. Although there are customary change of control provisions in the PNM debt agreements, the change of control provisions in these agreements, including the PNM September 2021 Note Purchase Agreement, are not triggered by the closing of the Merger. PNM has the right to redeem any or all of the PNM September 2021 SUNs prior to their maturities, subject to payment of a customary make-whole premium.
At December 31, 2020, PNM had $100.3 million of outstanding PNM Floating Rate PCRBs. The PNM Floating Rate PCRBs bore interest at rates that were reset weekly, giving investors the option to return the PCRBs for remarketing to new investors upon 7 days' notice. On October 1, 2021, PNM converted the PNM Floating Rate PCRBs to a fixed rate period and successfully remarketed them to new investors (“PNM 2021 Fixed Rate PCRBs”). The PNM 2021 Fixed Rate PCRBs now bear interest at 0.875% and are subject to mandatory tender on October 1, 2026.
At December 31, 2020, PNM had $146.0 million of outstanding PCRBs with a final maturity of April 1, 2033. These PCRBs were subject to mandatory tender on October 1, 2021 and were successfully remarketed to new investors on that date. The $146.0 million PCRBs bear interest at a fixed rate of 2.15% until their final maturity.
On October 20, 2020, the execution of the Merger Agreement constituted a “Change of Control” under certain PNMR, TNMP, and PNMR Development debt agreements. Under each of the specified debt agreements, a “Change of Control” constitutes an “Event of Default,” pursuant to which the lender parties thereto had the right to accelerate the indebtedness under the debt agreements.
On October 26, 2020, PNMR, TNMP and PNMR Development entered into amendment agreements with the lender parties thereto to amend the definition of “Change of Control” such that the entry into the Merger Agreement would not constitute a Change of Control and to waive the Event of Default arising from entry into the Merger Agreement. On September 15, 2021, PNMR and TNMP and the lender parties further amended the definition of “Change of Control” in the PNMR Revolving Credit Facility and the TNMP Revolving Credit Facility such that the closing of the Merger does not constitute a Change of Control under those facilities. The Change of Control provisions in the PNM debt agreements, PNM note purchase agreements, and TNMP 2021 Bond Purchase Agreement are not triggered by the closing of the Merger and did not require amendment.
The documents governing TNMP's aggregate $750.0 million of outstanding 2014 to 2020 First Mortgage Bonds (“TNMP FMBs”) obligated TNMP to offer, within 30 business days following the signing of the Merger Agreement, to prepay that $750.0 million of outstanding TNMP FMBs at 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon, but without any make-whole amount or other premium. TNMP made such offer to prepay the TNMP FMBs in accordance with the terms of the TNMP FMBs, and none of the holders of the TNMP FMBs accepted TNMP’s offer. The documents governing the 2014 to 2020 TNMP FMBs require TNMP to make another offer, within 30 business days of closing of the Merger, to prepay all outstanding TNMP FMBs at par. TNMP will make such offer to prepay the TNMP FMBs in accordance with the terms of the TNMP FMBs; however, holders of the TNMP FMBs are not required to tender their TNMP FMBs and may accept or reject such offer to prepay. As discussed above, the supplemental indenture that governs the TNMP 2021 Bonds excludes the Merger from the definition of Change of Control.
The TNMP FMBs are not registered under the Securities Act and may not be offered or sold in the United States absent registration or applicable exemption from registration requirements and applicable state laws. The information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K is for informational purposes only and is neither an offer to purchase, nor a solicitation of an offer to sell, subscribe for or buy any securities in any jurisdiction pursuant to the proposed transactions or otherwise, nor shall there be any sale, issuance or transfer of securities in any jurisdiction in contravention of applicable law. Similar to the offer to prepay made after signing the Merger Agreement, the post-Merger closing offer to prepay the TNMP FMBs will be made only pursuant to an offer to prepay, which will set forth the terms and conditions of the offer to prepay.
In 2017, PNMR entered into three separate four-year hedging agreements that effectively established fixed interest rates of 1.926%, 1.823%, and 1.629%, plus customary spreads over LIBOR for three separate tranches, each of $50.0 million, of its variable rate debt. On March 23, 2021, the 1.926% fixed interest rate hedge agreement expired according to its terms and the remaining agreements expired on May 23, 2021.
Capital Requirements
PNMR’s total capital requirements consist of construction expenditures, cash dividend requirements for PNMR common stock and PNM preferred stock. Key activities in PNMR’s current construction program include:
A - 48
•Investments in transmission and distribution infrastructure
•Upgrading generation resources and delivering clean energy
•Purchasing nuclear fuel
Projected capital requirements for 2022-2026 are:
The construction expenditure estimates are under continuing review and subject to ongoing adjustment, as well as to Board review and approval. The construction expenditures above include expenditures for PNM’s capital initiative that includes investments in transmission and distribution infrastructure to deliver clean energy, enhance customer satisfaction, and increase grid resilience. Not included in the table above are incremental expenditures for new customer growth in New Mexico and Texas, and other transmission and renewable energy expansion in New Mexico. The ability of PNMR to pay dividends on its common stock is dependent upon the ability of PNM and TNMP to be able to pay dividends to PNMR. See Note 6 for a discussion of regulatory and contractual restrictions on the payment of dividends by PNM and TNMP.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, PNMR met its capital requirements and construction expenditures through cash generated from operations, as well as its liquidity arrangements and the borrowings discussed in Financing Activities above.
In addition to the capital requirements for construction expenditures and dividends, the Company has long-term debt and term loans that must be paid or refinanced at maturity. PNM has $104.5 million of PCRBs that must be refinanced or repriced in June 2022 and the PNM 2021 $75.0 million Term Loan which matures in December 2022. See Note 7 for additional information about the Company’s long-term debt and equity arrangements. Funds received from the issuance of approximately 6.2 million shares of PNMR common stock in December 2020 under the PNMR 2020 Forward Equity Sale Agreements were used to repay existing indebtedness and for other corporate purposes. The Company may also enter into new arrangements similar to the existing agreements, borrow under the revolving credit facilities, or issue new long-term debt or equity in the public or private capital markets, or a combination of these sources. The Company has from time to time refinanced or repurchased portions of its outstanding debt before scheduled maturity. Depending on market conditions, the Company may refinance other debt issuances or make additional debt repurchases in the future.
Other Material Cash Requirements
In addition to the cash requirements for construction requirements and long-term debt discussed above, the Company has other material cash requirements related to long-term contractual obligations including minimum lease payments (Note 8), coal contracts, coal mine reclamation, nuclear decommissioning, SJGS plant decommissioning (Note 16), and pension and retiree medical contributions (Note 11).
Interest on long-term debt
Interest accrues on long-term debt agreements, at fixed rates, with the passage of time and is typically paid semi-annually in accordance with the terms of the debt agreement. Provided that long-term debt agreements are not prepaid or refinanced before their expected maturities, payments of interest are expected to total $85.0 million in 2022, $162.5 million in 2023 and 2024, $136.4 million in 2025 and 2026, and $545.6 million in 2027 and thereafter.
Transmission service arrangements
PNM owns transmission lines that are interconnected with other utilities in Arizona and Texas. PNM has executed long-term contracts with these other utilities to receive service for the transmission of energy owned by PNM utilizing the third-party transmission facilities. PNM generally receives transmission services, which are regulated by FERC, from a third-party through the other utilities’ OATT or a specific contract. PNM has reserved firm capacity on a long-term basis and is committed under the terms of the contracts. These contracted obligations total $16.8 million in 2022, $17.5 million in 2023 and 2024, $2.8 million in 2025 and 2026, and $2.6 million in 2027 and thereafter.
Technology outsourcing
The Company has other technology services under long-term contracts. The obligations under these contracts total $7.0 million in 2022, $8.5 million in 2023 and 2024, and $0.3 million in 2025 and 2026.
A - 49
Liquidity
PNMR’s liquidity arrangements include the $300.0 million PNMR Revolving Credit Facility, the $400.0 million PNM Revolving Credit Facility, and the $75.0 million TNMP Revolving Credit Facility. The PNMR and PNM facilities currently expire in October 2023 but can be extended through October 2024, subject to approval by a majority of the lenders. The TNMP Revolving Credit Facility matures in September 2022 and contains two one-year extension options, subject to approval by a majority of the lenders. PNM also has the $40.0 million PNM 2017 New Mexico Credit Facility that expires in December 2022. The Company believes the terms and conditions of these facilities are consistent with those of other investment grade revolving credit facilities in the utility industry. Variable interest rates under these facilities are based on LIBOR but contain provisions which allow for the replacement of LIBOR with other widely accepted interest rates. The Company expects that it will be able to extend or replace these credit facilities under similar terms and conditions prior to their expirations.
The revolving credit facilities and the PNM 2017 New Mexico Credit Facility provide short-term borrowing capacity. The revolving credit facilities also allow letters of credit to be issued. Letters of credit reduce the available capacity under the facilities. The Company utilizes these credit facilities and cash flows from operations to provide funds for both construction and operational expenditures. The Company’s business is seasonal with more revenues and cash flows from operations being generated in the summer months. In general, the Company relies on the credit facilities to be the initial funding source for construction expenditures. Accordingly, borrowings under the facilities may increase over time. Depending on market and other conditions, the Company will periodically sell long-term debt and use the proceeds to reduce the borrowings under the credit facilities. Information regarding the range of borrowings for each facility is as follows:
At December 31, 2021, the average interest rates were 1.61% for the PNMR Revolving Credit Facility, 1.35% for the PNM Revolving Credit Facility, and 0.85% for the TNMP Revolving Credit Facility. There were no borrowings outstanding under the PNM 2017 New Mexico Credit Facility at December 31, 2021.
The Company currently believes that its capital requirements for at least the next twelve months can be met through internal cash generation, existing, extended, or new credit arrangements, and access to public and private capital markets. The Company anticipates that it will be necessary to obtain additional long-term financing to fund its capital requirements and to balance its capital structure during the 2022 - 2026 period, including interim financing to fund construction of replacement resources prior to the issuance of the Securitized Bonds included in PNM’s SJGS Abandonment Application. This could include new debt and/or equity issuances. To cover the difference in the amounts and timing of internal cash generation and cash requirements, the Company intends to use short-term borrowings under its current and future liquidity arrangements or other short-term loans. However, if market conditions worsen, the Company may not be able to access the capital markets or renew credit facilities when they expire. Should that occur, the Company would seek to improve cash flows by reducing capital expenditures and exploring other available alternatives.
Currently, all of the credit ratings issued by both Moody’s and S&P on the Company’s debt are investment grade. On February 10, 2022, Moody’s downgraded TNMP’s issuer rating from A3 to Baa1 and changed the outlook from negative to stable. Investors are cautioned that a security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities, that each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization, and that each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
A - 50
As of February 18, 2022, ratings on the Company’s securities were as follows:
Investors are cautioned that a security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities, that each rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization, and that each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
A summary of liquidity arrangements as of February 18, 2022, is as follows:
In addition to the above, PNMR has $30.3 million of letters of credit outstanding under the WFB LOC Facility. The above table excludes intercompany debt. As of February 18, 2022, PNM had no intercompany borrowings and TNMP had $45.5 million of intercompany borrowings from PNMR. PNMR Development had no intercompany borrowings from PNMR and PNMR had $6.3 million in intercompany borrowing from PNMR Development. The remaining availability under the revolving credit facilities at any point in time varies based on a number of factors, including the timing of collections of accounts receivables and payments for construction and operating expenditures.
PNMR had an automatic shelf registration that provides for the issuance of various types of debt and equity securities that expired in March 2021. PNM has a shelf registration statement for up to $650.0 million of senior unsecured notes that expires in May 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
PNMR has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Contingent Provisions of Certain Obligations
PNMR, PNM, and TNMP have a number of debt obligations and other contractual commitments that contain contingent provisions. Some of these, if triggered, could affect the liquidity of the Company. In the unlikely event that the contingent requirements were to be triggered, PNMR, PNM, or TNMP could be required to provide security, immediately pay outstanding obligations, or be prevented from drawing on unused capacity under certain credit agreements. The most significant consequences resulting from these contingent requirements are detailed in the discussion below.
The PNMR Revolving Credit Facility, PNM Revolving Credit Facility, PNM 2017 New Mexico Credit Facility, and the TNMP Revolving Credit Facility contain “ratings triggers,” for pricing purposes only. If PNMR, PNM, or TNMP is downgraded or upgraded by the ratings agencies, the result would be an increase or decrease in interest cost. PNMR’s facilities require that PNMR is to maintain a debt-to-capitalization ratio of less than or equal to 70%. The debt-to-capitalization ratio requirement remains at less than or equal to 65% for the PNM and TNMP facilities. If these ratios were exceeded, the entity
A - 51
could be required to repay all borrowings under its facility, be prevented from borrowing on the unused capacity under the facility and be required to provide collateral for all outstanding letters of credit issued under the facility.
If a contingent requirement were to be triggered under the PNM facilities resulting in an acceleration of the repayment of outstanding loans, a cross-default provision in the PVNGS leases could occur if the accelerated amount is not paid. If a cross-default provision is triggered, the PVNGS lessors have the ability to accelerate their rights under the leases, including acceleration of all future lease payments. The Company’s revolving credit facilities and term loan agreements also include cross-default provisions (Note 7).
PNM’s standard purchase agreement for the procurement of natural gas for its fuel needs contains a contingent requirement that could require PNM to provide collateral for its gas purchase obligations if the seller were to reasonably believe that PNM was unable to fulfill its payment obligations under the agreement.
The master agreement for the sale of electricity in the WSPP contains a contingent requirement that could require PNM to provide collateral if the credit ratings on its debt falls below investment grade. The WSPP agreement also contains a contingent requirement, commonly called a “material adverse change” provision, which could require PNM to provide collateral if a material adverse change in its financial condition or operations were to occur. Additionally, PNM utilizes standard derivative contracts to financially hedge and trade energy. These agreements contain contingent requirements that require PNM to provide security if the credit rating on its debt falls below investment grade. The Company believes its financing arrangements are sufficient to meet the requirements of the contingent provisions. No conditions have occurred that would result in any of the above contingent provisions being implemented.
Capital Structure
The capitalization tables below include the current maturities of long-term debt, but do not include short-term debt and do not include operating lease obligations as debt.
OTHER ISSUES FACING THE COMPANY
Climate Change Issues
Background
For the past several years, management has identified multiple risks and opportunities related to climate change, including potential environmental regulation, technological innovation, and availability of fuel and water for operations, as among the most significant risks facing the Company. Accordingly, these risks are overseen by the Board in order to facilitate more integrated risk and strategy oversight and planning. Board oversight includes understanding the various challenges and opportunities presented by these risks, including the financial consequences that might result from enacted and potential federal and/or state regulation of GHG; plans to mitigate these risks; and the impacts these risks may have on the Company’s strategy. In addition, the Board approves certain procurements of environmental equipment, grid modernization technologies, and replacement resources.
Management is also responsible for assessing significant risks, developing and executing appropriate responses, and reporting to the Board on the status of risk activities. For example, management periodically updates the Board on the implementation of corporate environmental policy, and the Company’s environmental management systems, including the promotion of energy efficiency programs, and the use of renewable resources. The Board is also informed of the Company’s practices and procedures to assess the impacts of operations on the environment. The Board considers issues associated with climate change, the Company’s GHG exposures, and the financial consequences that might result from enacted and potential federal and/or state regulation of GHG. Management has published, with Board oversight, a Climate Change Report available
A - 52
at http://www.pnmresources.com/about-us/sustainability-portal.aspx, that details the Company’s efforts to transition to an emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040.
As part of management’s continuing effort to monitor climate-related risks and assess opportunities, the Company has advanced its understanding of climate change by participating in the “2 Degree Scenario” planning by participating in the Electric Power Research Institute (“EPRI”) Understanding Climate Scenarios & Goal Setting Activities program. The program focused on characterizing and analyzing the relationship of individual electric utility company’s carbon emissions and global temperature goals. Activities include analyzing the scientific understanding of global emissions pathways that are consistent with limiting global warming and providing insight to assist companies in developing approaches to climate scenario planning. As PNM expands its sustainability efforts, EPRI’s program has also been useful in gaining a better understanding of the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures’ (“TCFD”) recommendations for sustainability reporting. On November 19, 2019, TCFD announced the formation of the TCFD Advisory Group on Climate-Related Guidance. EPRI was invited to participate as one of seven members of the group that provides guidance on implementing scenario analysis at the utility company level and to assist in understanding how climate-related issues affect business strategies.
The Company cannot anticipate or predict the potential long-term effects of climate change or climate change related regulation on its results of operations, financial position, or cash flows.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Exposures
In 2020, GHG associated with PNM’s interests in its fossil-fueled generating plants included approximately 5.4 million metric tons of CO2, which comprises the vast majority of PNM’s GHG.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately 56% of PNM’s generating capacity, including resources owned, leased, and under PPAs, all of which is located within the U.S., consisted of coal or gas-fired generation that produces GHG. This reflects the retirement of SJGS Units 2 and 3 that occurred in December 2017 and the restructuring of ownership in SJGS Unit 4. These events reduced PNM’s entitlement in SJGS from 783 MW to 562 MW and caused the Company’s output of GHG to decrease when compared to 2017. Many factors affect the amount of GHG emitted, including total electricity sales, plant performance, economic dispatch, and the availability of renewable resources. For example, wind generation performance from PNM’s largest single renewable energy resource, New Mexico Wind, varies each year as a result of highly seasonal wind patterns and annual wind resource variability. Similarly, if PVNGS experienced prolonged outages or if PNM’s entitlement from PVNGS were reduced, PNM might be required to utilize other power supply resources such as gas-fired generation, which could increase GHG.
PNM has several programs underway to reduce or offset GHG from its generation resource portfolio, thereby reducing its exposure to climate change regulation. As described in Note 16, PNM received approval for the December 31, 2017 shutdown of SJGS Units 2 and 3 as part of its strategy to address the regional haze requirements of the CAA. The shutdown of SJGS Units 2 and 3 resulted in a reduction of GHG for the entire station of approximately 54% for 2018, reflecting a reduction of 32% of GHG from the Company’s owned interests in SJGS, below 2005 levels. In 2020, PNM received authorization for a June 2022 abandonment of SJGS Units 1 and 4. In addition, PNM has filed the Four Corners Abandonment Application with the NMPRC for approval to sell its ownership interest in Four Corners by the end of 2024. On December 15, 2021, the NMPRC rejected the hearing examiner’s recommendations and issued an Order denying the requested abandonment and financing related to the Four Corners Abandonment application. On December 22, 2021, PNM filed a Notice of Appeal with the NM Supreme Court and on January 21, 2022, PNM filed its Statement of Issues regarding the appeal. See additional discussion of the SJGS and Four Corners Abandonment in Note 17. Retiring PNM’s share of SJGS and exiting participation in Four Corners would further reduce PNM’s GHG as those two coal-fired stations represent approximately 86% of PNM’s 2020 GHG emissions from generation.
As of December 31, 2021, PNM owned or procured power under PPAs from 957 MW of capacity from renewable generation resources. This is comprised of 158 MW of PNM owned solar as well as wind, solar-PV, and geothermal facilities aggregating to 658 MW, 130 MW, and 11 MW. These agreements currently have expiration dates beginning in January 2035 and extending through June 2045. The NMPRC has approved PNM’s request to enter into additional PPAs for renewable energy for an additional 1,440 MW of energy from solar-PV facilities combined with 640 MW of battery storage agreements with an anticipated 100 MW expected to come online in 2022. The entire portfolio of replacement resources approved by the NMPRC in PNM’s SJGS Abandonment Application includes replacement of SJGS capacity with the procurement of 650 MW of solar PPAs combined with 300 MW of battery storage agreements and the PVNGS Leased Interest Abandonment Application for solar PPAs of 450 MW combined with 290 MW of battery storage agreements. In addition, the NMPRC issued an order that will allow PNM to service a data center for an additional 190 MW of solar PPA combined with 50 MW of battery storage and a 50 MW solar PPA expected to be operational in 2023. Approval of these renewable energy and battery resources should further reduce any exposure to GHG emissions risk. These estimates are subject to change due to underlying variables, including changes in PNM's generation portfolio, supplier's ability to meet contractual in-service dates and complex relationships between several factors. See additional discussion of these resources in Notes 16 and 17.
A - 53
PNM also has a customer distributed solar generation program that represented 201.2 MW at December 31, 2021. PNM’s distributed solar programs will generate an estimated 402.4 GWh of emission-free solar energy available this year to offset PNM’s annual production from fossil-fueled electricity generation. PNM has offered its customers a comprehensive portfolio of energy efficiency and load management programs since 2007. PNM’s cumulative savings from these programs was approximately 5,924 GWh of electricity through 2021. Over the next 20 years, PNM projects energy efficiency and load management programs will provide the equivalent of approximately 9,500 GWh of electricity savings, which will avoid at least 1.0 million metric tons of CO2 based upon projected emissions from PNM’s system-wide resources. These estimates are subject to change because of the uncertainty of many of the underlying variables, including changes in PNM’s generation portfolio, demand for electricity, energy efficiency, and complex relationships between those variables.
Because of PNM’s dependence on fossil-fueled generation, legislation or regulation that imposes a limit or cost on GHG could impact the cost at which electricity is produced. While PNM expects to recover any such costs through rates, the timing and outcome of proceedings for cost recovery are uncertain. In addition, to the extent that any additional costs are recovered through rates, customers may reduce their usage, relocate facilities to other areas with lower energy costs, or take other actions that ultimately could adversely impact PNM.
Other Climate Change Risks
PNM’s generating stations are located in the arid southwest. Access to water for cooling for some of these facilities is critical to continued operations. Forecasts for the impacts of climate change on water supply in the southwest range from reduced precipitation to changes in the timing of precipitation. In either case, PNM’s generating facilities requiring water for cooling will need to mitigate the impacts of climate change through adaptive measures. Current measures employed by PNM generating stations such as air cooling, use of grey water, improved reservoir operations, and shortage sharing arrangements with other water users will continue to be important to sustain operations.
PNM’s service areas occasionally experience periodic high winds and severe thunderstorms. TNMP has operations in the Gulf Coast area of Texas, which experiences periodic hurricanes and other extreme weather conditions. In addition to potentially causing physical damage to Company-owned facilities, which disrupts the ability to transmit and/or distribute energy, weather and other events of nature can temporarily reduce customers’ usage and demand for energy. In addition, other events influenced by climate change, such as wildfires, could disrupt Company operations or result in third-party claims against the Company. PNM has enhanced its wildfire prevention efforts and maintains a wildfire mitigation plan.
EPA Regulation
In April 2007, the US Supreme Court held that EPA has the authority to regulate GHG under the CAA. This decision heightened the importance of this issue for the energy industry. In December 2009, EPA released its endangerment finding for GHG from new motor vehicles, stating that the atmospheric concentrations of six key greenhouse gases (CO2, methane, nitrous oxides, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride) endanger the public health and welfare of current and future generations. In May 2010, EPA released the final Prevention of Significant Deterioration (“PSD”) and Title V Greenhouse Gas Tailoring Rule to address GHG from stationary sources under the CAA permitting programs. The purpose of the rule was to “tailor” the applicability of two programs, the PSD construction permit and Title V operating permit programs, to avoid impacting millions of small GHG emitters. On June 23, 2014, the US Supreme Court found EPA lacked authority to “tailor” the CAA’s unambiguous numerical thresholds of 100 or 250 tons per year, and thus held EPA may not require a source to obtain a PSD permit solely on the basis of its potential GHG. However, the court upheld EPA’s authority to apply the PSD program for GHG to “anyway” sources - those sources that are required to comply with the PSD program for other non-GHG pollutants.
On June 25, 2013, then President Obama announced his Climate Action Plan, which outlined how his administration planned to cut GHG in the U.S., prepare the country for the impacts of climate change, and lead international efforts to combat and prepare for global warming. The plan proposed actions that would lead to the reduction of GHG by 17% below 2005 levels by 2020.
On August 3, 2015, EPA responded to the Climate Action Plan by issuing (1) the Carbon Pollution Standards for new, modified, and reconstructed power plants (under Section 111(b)); and (2) the Clean Power Plan for existing power plants (under Section 111(d)).
EPA’s Carbon Pollution Standards for new sources (those constructed after January 8, 2014) established separate standards for gas and coal-fired units deemed achievable through the application of what EPA determined to be the BSER demonstrated for each type of unit efficient natural gas combined cycle technology for gas units, and partial carbon capture and sequestration for coal units. The Clean Power Plan established numeric “emission standards” for existing electric generating units based on emission reduction opportunities that EPA deemed achievable using technical assumptions for three “building blocks”: efficiency improvements at coal-fired EGUs, displacement of affected EGUs with renewable energy, and displacement of coal-fired generation with natural gas-fired generation.
A - 54
Multiple states, utilities, and trade groups filed petitions for review in the DC Circuit to challenge both the Carbon Pollution Standards for new sources and the Clean Power Plan for existing sources in separate cases, and the challenges successfully petitioned the US Supreme Court for a stay of the Clean Power Plan. However, before the DC Circuit could issue an opinion regarding either the Carbon Pollution Standards or the Clean Power Plan, President Trump took office and his administration asked the court to hold both cases in abeyance while the rules were re-evaluated, which the court granted.
On June 19, 2019, EPA repealed the Clean Power Plan, promulgated the ACE Rule, and revised the implementing regulations for all emission guidelines issued under CAA Section 111(d). EPA set the BSER for existing coal-fired power plants as heat rate efficiency improvements based on a range of “candidate technologies” to be applied inside the fence-line of an individual facility. The ACE Rule was also challenged and, on January 19, 2021, the DC Circuit issued an opinion in American Lung Association and American Public Health Association v. EPA, et al. finding that EPA misinterpreted the CAA when it determined that the language of section 111 unambiguously barred consideration of emissions reductions options that were not applied at the source. As a result, the court vacated the ACE Rule and remanded the record to EPA for further consideration consistent with the court’s opinion. While the D.C. Circuit rejected the ACE Rule, it did not reinstate the Clean Power Plan. EPA filed a motion seeking a partial stay of the mandate as to the repeal of the Clean Power Plan, to ensure the court’s order will not render effective the now out-of-date Clean Power Plan. On February 22, 2021, the DC Circuit granted EPA’s motion, indicating that it would withhold issuance of the mandate with respect to the repeal of the Clean Power Plan until EPA responds to the court’s remand in a new rulemaking action. EPA has indicated it is developing a proposed rule under CAA Section 111(d) to establish guidelines for CO2 emissions from existing EGUs. EPA expects to publish the draft rule in the summer of 2022. On October 29, 2021, the US Supreme Court granted four petitions for certiorari seeking review of the DC Circuit’s decision vacating the ACE Rule and the repeal of the Clean Power Plan. Oral arguments in the US Supreme Court were held on February 28, 2022. A decision is expected in June 2022. The US Supreme Court’s decision will rule on the extent of EPA’s authority under CAA Section 111(d) to regulate GHGs from existing fossil-fueled EGUs.
The litigation over the Carbon Pollution Standards remains held in abeyance, but could be reactivated by the parties upon a determination by the court that the Biden Administration is unlikely to finalize the revisions proposed in 2018 and that reconsideration of the rule has concluded.
On January 20, 2021, President Biden signed an executive order “Protecting Public Health and the Environment and Restoring Science to Tackle the Climate Crisis,” which instructs agency heads to review all Trump Administration actions for inconsistency with the Biden Administration’s policy “to listen to the science; to improve public health and protect our environment; to ensure access to clean air and water; to limit exposure to dangerous chemicals and pesticides; to hold polluters accountable, including those who disproportionately harm communities of color and low-income communities; to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; to bolster resilience to the impacts of climate change; to restore and expand our national treasures and monuments; and to prioritize both environmental justice and the creation of the well-paying union jobs necessary to deliver on these goals.” Agency heads were directed to consider suspending, revising or rescinding any action that is inconsistent with the stated policy. Within 30 days of the executive order, agency heads submitted to OMB a preliminary list of those actions being considered for suspension, revision or rescission that would be completed by December 31, 2021, and would be subject to OMB review. Within 90 days of the executive order, agency heads submitted to OMB an updated list of such actions that would be completed by December 31, 2025. EPA is reconsidering the ACE Rule pursuant to this executive order.
Federal Legislation
President Biden has indicated that climate change is a top priority for his administration. A number of legislative proposals to address climate change are already being considered in the Democratic-led U.S. House of Representatives, but the thin majority held by the Democrats in the Senate may make enactment of new laws to address climate change difficult. On April 22, 2021, at the Earth Day Summit, as part of the U.S.’s re-entry into the Paris Agreement, President Biden unveiled the goal to cut U.S. emissions by 50% - 52% from 2005 levels by 2030, nearly double the GHG emissions reduction target set by the Obama Administration. The 2030 goal joins President Biden’s other climate goals which include a carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035 and a net-zero emissions economy by no later than 2050.
State and Regional Activity
Pursuant to New Mexico law, each utility must submit an IRP to the NMPRC every three years to evaluate renewable energy, energy efficiency, load management, distributed generation, and conventional supply-side resources on a consistent and comparable basis. The IRP is required to take into consideration risk and uncertainty of fuel supply, price volatility, and costs of anticipated environmental regulations when evaluating resource options to meet supply needs of the utility’s customers. The NMPRC requires that New Mexico utilities factor a standardized cost of carbon emissions into their IRPs using prices ranging between $8 and $40 per metric ton of CO2 emitted and escalating these costs by 2.5% per year. Under the NMPRC order, each utility must analyze these standardized prices as projected operating costs. Reflecting the evolving nature of this issue, the NMPRC order states that these prices may be changed in the future to account for additional information or changed circumstances. Although these prices may not reflect the costs that ultimately will be incurred, PNM is required to use these prices for purposes of its IRP. In its 2020 filing for Four Corners Abandonment, PNM analyzed resource portfolio plans for scenarios that assumed Four Corners will operate through 2031 and for scenarios that assumed PNM will exit Four Corners at
A - 55
the end of 2024. The key findings of the analysis include that exiting Four Corners in 2024 would provide long-term economic benefits to PNM’s customers. See Note 17.
The ETA was signed into New Mexico state law and became effective on June 14, 2019. The ETA, among other things, requires that investor-owned utilities obtain specified percentages of their energy from renewable and carbon-free resources. Prior to the enactment of the ETA, the REA established a mandatory RPS requiring utilities to acquire a renewable energy portfolio equal to 10% of retail electric sales by 2011, 15% by 2015, and 20% by 2020. The ETA amends the REA and requires utilities operating in New Mexico to have renewable portfolios equal to 40% by 2025, 50% by 2030, 80% by 2040, and 100% zero-carbon energy by 2045. Under the ETA provisions, PNM will also be required to meet a generation emission standard of no more than 400 lbs. of CO2 per MWh beginning in 2023 and not more than 200 lbs. per MWh beginning in 2032. PNM takes this requirement into account in its resource planning, and it is expected that the standards will be met with the approved resource retirements and replacements. The ETA provides for a transition from coal-fired generating resources to carbon-free resources by allowing investor-owned utilities to issue securitized bonds, or “energy transition bonds,” related to the retirement of coal-fired generating facilities to qualified investors. Proceeds from the energy transition bonds must be used only for purposes related to providing utility service to customers and to pay “energy transition costs” (as defined by the ETA). These costs may include coal mine reclamation, plant decommissioning, and other costs that have not yet been charged to customers or disallowed by the NMPRC or by a court order. Proceeds provided by energy transition bonds may also be used to pay for severances for employees of the retired coal-fired generating facility and related coal mine, as well as to pay for job training, education, and economic development. Energy transition bonds must be issued under a NMPRC financing order and are paid by a non-bypassable charge paid by all customers of the issuing utility. The ETA also amends sections of the REA to allow for the recovery of undepreciated investments and decommissioning costs related to qualifying EGUs that the NMPRC has required be removed from retail jurisdictional rates, provided replacement resources to be included in retail rates have lower or zero-carbon emissions. The ETA requires the NMPRC to prioritize replacement resources in a manner intended to mitigate the economic impact to communities affected by these plant retirements. See additional discussion of the ETA in Note 16. PNM expects the ETA will have a significant impact on PNM’s future generation portfolio. In February 2020, the hearing examiners assigned to the SJGS abandonment and financing proceedings issued recommended decisions recommending approval of PNM’s abandonment application and for the issuance of Securitized Bonds consistent with the requirements of the ETA. On April 1, 2020, the NMPRC approved the hearing examiners’ recommendation to approve PNM’s application to retire its share of SJGS in 2022 and for the issuance of Securitized Bonds. PNM has also requested approval of energy transition bonds for the Four Corners Abandonment costs of that transition away from coal-fired generation. On December 15, 2021, the NMPRC denied approval of the Four Corners Abandonment Application and the corresponding request for issuance of securitized financing. On December 22, 2021, PNM filed a Notice of Appeal with the NM Supreme Court of the NMPRC decision to deny the application. PNM cannot predict the full impact of the ETA or the outcome of the NM Supreme Court decision with respect to the abandonment of Four Corners. See additional discussion of PNM’s SJGS and Four Corners Abandonment Applications in Note 17.
International Accords
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (“UNFCCC”) is an international environmental treaty that was negotiated at the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (informally known as the Earth Summit) and entered into force in March 1994. The objective of the treaty is to “stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.” Parties to the UNFCCC, including the U.S., have been meeting annually in Conferences of the Parties (“COP”) to assess progress in meeting the objectives of the UNFCCC.
On December 12, 2015, the Paris Agreement was finalized during the 2015 COP. The aim of the Paris Agreement is to limit global temperature rise to two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The agreement, which was agreed to by approximately 200 parties, requires that countries submit INDCs. INDCs reflect national targets and actions that arise out of national policies and elements relating to oversight, guidance and coordination of actions to reduce emissions by all countries. In November 2014, then President Obama announced the United States’ commitment to reduce GHG, on an economy-wide basis, by 26%-28% from 2005 levels by the year 2025. The U.S. INDC was part of an overall effort by the former administration to have the U.S. achieve economy-wide reductions of around 80% by 2050. The former administration’s GHG reduction target for the electric utility industry was a key element of its INDC and was based on EPA’s GHG regulations for new, existing, and modified and reconstructed sources at that time. Thresholds for the number of countries necessary to ratify or accede to the Paris Agreement and total global GHG percentage were achieved on October 5, 2016 and the Paris Agreement entered into force on November 4, 2016. On June 1, 2017, President Trump announced that the U.S. would withdraw from the Paris Agreement. As a result of the President’s notice to the United Nations, the U.S. officially withdrew from the Paris Agreement on November 4, 2020. On January 20, 2021, President Biden signed an instrument that will allow the United States to rejoin the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The instrument was deposited with the United Nations on January 21, 2021, and the United States officially became a party to the Agreement on February 19, 2021.
PNM has calculated GHG reductions that would result from scenarios that assume PNM’s scheduled retirement of its share of the SJGS in 2022 and would exit from Four Corners in either 2024 or 2031 and PNM has set a goal to have a 100% emissions-free generating portfolio by 2040. While the Company has not conducted an independent 2 Degree Scenario analysis, our commitment to becoming 100% emissions-free by 2040 produces a carbon emissions reduction pathway that tracks within the ranges of climate scenario pathways that are consistent with limiting the global warming average to less than 2
A - 56
degrees Celsius. In addition, as an investor-owned utility operating in the state of New Mexico, PNM is required to comply with the recently enacted ETA, which requires utilities’ generating portfolio be 100% carbon-free by 2045. The requirements of the ETA and the Company’s goal compare favorably to the U.S. NDC of 50% to 52% carbon emissions reduction by 2030 and the Biden Administration’s goal of net-zero carbon emissions economy-wide by 2050. On April 1, 2020, the NMPRC approved PNM’s application to retire its share of SJGS in 2022. PNM filed for abandonment of Four Corners on January 8, 2021. See Note 17.
PNM will continue to monitor the United States’ participation in the Paris Agreement and other parties’ involvement in these types of international accords, but the potential impact that such accords may have on the Company cannot be determined at this time.
Assessment of Legislative/Regulatory Impacts
The Company has assessed, and continues to assess, the impacts of climate change legislation and regulation on its business. This assessment is ongoing and future changes arising out of the legislative or regulatory process could impact the assessment significantly. PNM’s assessment includes assumptions regarding specific GHG limits; the timing of implementation of these limits; the possibility of a market-based trading program, including the associated costs and the availability of emission credits or allowances; the development of emission reduction and/or renewable energy technologies; and provisions for cost containment. Moreover, the assessment assumes various market reactions such as the price of coal and gas and regional plant economics. These assumptions are, at best, preliminary and speculative. However, based upon these assumptions, the enactment of climate change legislation or regulation could, among other things, result in significant compliance costs, including large capital expenditures by PNM, and could jeopardize the economic viability of certain generating facilities. See Notes 16 and 17. While PNM currently expects the retirement of SJGS in 2022 will provide savings to customers, the ultimate consequences of climate change and environmental regulation could lead to increased costs to customers and affect results of operations, cash flows, and financial condition if the incurred costs are not fully recovered through regulated rates. Higher rates could also contribute to reduced usage of electricity. PNM’s assessment process is evolving and is too speculative at this time for a meaningful prediction of the long-term financial impact.
Transmission Issues
At any given time, FERC has various notices of inquiry and rulemaking dockets related to transmission issues pending. Such actions may lead to changes in FERC administrative rules or ratemaking policy but have no time frame in which action must be taken or a docket closed with no further action. Further, such notices and rulemaking dockets do not apply strictly to PNM but will have industry-wide effects in that they will apply to all FERC-regulated entities. PNM monitors and often submits comments taking a position in such notices and rulemaking dockets or may join in larger group responses. PNM often cannot determine the full impact of a proposed rule and policy change until the final determination is made by FERC and PNM is unable to predict the outcome of these matters.
Financial Reform Legislation
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (“Dodd-Frank Reform Act”), enacted in July 2010, includes provisions that will require certain over-the-counter derivatives, or swaps, to be centrally cleared and executed through an exchange or other approved trading facility. It also includes provisions related to swap transaction reporting and record keeping and may impose margin requirements on swaps that are not centrally cleared. The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) has published final rules defining several key terms related to the act and has set compliance dates for various types of market participants. The Dodd-Frank Reform Act provides exemptions from certain requirements, including an exception to the mandatory clearing and swap facility execution requirements for commercial end-users that use swaps to hedge or mitigate commercial risk. PNM has elected the end-user exception to the mandatory clearing requirement. PNM expects to be in compliance with the Dodd-Frank Reform Act and related rules within the time frames required by the CFTC. However, as a result of implementing and complying with the Dodd-Frank Reform Act and related rules, PNM’s swap activities could be subject to increased costs, including from higher margin requirements. At this time, PNM cannot predict the ultimate impact the Dodd-Frank Reform Act may have on PNM’s financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, or liquidity.
Other Matters
See Notes 16 and 17 for a discussion of commitments and contingencies and rate and regulatory matters.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to apply accounting policies and to make estimates and judgments that best provide the framework to report the results of operations and financial position for PNMR, PNM, and TNMP. As a result, there exists the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. Management has identified the following accounting policies that it deems critical to the portrayal of the financial condition and results of operations and that involve significant subjectivity. The following discussion provides information on the processes utilized by management in making judgments and assumptions as they apply to its critical accounting policies.
A - 57
Regulatory Accounting
The Company is subject to the provisions of GAAP for rate-regulated enterprises and records assets and liabilities resulting from the effects of the ratemaking process, which would not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Additional information concerning regulatory assets and liabilities is contained in Note 13.
The Company continually evaluates the probability that regulatory assets and liabilities will impact future rates and makes various assumptions in those analyses. The expectations of future rate impacts are generally based on orders issued by regulatory commissions or historical experience, as well as discussions with applicable regulatory authorities. If future recovery or refund ceases to be probable, the Company would be required to write-off the portion that is not recoverable or refundable in current period earnings.
The Company has made adjustments to regulatory assets and liabilities that affected its results of operations in the past due to changes in various factors and conditions impacting future cost recovery. Based on its current evaluation, the Company believes that future recovery of its regulatory assets is probable.
Impairments
Tangible long-lived assets are evaluated for impairment when events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. These potential impairment indicators include management’s assessment of fluctuating market conditions as a result of planned and scheduled customer purchase commitments; future market penetration; changing environmental requirements; fluctuating market prices resulting from factors including changing fuel costs and other economic conditions; long-term weather patterns; and other market trends. The amount of impairment recognized, if any, is the difference between the fair value of the asset and the carrying value of the asset and would reduce both the asset and current period earnings. Variations in the assessment of potential impairment or in the assumptions used to calculate an impairment could result in different outcomes, which could lead to significant effects on the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Notes 16 and 17.
Goodwill is evaluated for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the goodwill might be impaired. Impairment testing may be performed based on either a qualitative analysis or quantitative analysis. Note 19 contains information on the impairment testing performed by the Company on goodwill. For 2021, the Company utilized a qualitative analysis for both the PNM and TNMP reporting units. No impairments were indicated in the Company’s annual goodwill testing, which was performed as of April 1, 2021. Since the annual evaluation, there have been no indications that the fair values of the reporting units with recorded goodwill have decreased below the carrying values. The annual testing was based on certain critical estimates and assumptions. Changes in the estimates or the use of different assumptions could affect the determination of fair value and the conclusion of impairment for each reporting unit.
Application of the qualitative goodwill impairment test requires evaluating various events and circumstances to determine whether it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. As a part of the Company’s goodwill qualitative testing process for a reporting unit, various factors that are specific to that reporting unit as well as industry and macroeconomic factors are evaluated in order to determine whether these factors are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the fair value of the reporting unit. Examples of the factors that were considered in the qualitative testing of the goodwill include the results of the most recent quantitative impairment test, current and long-term forecasted financial results, regulatory environment, credit rating, changes in the interest rate environment, and operating strategy for the reporting unit.
Based on the analysis performed for the PNM and TNMP reporting units in 2021, the Company concluded that there were no changes that were reasonably likely to cause the fair value of the reporting units to be less than their carrying value and determined that there was no impairment of goodwill. Although the Company believes all relevant factors were considered in the qualitative impairment analysis to reach the conclusion that goodwill is not impaired, significant changes in any one of the assumptions could produce a significantly different result potentially leading to the recording of an impairment that could have significant impacts on the results of operations and financial position of the Company.
Decommissioning and Reclamation Costs
PNM is only required to recognize and measure decommissioning liabilities for tangible long-lived assets for which a legal obligation exists. Accounting for decommissioning costs for nuclear and fossil-fuel generation involves significant estimates related to costs to be incurred many years in the future after plant closure. Decommissioning costs are based on site-specific estimates, which are updated periodically and involve numerous judgments and assumptions, including estimates of future decommissioning costs at current price levels, inflation rates, and discount rates. Changes in these estimates could significantly impact PNMR’s and PNM’s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. Nuclear decommissioning costs are based on estimates of the costs for removing all radioactive and other structures at PVNGS. AROs, including nuclear decommissioning costs, are discussed in Note 15. Nuclear decommissioning costs represent approximately 62% of PNM’s ARO liability. A 10% increase in the estimates of future decommissioning costs at current price levels would have increased the ARO liability by $10.0 million at December 31, 2021. PNM recognizes an expense and a corresponding liability for ultimate decommissioning of PVNGS. See Note 17 for information concerning NMPRC’s order to address the recovery of decommissioning costs in a future proceeding.
A - 58
In connection with both the SJGS coal agreement and the Four Corners fuel agreement, the owners are required to reimburse the mining companies for the cost of contemporaneous reclamation, as well as the costs for final reclamation of the coal mines. The reclamation costs are based on periodic site-specific studies that estimate the costs to be incurred in the future and are dependent upon numerous assumptions, including estimates of future reclamation costs at current price levels, inflation rates, and discount rates. A 10% increase in the estimates of future reclamation costs at current price levels would have increased the mine reclamation liability by $10.9 million at December 31, 2021. PNM considers the contemporaneous reclamation costs part of the cost of its delivered coal costs. The NMPRC has capped the amount that can be collected from ratepayers for final reclamation of the surface mines. If future estimates increase the liability for surface mine reclamation, the excess would be expensed at that time. See Note 16 for discussion of reclamation costs.
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
The Company maintains qualified defined benefit pension plans, postretirement benefit plans providing medical and dental benefits, and executive retirement programs. The net periodic benefit cost or income and the calculation of the projected benefit obligations are recognized in the Company’s financial statements and depend on expected investment performance, the level of contributions made to the plans, and employee demographics. These calculations require the use of a number of actuarial assumptions and estimates. The most critical of the actuarial assumptions are the expected long-term rate of return, the discount rate, and projected health care cost trend rates. The Company reviews and evaluates its actuarial assumptions annually and adjusts them as necessary. Changes in the pension and OPEB assets and liabilities associated with these factors are not immediately recognized as net periodic benefit cost or income in results of operations, but are recognized in future years, generally, over the remaining life of the plan. However, these factors could have a significant impact on the financial position of the Company. Note 11 contains additional information about pension and OPEB obligations, including assumptions utilized in the calculations and impacts of changes in certain of those assumptions.
Accounting for Contingencies
The financial results of the Company may be affected by judgments and estimates related to loss contingencies. Contingencies related to litigation and claims, as well as environmental and regulatory matters, also require the use of significant judgment and estimation. The Company attempts to take into account all known factors regarding the future outcome of contingent events and records an accrual for any contingent loss events that are both probable of occurring and can be reasonably estimated based upon current available information. However, the actual outcomes can vary from any amounts accrued which could have a material effect on the results of operations and financial position of the Company. See Note 16 and Note 17.
Income Taxes
The Company’s income tax expense and related balance sheet amounts involve significant judgment and use of estimates. Amounts of deferred income tax assets and liabilities, current and noncurrent accruals, and determination of uncertain tax positions involve judgment and estimates related to timing and probability of the recognition of income and deductions by taxing authorities. In addition, some temporary differences are accorded flow-through treatment by the Company’s regulators and impact the Company’s effective tax rate. In assessing the likelihood of the realization of deferred tax assets, management considers the estimated amount and character of future taxable income. Significant changes in these judgments and estimates could have a material impact on the results of operations and financial position of the Company. Actual income taxes could vary from estimated amounts due to the future impacts of various items, including changes in income tax laws, the Company’s forecasted financial condition and results of operations in future periods, and the final review from taxing authorities. See Note 18.
MD&A FOR PNM
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
PNM operates in only one reportable segment, as presented above in Results of Operations for PNMR.
MD&A FOR TNMP
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
TNMP operates in only one reportable segment, as presented above in Results of Operations for PNMR.
A - 59