Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto for the periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (the “2021 Financial Statements”) included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. You should carefully read the section entitled “Risk Factors” to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”. We do not assume any obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section to "POINT," the "Company," “we,” “us,” “our” and other similar terms refer to POINT Biopharma Global Inc. and its subsidiaries.
Overview
Introduction
We are a globally focused radiopharmaceutical company building a platform for the clinical development and commercialization of radioligands that fight cancer. We have a pipeline of product candidates and early-stage development programs, in-house manufacturing capabilities, and a secured supply for rare medical isotopes like 225Ac and 177Lu.
Our team brings decades of combined experience in radiopharmaceutical clinical development and manufacturing. In a space where supply chain is often overlooked, the Company has carved out a unique advantage for itself: a 100% company-owned facility, located in Indianapolis, Indiana, which includes an office space occupying 10,500 square feet and a manufacturing facility occupying 70,200 square feet, and which we believe has the capacity for expansion to commercially supply both North America and Europe with large volumes. Furthermore, management has leveraged their prior relationships to assemble resilient radioisotope supply chains for the Company, which even includes manufacturing the Company's own n.c.a. 177Lu isotope in-house.
Our predecessor was incorporated on September 18, 2019 (“Inception”) as POINT Theranostics Inc. under the DGCL and subsequently amended its name to “POINT Biopharma Inc.” on November 22, 2019. Subsequent to the Business Combination, POINT Biopharma Inc. became a wholly-owned subsidiary of POINT Biopharma Global Inc. on June 30, 2021.
Business Combination
On June 30, 2021, POINT Biopharma Inc. consummated the Business Combination with RACA, pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of March 15, 2021, by and among RACA, Bodhi Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of RACA, and POINT Biopharma Inc. Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, on the Closing Date, (i) Merger Sub merged with and into POINT Biopharma Inc., with POINT Biopharma Inc. as the surviving company in the Merger as a wholly-owned subsidiary of RACA and (ii) RACA changed its name to “POINT Biopharma Global Inc.”
In accordance with the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, at the Effective Time of the Merger, (i) each share and vested equity award of POINT Biopharma Inc. outstanding as of immediately prior to the Effective Time was exchanged for shares of the Common Stock of POINT or comparable vested equity awards that are exercisable for shares of Common Stock, as applicable, based on an implied POINT Biopharma Inc. vested equity value of $585,000,000 (which results in a conversion ratio of approximately 3.59:1); (ii) all unvested equity awards of POINT Biopharma Inc. were exchanged for comparable unvested equity awards that are exercisable for shares of Common Stock, determined based on the same exchange ratio at which the vested equity awards were exchanged for shares of Common Stock; and (iii) each share of Class A Common Stock of RACA and each share of Class B common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of RACA that was issued and outstanding immediately prior to the Effective Time became one share of Common Stock following the consummation of the Business Combination.
In addition, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, on March 15, 2021, RACA entered into Subscription Agreements with certain investors, pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and RACA agreed to issue and sell to the PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 16,500,000 shares of Class A Common Stock at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $165,000,000. The PIPE Financing was consummated concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. We received net proceeds of approximately $260.0 million consisting of proceeds of the PIPE Financing and the proceeds remaining in RACA’s trust account. Transaction costs of approximately $27.0 million consisted of investment banker, legal, audit, tax, accounting, consulting, insurance, board retainer fees and listing fees.
Recent Developments
Manufacturing:
POINT Biopharma’s Indianapolis manufacturing facility opened in October 2021 and began providing clinical supply in January 2022.
PNT2002: 177Lu-based PSMA-targeted radiopharmaceutical
In February 2022, POINT published dosimetry data from the safety and dosimetry lead-in cohort for the Company’s Phase 3 SPLASH trial evaluating PNT2002 for the treatment of mCRPC at the 2022 SNMMI Mid-Winter & ACNM Annual Meeting.
Data from the abstract titled “Dosimetry Results from the SPLASH Trial” (Abstract #: MWMA2244) demonstrated the following:
•Organs receiving the largest absorbed doses were the lacrimal glands at 1.2 Gy/GBq, followed by the kidneys at 0.73 Gy/GBq.
•The average dose to the salivary glands and red marrow was 0.34 Gy/GBq and 0.034 Gy/GBq, respectively.
•For a cumulative administered activity of 27.2 GBq, i.e. four cycles of 6.8 GBq, the kidneys would receive a cumulative absorbed dose of 19.9 Gy, and the red marrow, 0.91 Gy.
•SPECT/CT vs planar-based kidney dosimetry was consistent across most subjects (±20%) where SPECT/CT images were available with a mean kidney absorbed dose difference of 1%.
The Company is currently enrolling patients across 32 sites in North America and Europe. Site activations all in jurisdictions remain ongoing to expedite accrual. The Company continues to expect to report top line data from SPLASH mid-2023.
PNT2004: fibroblast activation protein-alpha (FAP-alpha) inhibitor
POINT accelerated PNT2004’s therapeutic program after the compelling preclinical data for PNT2004’s lead candidate PNT6555 was first announced in the fourth quarter of 2021. The Company recently completed a pre-CTA meeting in December 2021 with Health Canada regarding the development pathway and clinical study design for the upcoming Phase 1 trial and expects to file a CTA with Health Canada at the end of the first quarter of 2022.
The clinical trial for PNT2004 is expected to commence in summer 2022 in Canada and will use a 68Ga-based PNT6555 molecular imaging agent to select patients to receive a n.c.a. 177Lu-based PNT6555 therapeutic agent. Additional preclinical studies in syngeneic and PDX models for monotherapy and combination treatment are in development and include other therapeutic isotopes such as 225Ac.
PNT2003: n.c.a. 177Lu-labelled somatostatin-targeted radiopharmaceutical
PNT2003’s use of n.c.a. 177Lu enables it to be administered in outpatient clinics without the need for the clinic to maintain costly dedicated waste streams, providing a unique advantage over the currently approved radiopharmaceutical product for the GEP-NETs indication.
The Company is assessing two distinct pathways for PNT2003 with regulatory authorities. These pathways include a 505(b)(2) with the FDA’s Division of Oncology Products and an ANDA with the FDA’s Office of Generic Drugs. The Company is currently waiting to complete discussions with the FDA prior to making a public announcement regarding the pathway which will be pursued. The sponsor of PNT2003 clinical trial has informed the Company that all patients will have completed the primary follow-up in the second quarter of 2022 and will have data to report to the Company in the second half of 2022.
PNT2001: 225Ac-labelled next-generation PSMA-targeted radiopharmaceutical
PNT2001 program leverages linker technology that promotes increased tumor accumulation. Preclinical studies of PNT2001 have resulted in the identification of a lead candidate which, as compared to late-stage PSMA ligands, demonstrates potent anti-tumor activity using 225Ac, while also having an improved biodistribution profile. The company is planning to advance the lead candidate into IND-enabling studies which are expected to support an IND/CTA submission in the first half of 2023. The clinical development pathway being considered for PNT2001 is in recurrent hormone-sensitive prostate cancer as well as in post-Lu-PSMA prostate cancer.
CanSEEKTM: Tumor Microenvironment (TME) Targeting Technology
The goal of the CanSEEKTM program is to significantly improve the precision and safety of radioligands. Based on the (d)-Ala-Pro FAP-alpha substrate technology, CanSEEKTM prevents a radioligand from binding to receptors until it has been activated by FAP-alpha in the TME. If successful, CanSEEKTM could significantly improve the therapeutic index of targeted radiopharmaceuticals. Multiple (d)-Ala-Pro substrate enabled ligands are being studied preclinically against different targets.
POINT’s CanSEEKTM has been sub-licensed from both Bach Biosciences and Avacta, who have branded the technology as pre|CISIONTM (an Avacta trademark).
Risks & Liquidity
Drug research and development is very expensive and involves a high degree of risk. Only a small number of research and development programs result in the commercialization of a product. We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development, are able to obtain regulatory approval for and successfully commercialize the product candidates we are currently developing or may develop. We currently do not have any product candidates approved for commercial sale.
Our product candidates, currently under development or that we may develop, will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel infrastructure and extensive compliance and reporting capabilities. There can be no assurance that our research and development activities will be successfully completed, that adequate protection for our licensed or developed technology will be obtained and maintained, that products developed will obtain necessary regulatory approval or that any approved products will be commercially viable.
If we obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capabilities to support product sales, marketing, and distribution activities, either alone or in collaboration with others. Further, following the Business Combination, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy.
We have incurred significant net losses since our Inception and have relied on the ability to fund operations through equity financings. We expect to continue to incur significant operating and net losses, as well as negative cash flows from operations, for the foreseeable future as we continue to complete clinical trials for our products and prepare for potential future regulatory approvals and commercialization of our products, if approved. We have not generated any revenue to date and do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for at least one of our product candidates.
We believe that the net proceeds from the Business Combination and PIPE Financing, together with our available resources and existing cash and cash equivalents, are sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the first quarter of 2024.
As losses continue to be incurred, we are subject to risks and uncertainties common to early-stage companies in the biotechnology industry, including, but not limited to, successful discovery and development of our product candidates, development by competitors of new technological innovations, dependence on key personnel, the ability to attract and retain qualified employees, protection of proprietary technology, compliance with governmental regulations, the impact of COVID-19, the ability to secure additional capital to fund operations and commercial success of our product candidates. Product candidates currently under development will require extensive preclinical and clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel, and infrastructure and extensive compliance-reporting capabilities. Even if our drug development efforts are successful, it is uncertain when, if ever, we will realize significant revenue from product sales.
We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•advance our clinical-stage product candidates: 177Lu-PNT2003 and 177Lu-PNT2002 through clinical development;
•advance our preclinical stage product candidates: 177Lu-PNT2004, 177Lu-PNT2001, along with candidates developed with our CanSEEKTM Prodrug Platform into clinical development;
•seek to identify, acquire, and develop additional product candidates, including through business development efforts to invest in or in-license other technologies or product candidates;
•hire additional clinical, quality control, medical, scientific, and other technical personnel to support our clinical operations;
•expand our operational, financial and management systems, and increase personnel to support our operations;
•meet the requirements, and demands of being a public company;
•maintain, expand, and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•make milestone, royalty or other payments due under various in-license or collaboration agreements;
•seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials; and
•undertake any pre-commercialization activities to establish sales, marketing, and distribution capabilities for any product candidates for which we may receive regulatory approval in regions where we choose to commercialize our products on our own or jointly with third parties.
COVID-19 Pandemic and other geopolitical events
The COVID-19 pandemic, which was declared by the World Health Organization as a pandemic in March 2020 and has since spread worldwide, has caused many governments to implement measures to slow the spread of the outbreak through quarantines, travel restrictions, heightened border security and other measures. The impact of this pandemic has been, and will likely continue to be, extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted, and will likely continue to result, in significant disruptions to the global economy as well as businesses and capital markets around the world. The future progression of the pandemic and its effects on our business and operations are uncertain.
In response to public health directives and orders and to help minimize the risk of the virus to employees, we have taken precautionary measures, including implementing work-from-home policies, mandatory vaccination, masking and weekly testing for certain employees. The impact of the virus, including work-from-home policies, may negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business, and delay our preclinical research and clinical trial activities and our development program timelines, the magnitude of which will depend, in part, on the length and severity of the restrictions and other limitations on our ability to conduct our business in the ordinary course. Specifically, we may not be able to fulfill enrollment expectations on our planned timeline or visit clinics to conduct on-site monitoring due to disruptions at our clinical trial sites. We are currently unable to predict when potential disruptions to our clinical programs resulting from the pandemic will resolve. Other impacts to our business may include temporary closures of our suppliers and disruptions or restrictions on our employees’ ability to travel. Any prolonged material disruption to our employees or suppliers could adversely impact our preclinical research and clinical trial activities, financial condition and results of operations, including our ability to obtain financing.
Additionally, financial markets may be adversely affected by the current or anticipated impact of military conflict, including escalating military fighting between Russia and Ukraine, terrorism or other geopolitical events. The U.S. and other nations in response to the Russo-Ukrainian conflict have announced economic sanctions which may have an adverse effect on the global financial markets, which, in turn, could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We are monitoring the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russo-Ukrainian conflict on our business and 2021 Financial Statements. To date, we have not experienced any material business disruptions or incurred any impairment losses in the carrying values of our assets as a result of these events and we are not aware of any specific related event or circumstance that would require us to revise our estimates reflected in the 2021 Financial Statements.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
We have not generated any revenues since our Inception and do not expect to generate any revenues from the sale of products in the near future, if at all. If our development efforts for our current product candidates or additional product candidates that we may develop in the future are successful and can be commercialized, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales. Additionally, we may enter into collaboration and license agreements from time to time that provide for certain payments due to us. Accordingly, we may generate revenue from payments from such collaboration or license agreements in the future.
Research and Development
We support our drug discovery and development efforts through the commitment of significant resources to our preclinical and clinical development activities. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including costs for salaries and bonuses, employee benefits, subcontractors, facility-related expenses, share-based compensation, third-party license fees, laboratory supplies, and external costs of outside vendors engaged to conduct discovery, preclinical and clinical development activities and clinical trials as well as to manufacture clinical trial materials, and other costs. We recognize external research and development costs based on an evaluation of the services performed to date of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers.
Non-refundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. Such prepaid expenses are recognized as an expense when the goods have been delivered or the related services have been performed, or when it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered, or the services rendered.
Upfront payments under our license agreements are expensed as research and development expense upon receipt of the license. Milestone payments under these license agreements are accrued, with a corresponding expense being recognized, in the period in which the milestone is determined to be probable of achievement and the related amount is reasonably estimable.
We may be entitled to investment tax credits in connection with our research and development costs. These investment tax credits are non-refundable tax credits and are accounted for in accordance with our accounting policies.
We expect that our research and development expenses will substantially increase in connection with our planned preclinical and clinical development activities, both in the near-term and beyond as we continue to invest in activities to develop our product candidates and preclinical programs and as certain product candidates advance into later stages of development. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size, scope, and duration of later-stage clinical trials. Furthermore, the process of conducting the necessary clinical trials to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development for any of our product candidates or when and to what extent we may generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates or achieve profitability.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors that include, but are not limited to:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient follow-up; and
•the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates.
Changes in any of these assumptions could significantly impact the cost and timing associated with the development of our product candidates. Additionally, future competition and commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control may also impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative
We expense general and administrative costs as incurred. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees incurred relating to corporate and patent matters, professional fees incurred for accounting, auditing, tax and administrative consulting services, insurance costs, and facilities expenses.
We estimate and accrue for services provided by third parties related to the above expenses by monitoring the status of services provided and receiving estimates from our service providers. We reassess and adjust our accruals as actual costs become known or as additional information becomes available.
We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase over the next several years as we increase our headcount to support the continued development of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor, public relations and other expenses associated with being a public company.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the 2021 Financial Statements or our tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the provision for income taxes. We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established through a charge to income tax expense. Potential for recovery of deferred tax assets is evaluated by estimating the future taxable profits expected and considering prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in the 2021 Financial Statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized. First, the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it will be sustained upon external examination by the taxing authorities. If the tax position is deemed more likely than not to be sustained, the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the 2021 Financial Statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The provision for income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, or unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, and for the year ended December 31, 2020:
Research and Development
The following table summarizes the components of research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, and for the year ended December 31, 2020:
For the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in research and development expense was primarily due to increases in (a) costs incurred in clinical trials, including contract manufacturing and development of product candidates and personnel costs, (b) costs associated with our licensing agreements and related sponsored research in connection with our product candidates both preclinical and clinical, including a $3,250,000 expense related to the option exercised in connection with the exclusive global licensing agreement with Bach Biosciences, (c) salaries and wages due to increased personnel costs as the Company continues to expand its research and development headcount and (d) regulatory consulting fees that are required to further advance the
development of our product candidates as we advance our pipeline and grow the organization. The Company currently does not track its research and development expenditures by product.
General and administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to increased (a) personnel costs as the Company continues to expand its finance, information technology, human resources and other administrative headcount, (b) professional fees incurred for accounting, auditing and tax, each increasing primarily as a result of additional costs associated with being a publicly traded company, (c) costs associated with legal fees relating to corporate and patent matters and (d) insurance, administrative consulting services, advertising, office expenses and other facilities expenses as the Company continues to increase the scale of its operations.
Other Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expenses consist primarily of (a) foreign exchange losses associated with foreign currency transactions primarily occurring within the Company’s Canadian subsidiary, and (b) accretion expense related to the amortization of capitalized transaction costs in connection with our previous mortgage payable. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other expenses consisted the same or substantially similar expenses impacting the current period noted above.
Income Tax Expense
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, income tax expense consisted of taxes owing in Canada in relation to taxable income generated through management and research and development services performed by the Canadian subsidiary of the Company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity and Capital
We have incurred significant net losses since Inception and have relied on the ability to fund operations through equity financings. Operating losses and negative cash flows from operations and investing activities are expected to continue for the foreseeable future. As losses continue to be incurred, we are subject to risks and uncertainties common to early-stage companies in the biotechnology industry, including, but not limited to, successful discovery and development of its product candidates, development by competitors of new technological innovations, dependence on key personnel, the ability to attract and retain qualified employees, protection of proprietary technology, compliance with governmental regulations, the impact of COVID-19, the ability to secure additional capital to fund operations and commercial success of its product candidates. Product candidates currently under development will require extensive preclinical and clinical testing and regulatory approval prior to commercialization. These efforts require significant amounts of additional capital, adequate personnel, and infrastructure and extensive compliance-reporting capabilities. Even if our drug development efforts are successful, it is uncertain when, if ever, we will realize significant revenue from product sales.
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $238.8 million as of December 31, 2021, which is anticipated to fund operations into the first quarter of 2024. Net losses totaled $45.9 million and $13.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
On July 10, 2020, we obtained a mortgage loan in the amount of $3,562,500 for the purpose of purchasing a facility located in Indianapolis, Indiana (see Note 9 to the 2021 Financial Statements). The loan was collateralized by a first charge over the property. As part of the financing, we incurred $17,194 of costs and fees from the lender that are capitalized and recorded as finance costs over the life of the mortgage. The mortgage bore interest at 2.85% plus a minimum rate of 1-month LIBOR, subject to a LIBOR floor of 0.25%. The loan required quarterly interest payments, commencing October 1, 2020, with the principal amount due at maturity on January 10, 2022. On July 29, 2021, this mortgage loan was repaid in full and the related mortgage on the facility in Indianapolis, Indiana was released.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded $63,195 in interest costs which have been capitalized within property, in development, and $11,840 of accretion expense recorded within finance costs related to the amortization of capitalized financing costs and fees. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded $54,605 in interest costs which have been capitalized within property, in development, and $5,354 of accretion expense recorded within finance costs related to the amortization of capitalized financing costs and fees.
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any lease or other contractual obligations. We currently have a facility lease that is a month-to-month arrangement.
On January 28, 2021, warrants for the purchase of common shares of POINT Biopharma Inc. were exercised resulting in net proceeds of $20,000,000. On March 8, 2021, we received cash proceeds of $450,000 for a non-employee consultant’s exercise of stock options. On June 30, 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $260.0 million in connection with the Business Combination consisting of proceeds of the PIPE Financing and the proceeds remaining in RACA’s trust account. We intend to use the net proceeds from these transactions for general corporate purpose, funding of development programs, payment of milestones pursuant to our license agreements, general and administrative expenses, licensing of additional product candidates and to support our working capital needs.
Future Funding Requirements
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, primarily related to our research and development activities. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable, accrued expenses and prepaid expenses.
We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We will require additional capital to meet operational needs and capital requirements for clinical trials, other research and development expenditures, and business development activities. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated clinical trials and preclinical studies.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our current product candidates, as well as other additional product candidates we may develop and pursue in the future;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining marketing approvals for our product candidates and any other additional product candidates we may develop and pursue in the future;
•the number of future product candidates that we may pursue and their development requirements;
•subject to receipt of regulatory approval, the costs of commercialization activities for our product candidates, to the extent such costs are not the responsibility of any future collaborators, including the costs and timing of establishing product sales, marketing, distribution, and manufacturing capabilities;
•subject to receipt of regulatory approval, revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates or any other additional product candidates we may develop and pursue in the future;
•the achievement of milestones that trigger payments under our various license agreements;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to other products, product candidates or technologies;
•our ability to establish collaboration arrangements for the development of our product candidates on favorable terms, if at all;
•our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our research and development and establish a commercial infrastructure;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights, including enforcing and defending intellectual property related claims; and
•the costs of operating as a public company.
Until such time as we can generate substantial product revenue, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders' ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect rights of our stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or drug candidates, or grant
licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Going Concern
We assess and determine our ability to continue as a going concern in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 205-40, Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern. We have determined that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the settlement of liabilities an commitments in the normal course of business.
For additional information on risks associated with our substantial capital requirements, please read the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Working Capital
Working capital is defined as current assets less current liabilities.
The following table summarizes our total working capital and current assets and liabilities as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
The increase in working capital as of December 31, 2021, primarily reflects (a) net proceeds of approximately $260.0 million in connection with the Business Combination and the related PIPE Financing, exclusive of redemptions and approximately $27.0 million of transaction costs and (b) approximately $20.5 million received from the exercise of warrants and stock options during the year ended December 31, 2021. The transaction costs related to the Business Combination and PIPE Financing consisted of investment banker, legal, audit, tax, accounting, consulting, insurance, board retainer fees and listing fees. The increase in working capital as of December 31, 2021 was partially offset by increased (a) operating expenses, including research and development costs, (b) capital expenditures in connection with the development of our manufacturing and development facility in Indiana and (c) the repayment of our mortgage payable.
Cash Flows: Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Cash flows used in operating activities
Net cash flows used in operating activities represent the cash receipts and disbursements related to all of our activities other than investing and financing activities. We expect cash provided by financing activities will continue to be our primary source of funds to finance operating needs and capital expenditures for the foreseeable future.
The significant increase in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of (a) increased operating expenses as we grow our operations and further the development of our pipeline, as described above and (b) continued costs and pre-payments made in connection with our clinical trials.
Cash flows used in Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities reflected $8.8 million and $9.8 million, respectively, in capital expenditures for purchases in connection with the development of our Indiana facility.
Cash flows provided by Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities totaled $281.8 million, which consisted (a) net proceeds in connection with the Business Combination and the related PIPE Financing, and (b) the proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options each as discussed above. This was partially offset by cash outflows associated with the repayment of our mortgage payable as discussed above.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities totaled $28.6 million, which consisted of net proceeds from the issuance of common shares of POINT Biopharma Inc. and warrants to purchase common shares of POINT Biopharma Inc. as well as borrowings under our previous mortgage payable.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
The Company in the normal course of business enters into various services and supply agreements in connection with its clinical trials to ensure the supply of certain product and product lines during the Company’s clinical phase. These agreements often have minimum purchase commitments and generally terminate upon the termination of the clinical trial. For additional information, see Note 12 to the 2021 Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. For additional information related to our license agreements, please also see Note 13 to the 2021 Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or holdings in any variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our 2021 Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”).
The preparation of the 2021 Financial Statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that may affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the 2021 Financial Statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 2 to the 2021 Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Fair Value Measurements
Certain of our assets and liabilities are carried at fair value under U.S. GAAP. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Valuation techniques used to measure fair value must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. Financial assets and liabilities carried at fair value are to be classified and disclosed in one of the following three levels of the fair value hierarchy, of which the first two are considered observable and the last is considered unobservable:
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2 - Observable inputs (other than Level 1 quoted prices), such as quoted prices in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active for identical or similar assets or liabilities, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to determining the fair value of the assets or liabilities, including pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, and similar techniques.
Share-Based Compensation
We determine the fair value of each award issued under our equity-based compensation plan on the date of grant. Compensation expense for service-based stock option awards is recognized on a straight-line basis for the entire award over the requisite service period, with the amount of compensation expense recognized at any date at least equaling the portion of the grant-date fair value of the award that is vested at that date.
We elected to account prospectively for forfeitures as they occur rather than apply an estimated forfeiture rate to share-based compensation expense. We classify share-based compensation expense in our consolidated financial statements in the same manner in which the award recipient’s salary and related costs are classified or in which the award recipient’s service payments are classified, as applicable.
We estimate the fair value of the stock option awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model which includes certain judgments and estimates including the expected life of the stock options as well the risk-free rate, dividend yield, and volatility, each estimated over the expected life of the stock options. As there was no public market for our common shares, we determined the volatility for stock options granted based on an analysis of reported data for a peer group of companies. We will continue to apply this method until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own share price becomes available. As we do not have a history of stock option exercises, the expected life of the stock options has been determined as the period to expiry of the stock option. The risk-free interest rate is based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected life of the stock options.
The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and do not have current plans to pay any dividends on our common shares.
Recently adopted accounting standards and recent accounting pronouncements
For a discussion of new accounting standard updates adopted by us as well as recent accounting pronouncements for accounting standard updates not yet effective and their respective impact and expected impact on our consolidated financial statements or disclosures, please see Note 2 to the 2021 Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.