Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Pontem Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on October 15, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry, we intend to focus our search on global and regional consumer brands businesses.
We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of our existing investors, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Our Sponsor is Pontem LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our initial public offering became effective on January 12, 2021. On January 15, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 69,000,000 units, which includes 9,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $690.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $38.9 million, of which approximately $24.2 million and approximately $213,000 was for deferred underwriting commissions and deferred legal fees, respectively.
Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 10,533,333 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant with our Sponsor and HSM-Invest, a Switzerland simple partnership, generating gross proceeds of $15.8 million.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, $690.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in a trust account with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, or January 15, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our formation and the initial public offering and after the IPO searching for a target. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $9.8 million, which consisted of change in fair value of derivative liabilities of approximately $16.3 million and investment income on the trust account of approximately $76,000, partially offset by change in fair value of the forward purchase agreement of approximately $0.4 million, general and administrative expenses of approximately $4.3 million, general and administrative expenses to related party of $170,000, change in fair value of working capital loans of approximately $8,000 and financing costs related to derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $1.8 million.
For the period from October 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a loss of approximately $57,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $267,000 in its operating bank account and a working capital deficit of approximately $662,000
Prior to the initial public offering, our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for our issuance of the founder shares, a loan of up to approximately $300,000 from our Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note, of which approximately $181,000 was outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and approximately $227,000 just prior to repayment. We repaid the promissory note in full on January 18, 2021. Subsequent to the initial public offering, the Company’s liquidity needs have been satisfied with the proceeds of $2.0 million from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account, as well as the proceeds from working capital loans. In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were approximately $600,000 and $0 borrowed and outstanding under the working capital loans, respectively.
As more fully described in the Notes to our financial statements included herein as Item 1, on April 30, 2021, we entered into a working capital loan agreement with our Sponsor and HSM-Invest, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $1.2 million from our Sponsor and HSM-Invest for ongoing expenses reasonably related to our business and the consummation of the Business Combination. All unpaid principal under the working capital promissory note will be due and payable in full on the effective date of the Business Combination. On September 30, 2021, we entered into an Amended and Restated Agreement with our Sponsor and HSM-Invest, that amended the amount we can borrow to be up to $4,000,000 .
Based on the foregoing, management believes that it will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On October 19, 2020, we issued 14,375,000 Class B ordinary shares to our Sponsor in exchange for the payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to cover certain expenses on our behalf. Shares and the associated amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the shares capitalizations on December 23, 2020, January 8, 2021 and January 15, 2021, resulting in an aggregate of 17,250,000 Class B ordinary shares outstanding. The holders of the founder shares agreed to surrender and cancel up to an aggregate of 2,250,000 founder shares, on a pro rata basis, to the extent that the option to purchase additional units was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the founder shares would represent approximately 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the initial public offering. On January 15, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option; thus, these 2,250,000 founder shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
The Initial Shareholders agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares until the earlier to occur of: (i) three years after the completion of the initial Business Combination or (ii) the date following the completion of the initial Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of the shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least one year after the initial Business Combination, the founder shares will be released from the lockup.
Related Party Loans
On October 16, 2020, our Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $300,000 pursuant to a promissory note. The promissory note was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due upon the closing of the initial public offering. We borrowed approximately $181,000 through December 31, 2020 and approximately $227,000 prior to the initial public offering under the Note. We repaid the Note in full on January 18, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor, members of our founding team or any of our affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the working capital loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the working capital loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such working capital loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
On April 30, 2021, we entered into a working capital loan agreement (the “Agreement”) with our Sponsor and HSM-Invest, pursuant to which we may borrow up to $1,200,000 from the Sponsor and HSM-Invest for ongoing expenses reasonably related to the business of us and the consummation of the Business Combination. On April 30, 2021, pursuant to the Agreement, we issued a working capital promissory note for the principal amount of $600,000 to the Sponsor and HSM-Invest, respectively. The working capital promissory note does not bear any interest. All unpaid principal under the working capital promissory note will be due and payable in full on the effective date of the Business Combination (the “Maturity Date”). Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, we are not required to repay the working capital promissory note if it fails to complete the Business Combination. The Sponsor and HSM-Invest will have the option, at any time on or prior to the Maturity Date, to convert up to $1,500,000 under the working capital promissory note into warrants to purchase our Class A ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, at a conversion price of $1.50 per warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to the same adjustments applicable to the private placement warrants sold concurrently with our initial public offering.
On September 30, 2021, we entered into an amended and restated working capital loan agreement (the “Amended and Restated Agreement”) with our Sponsor and HSM-Invest, pursuant to increase the amount we may borrow up to $4,000,000 in the aggregate from the Sponsor and HSM-Invest for ongoing expenses reasonably related to the business of us and the consummation of any business combination by us. Pursuant to the Amended and Restated Agreement, we issued an amended and restated promissory note for the principal amount of $2,000,000 to each of the Sponsor and HSM-Invest, respectively. The amended and restated promissory note does not bear any interest. All unpaid principal under the amended and restated promissory note will be due and payable in full on the Maturity Date. Pursuant to the terms of the Amended and Restated Agreement, we are not required to repay the amended and restated promissory note if it fails to complete the Business Combination. The Sponsor and HSM-Invest will have the option, at any time on or prior to the Maturity Date, to convert up to $1,500,000 under the amended and restated promissory note into warrants to purchase our Class A ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, at a conversion price of $1.50 per warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to the same adjustments applicable to the private placement warrants sold concurrently with our initial public offering.
As of December 31, 2021, $599,975 was drawn under the Agreement, presented at fair value of approximately $592,000, on the accompanying balance sheets. There were no working capital loans outstanding as of December 31, 2020.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on NYSE through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and the liquidation, we agreed to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to members of the management team. The Company incurred $120,000 in such fees included as general and administrative expenses to related party on the accompanying statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, there was a balance due of $120,000.
In addition, our Sponsor, officers and directors, or our respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to our Sponsor, executive officers or directors, or our affiliates. Any such payments prior to an initial Business Combination will be made using funds held outside the trust account.
Consulting Agreement
On October 15, 2020, we entered into an agreement to obtain consulting services from an affiliate of our Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to which we agreed to pay such affiliate of our Chief Financial Officer $5,000 per month. Consulting expenses resulting from such agreement were included within general and administrative expenses in the accompanying statement of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from October 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred $50,000 and $10,000 in consulting expenses, respectively. In addition, we prepaid $5,000 of such costs, presented in prepaid expenses on the balance sheet.
Forward Purchase Agreement
On January 12, 2021, we entered into a forward purchase agreement with QVIDTVM Management LLC providing for the purchase of up to 15,000,000 forward purchase units, with each unit consisting of one forward purchase share and one-third of one forward purchase warrant, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The number of forward purchase units to be purchased by QVIDTVM Management LLC will be subject to the sole discretion of Mr. Alici, who has investment control over the capital committed to such entity, but in no event will be less than 5,000,000 forward purchase units. The obligations under the forward purchase agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares held by Public Shareholders are redeemed by us. The obligation to purchase the forward purchase units is subject to customary closing conditions, including that the initial Business Combination must be consummated substantially concurrently with, and immediately following, the purchase of forward purchase units. The forward purchase shares and forward purchase warrants will be issued only in connection with the closing of the initial Business Combination. The proceeds from the sale of forward purchase securities may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial Business Combination, expenses in connection with the initial Business Combination or for working capital in the post-transaction company. The forward purchase agreement is accounted for as an asset or liability measured at fair value with changes in fair value reported each period in earnings. The initial value of the forward purchase agreement was insignificant.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the initial public offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we registered such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the forward purchase agreement, we agreed to use our reasonable best efforts (i) to file within 30 days after the closing of a Business Combination a registration statement with the SEC for a secondary offering of the forward purchase shares and the forward purchase warrants (and underlying Class A ordinary shares), (ii) to cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than sixty (60) days after the initial filing, (iii) to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which our Sponsor or our assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 under the Securities Act and (iv) after such registration statement is declared effective, cause us to conduct firm commitment underwritten offerings, subject to certain limitations. In addition, the forward purchase agreement provides that these holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the prospectus relating to the initial public offering to purchase up to 9,000,000 additional units at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 15, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $13.8 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $24.2 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Deferred Legal Fees
We engaged a legal counsel firm for legal advisory services, and the legal counsel agreed to defer their fees in excess of $350,000. The deferred fee will become payable in the event that we complete a Business Combination. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had deferred legal fees of approximately $2.8 million and $50,000 in connection with such services on the accompanying balance sheet, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as assets, liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We are committed to issue forward purchase units, which are recognized as derivative assets or liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize forward purchase agreement instruments as assets or liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The assets or liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statement of operations. The fair value of the units associated with the forward purchase agreement have been estimated utilizing a forward pricing model.
The public warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and private placement warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the private placement warrants has been estimated using a Modified Black-Scholes model each measurement date. The fair value of public warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants. As the transfer of private placement warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the private placement warrants having substantially the same terms as the public warrants, we determined that the fair value of each private placement warrant is equivalent to that of each Public Warrant. The fair value of the Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Offering Costs Associated with the Initial Public Offering
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the initial public offering that were directly related to the initial public offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the initial public offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with warrant liabilities are expensed as incurred, presented as non-operating expenses in the statement of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A ordinary shares were included in temporary equity along with accretion of the Class A ordinary shares. Of the total offering costs of the initial public offering, approximately $1.8 million is included in financing cost - derivative warrant liabilities in the statements of operations. The Company classified deferred underwriting commissions as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 69,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Effective with the closing of the initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Shares
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted-average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering and the private placement to purchase an aggregate of 33,533,333 shares of ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.