ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains “forward-looking statements” that indicate certain risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control. Actual results could differ materially and adversely from those anticipated in such forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth below and elsewhere in this report. Important factors that may cause actual results to differ from projections include:
●
We may not be able to continue operating without additional financing;
●
Current negative operating cash flows;
●
Our capital needs to accomplish our goals, including any further financing, which may be highly dilutive and may include onerous terms;
●
Risks related to recent and future acquisitions, including the possibility of impairment of goodwill and risks related to the benefits and costs of acquisition;
●
Risks related to our partnerships with other companies, including the need to negotiate the definitive agreements; possible failure to realize anticipated benefits of these partnerships; and costs of providing funding to our partner companies, which may never be repaid or provide anticipated returns;
●
Risk that we will be unable to protect our intellectual property or claims that we are infringing on others’ intellectual property;
●
The impact of competition;
●
Acquisition and maintenance of any necessary regulatory clearances applicable to applications of our technology;
●
Risk we may not be able to attract or retain qualified senior management personnel, including sales and marketing personnel;
●
Risk that we never become profitable if our products and services are not accepted by potential customers;
●
Possible impact of government regulation and scrutiny;
●
Unexpected costs and operating deficits, and lower than expected sales and revenues, if any;
●
Adverse results of any legal proceedings;
●
The volatility of our operating results and financial condition,
●
Management of growth; and
●
Risk that our business and operations will continue to be materially and adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has impacted on a significant supplier; has resulted in delayed production and less efficiency; and has impacted on our sales efforts, accounts receivable, and terms demanded by suppliers; and may impact financing transactions; and
●
Other specific risks that may be alluded to in this report.
All statements, other than statements of historical facts, included in this report regarding our growth strategy, future operations, financial position, estimated revenue or losses, projected costs, prospects and plans, and objectives of management are forward-looking statements. When used in this report, the words “will,” “may,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “plan,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain such identifying words. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. We do not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statements or other information contained herein. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Although we believe that our plans, intentions, and expectations reflected in or suggested by the forward-looking statements in this report are reasonable, we cannot assure potential investors that these plans, intentions or expectations will be achieved. We disclose important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from expectations in the “Risk Factors” section and elsewhere in this report. These cautionary statements qualify all forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf.
Information regarding market and industry statistics contained in this report is included based on information available to us that we believe is accurate. It is generally based on academic and other publications that are not produced for purposes of securities offerings or economic analysis. We have not reviewed or included data from all sources, and we cannot assure potential investors of the accuracy or completeness of the data included in this report. Forecasts and other forward-looking information obtained from these sources are subject to the same qualifications and the additional uncertainties accompanying any estimates of future market size, revenue, and market acceptance of products and services. We have no obligation to update forward-looking information to reflect actual results or changes in assumptions or other factors that could affect those statements.
Overview
We operate in four primary business areas: first, the application of artificial intelligence (“AI”) in our precision medicine business, to provide AI-driven predictive models of tumor drug response to improve clinical outcomes for patients and to assist pharmaceutical, diagnostic, and biotech industries in the development of new personalized drugs and diagnostics; second, creation of tumor-specific 3D cell culture models driving accurate prediction of clinical outcomes; third, contract services and research focused on solubility improvements, stability studies, and protein production and; fourth, production of the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”)-cleared STREAMWAY System for automated, direct-to-drain medical fluid disposal and associated products
We have four reportable segments: Helomics®, zPREDICTA®, SolubleTM and Skyline®. The Helomics segment includes clinical testing and contract research services that include the application of AI. Our zPREDICTA segment specializes in organ-specific disease models that provide 3D reconstruction of human tissues accurately representing each disease state and mimicking drug response enabling accurate testing of anticancer agents. Our Soluble segment provides services using a self-contained, automated system that conducts high-throughput, self-interaction chromatography screens, using additives and excipients commonly included in protein formulations resulting in soluble and physically stable formulations for biologics. Our Skyline segment consists of the STREAMWAY System product sales, and our TumorGenesis subsidiary is included within corporate. Going forward, we have determined that we will focus our resources on the Helomics and zPREDICTA segments and our primary mission statements to accelerate patient-centric drug discovery to improve patient outcomes in cancer treatment, harnessing the power of AI, and to develop tumor-specific 3D cell culture models that provide accurate 3D reconstruction of human tissues representing each cancer disease state.
Capital Requirements
Since inception, we have been unprofitable. We incurred net losses of $19,657,174 and $25,884,397 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had an accumulated deficit of $128,040,282 and $108,383,108, respectively.
We have never generated sufficient revenues to fund our capital requirements. Since 2017, we have diversified our business by investing in ventures, including making significant loans and investments in early-stage companies. These activities led to the acquisition of Helomics in April 2019, the purchase of the assets of two businesses in 2020 and the acquisition of zPREDICTA in November 2021, each of which have accelerated our capital needs. We have funded our operations through a variety of debt and equity instruments. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Liquidity and Plan of Financing” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Financing Transactions” below.
Our future cash requirements and the adequacy of available funds depend on our ability to generate revenues from our Helomics and zPREDICTA segments; our ability to continue to sell our Skyline Medical products and to reach profitability in the Skyline Medical business, our ability to generate revenue from our Soluble reportable segment and the availability of future financing to fulfill our business plans. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources - Liquidity and Plan of Financing” below.
Our limited history of operations, especially in our precision medicine business, and our change in the emphasis of our business, starting in 2017, makes prediction of future operating results difficult. We believe that period-to-period comparisons of our operating results should not be relied on as predictive of our future results.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Year Ended December 31, 2021 with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue. We recorded revenue of $1,420,680 in 2021, compared to $1,252,272 in 2020. Our Skyline division was responsible for the majority of the revenue, with Soluble generating $233,293 and $2,870 and Helomics generating $13,367 and $64,188 in revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We sold 15 STREAMWAY System units in 2021 and 25 STREAMWAY System units in 2020.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales was $487,024 and $447,192 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cost of sales is primarily due to increased cost of disposables and costs associated with our repair and maintenance contracts The gross profit margin was 66% in 2021 compared to 64% in 2020. Our margins increased in 2021 due to higher margins associated with our Soluble operating segment and from our Skyline Medical operating segment disposable product margins.
General and Administrative expense. General and administrative (“G&A”) expense primarily consists of management salaries, professional fees, consulting fees, travel expense, administrative fees and general office expenses.
G&A expense increased by $580,152 to $10,932,125 in 2021 from $10,351,973 in 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in staff related expenses including additional headcount, as well as certain one-time expenses related to severance incurred as part of the departure of our former CEO. Additional increases included higher costs for consulting expenses and fees to our Board of Directors. Also, increased depreciation was driven by newly added assets supporting our Helomics division. These increases were offset by lower share-based compensation and lower costs for investor relations.
Operations expense. Operations expense in our current stage primarily consists of expenses related to product development, prototyping and testing including staff related expenses for individuals performing this work.
Operations expense increased by $346,856 to $2,698,565 in 2021 compared to $2,351,709 in 2020. The increase in operations expense in 2021 was primarily due to higher payroll costs and higher costs associated with cloud computing, offset by decreased costs associated with consulting.
Sales and marketing expense. Sales and marketing expense consists of expenses required to sell products through independent reps, attendance at trade shows, product literature and other sales and marketing activities.
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $189,593 to $774,530 in 2021 compared to $584,937 in 2020. The increase in 2021 was due to increased expenses in web development, public relations, and market research.
Loss on goodwill impairment. We incurred a loss on impairment of goodwill of $2,813,792 and $12,876,498 during 2021 and 2020, respectively, all relating to the goodwill acquired in the Helomics acquisition in 2019. Our goodwill, for our Helomics operating segment, following the impairment was $0 and $2,813,792 at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The cumulative losses on goodwill are $23,790,290 as of December 31, 2021. See Note 10 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report.
Loss on intangible asset impairment. We incurred a loss on impairment of intangibles of $2,893,548 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The impairment recorded relates to the intangible assets of our Helomics operating segment and none of the Company’s other operating segments. The value of the intangible assets of the Helomics operating segment following the impairment was $0 at December 31, 2021. See Note 10 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report.
Loss on impairment of acquired software. We incurred a loss on impairment on acquired software of $1,249,727 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The impairment recorded relates to the acquired software asset of our Helomics operating segment and none of the Company’s other operating segments. The value of the acquired software asset of the Helomics operating segment following the impairment was $0 at December 31, 2021. Please see Note 10 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report for further information.
Other income. We earned other income of $184,528 in 2021 compared to $843,440 in 2020. Other income included interest income and gains on settlement of outstanding payables during 2021. Other income was comprised of gain on the forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loan of $541,867 and gains on settlement of outstanding payables during 2020.
Other expense. We incurred other expenses of $239,631 in 2021 compared to $2,427,026 in 2020. Other expenses consisted primarily of interest expense, payment penalties and amortization of original issue discounts.
Gain on derivative instruments. We incurred a gain of $164,902 in 2021 compared to a gain of $1,765,907 in 2020, primarily related to the changes in fair market value on derivatives.
Gain on notes receivable associated with asset purchase. We recorded a gain of $1,290,000 in 2020 related to the gain on notes receivable in connection with our acquisition of certain assets in 2020.
Income Taxes. We recognized $661,658 income tax benefit in our consolidated statement of net loss in the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the release of the valuation allowance following the zPREDICTA acquisition and zero related to our U.S. operating losses, as all tax benefits are fully reserved.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows
Net cash used in operating activities was $12,208,929 in 2021, compared with net cash used of $12,257,732 in 2020. Cash used in operating activities increased in 2021 primarily due to operating losses as well as outflows related to payments on accounts payables and payments for accrued expenses, inventories and prepaid expenses.
Cash flows used in investing activities were $10,607,536 in 2021, and $167,456 in 2020. Cash flows used in investing activities in 2021 were primarily related to the acquisition of our zPREDICTA subsidiary in the amount of $9,590,214 and $910,429 of cash outflows related to purchases of fixed assets. Cash flows used in investing activities in 2020 were primarily for purchases of fixed assets, offset by disposals of fixed assets.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $50,340,748 in 2021 compared to net cash provided of $12,952,689 in 2020. Cash flows provided by financing activities in 2021 were primarily due from proceeds from the issuance of common stock and warrants of $50,523,527 in several equity offerings and proceeds from the exercise of warrants into common stock of $4,513,871, offset by repayment of debt and payment penalties of $5,236,214.
Liquidity and Plan of Financing
Since our inception, we have incurred significant losses, and our accumulated deficit was $128,040,282 as of December 31, 2021. We have committed significant capital and management resources to develop our CRO business and other new business areas and intend to continue to devote significant resources to the Helomics and zPREDICTA business and other new business in this market. Our business will need to generate significantly more revenue to sufficiently fund our operations without external financing. Our operations from inception have been funded with private placements of convertible debt securities and equity securities, public offerings, and loan agreements. We have not achieved profitability and anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses at least through the remainder of 2022. We had revenues of $1,420,680 and $1,252,272 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, but we had negative operating cash flows of $12,208,929 and $12,257,732 in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our cash balance was $28,202,615 as of December 31, 2021, and our accounts payable and accrued expenses were an aggregate $2,284,415. See “Financing Transactions” below.
We believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to support our operating plan for the next twelve months and beyond. However, we may also seek to raise additional capital to support our growth through additional debt, equity or other alternatives or a combination thereof. We would raise such capital through equity or debt financing to fund our capital and equipment investments and our operations.
Financing Transactions
We have funded our operations through a combination of debt and equity instruments including an early bank loan (since repaid), and a variety of debt and equity offerings. Since late 2018, these financing transactions have consisted of (1) secured convertible notes to private investors starting in late 2018, the remaining amount of which was repaid on March 1, 2021; (2) a series of loans from Dr. Carl Schwartz, our former CEO, starting in late 2018, which were exchanged for common stock in 2020; and (3) a number of public offerings, registered direct offerings and private placements, including an equity line arrangement (offerings), since 2019.
2021 Offerings
In January and February 2021, the Company completed a series of five offerings, all of which were priced at-the-market under applicable NASDAQ rules. The first four offerings were registered direct offerings of common stock under its shelf registration statement, and in each such case, in a concurrent private placement, the Company also issued such investors one warrant to purchase common stock for each two shares purchased in the transaction. Following those four offerings, the Company completed a private placement of common stock, with each investor receiving one warrant to purchase common stock for each two shares purchased in the transaction. In June 2021, the Company completed a registered direct offering of common stock and warrants. The warrants became exercisable on the effective date of an increase in the number of shares of the Company’s authorized common stock, which occurred on August 17, 2021, and expire three years after the initial exercise date. In each case, each such investor warrant is exercisable immediately upon issuance and will expire five and one-half years from the issue date. In each case, the Company paid to the placement agent an aggregate fee equal to 7.5% of the aggregate gross proceeds received by the Company in the offering and a management fee equal to 1% of the aggregate gross proceeds received by the Company in the offering and reimbursed the placement agent for certain non-accountable and out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, the Company granted to the placement agent, or its assigns warrants to purchase 7.5% of the shares sold to investors in the offering at an exercise price equal to 125% of the price of the shares in the transaction, with a term of five years for the registered direct offerings (three years for the June 2021 offering) or five and one-half years for the private placement.
These 2021 offerings were as follows:
* Sale price includes one share and a warrant to purchase one-half share (or one whole share in the case of the June 16, 2021 offering).
Secured Notes and Repayment in Full
On March 1, 2021, the Company used $5,906,802 of the proceeds of the private placement on February 23, 2021, described above under “2021 Offerings”, to repay in full the outstanding principal and interest and applicable premium amounts under the convertible secured promissory notes to two private investors in the original principal amount of an aggregate $2,297,727 issued in September 2018, the secured promissory note with a principal amount of $847,500 issued during September 2019 and the secured promissory note with a principal amount of $1,450,000 issued on February 5, 2020.
2021 Warrant Exercises
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the holders of outstanding investor warrants have exercised such warrants for the total purchase of 5,269,059 shares at a weighted average exercise price of $0.86 per share, for total proceeds of $4,513,871.
Equity Line
On October 24, 2019, the Company entered into an equity purchase agreement with an investor, providing for an equity financing facility. Upon the terms and subject to the conditions in the purchase agreement, the investor is committed to purchase shares having an aggregate value of up to $15,000,000 of the Company’s common stock for a period of up to three years. The Company issued to the investor 104,651 commitment shares at a fair market value of $450,000 for entering into the agreement. From time to time during the three-year commitment period, provided that the closing conditions are satisfied, the Company may provide the investor with put notices to purchase a specified number of shares subject to certain limitations and conditions and at specified prices, which generally represent discounts to the market price of the common stock. As of December 31, 2021, there was $9,113,829 of remaining available balance under the equity line, subject to shareholder approval required for additional purchases, as well as requirements for market conditions including trading volume and stock price, and subject to other limitations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued 647,504, shares of its common stock valued at $675,590 pursuant to the equity line.
Dr. Schwartz Notes
In November 2018, Dr. Schwartz made a loan to the Company with a principal balance of $370,000. As of December 31, 2018, one promissory note was held with a principal balance of $370,000 and an unamortized discount of $63,028. From November 30, 2018 through July 15, 2019, Dr. Schwartz made numerous loans to the Company in the total amount of $1,920,000 under two promissory notes. As consideration for these amounts, Dr. Schwartz received promissory notes and warrants to purchase 22,129 shares of the Company’s common stock at $8.36 per share. Further, beginning on February 1, 2019 and the first day of each calendar month thereafter while the note remained outstanding, a number of additional warrants were issued. Beginning in October 2019, the Company and Dr Schwartz began to renegotiate the note. Due to the negotiations, the Company did not issue any additional warrants because they would be cancelled under the new deal.
During January 2020, the Company entered into an exchange agreement with Dr. Schwartz. Under the exchange agreement, the two outstanding notes were cancelled and in exchange a new combined promissory note in the amount of $2,115,000 (the “2020 Schwartz Note”) bearing 12% interest per annum and maturing on September 30, 2020 was issued. In addition to the 2020 Schwartz Note, Dr. Schwartz received 50,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. All warrants issued under the prior promissory notes were cancelled under the exchange agreement; no rights and obligations remain under the cancelled notes. The Company determined that the exchange agreement had, in substance, occurred at December 31, 2019.
Effective as of April 21, 2020, the Company and Dr. Schwartz, entered into an exchange agreement relating to the 2020 Schwartz Note. The 2020 Schwartz Note bore twelve percent (12%) interest per annum and had a maturity date of September 30, 2020. The accrued interest on the note through April 21, 2020 was $77,878, resulting in a total balance of $2,192,878 in principal and accrued interest on the 2020 Schwartz Note as of such date. Dr. Schwartz and the Company agreed to exchange the 2020 Schwartz Note for newly issued shares of common stock of the Company at market value. Pursuant to the exchange agreement, Dr. Schwartz was issued 1,533,481 shares of newly issued common stock at an exchange rate of $1.43 per share, equal to the closing price of the common stock on April 21, 2020. In 2021, the Company determined that due to a calculation error, the balance of the 2020 Schwartz Note should have been higher by $143,573 at the time of the exchange agreement, and on February 24, 2021, the Company issued an additional 100,401 shares to Dr. Schwartz.
2020 Offerings
On March 19, 2020, in a private placement we sold and issued (1) 260,000 shares of common stock, at a sale price of $2.121 per share; (2) prefunded warrants to acquire 1,390,166 shares of common stock, sold at $2.12 per share and exercisable at an exercise price of $0.001 per share; (3) warrants to acquire 1,650,166 shares of common stock at $1.88 per share, exercisable immediately and terminating five and one-half years after the date of issuance; and (4) warrants to acquire 1,650,166 shares of common stock at $1.88 per share, exercisable immediately and terminating two years after the date of issuance. The sale resulted in gross proceeds of $3,498,612 and net proceeds of $3,127,112. The Company paid the Placement Agent an aggregate fee equal to 7.5% of the aggregate gross proceeds received by the Company in the offering. The Company also paid the Placement Agent a management fee equal to 1% of the aggregate gross aggregate gross proceeds received by the Company in the offering and reimbursed the Placement Agent for $25,000 in non-accountable expenses and up to $40,000 in legal and other out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, the Company granted to the Placement Agent, or its assigns warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 123,762 shares of its common stock (which represents 7.5% of the Shares sold to investors in the private placement) at an exercise price equal to 125% of the price of the Shares in the private placement, or $2.65125. These placement agent warrants will expire on March 18, 2025.
During May 2020, the Company sold 1,396,826 shares of common stock in a registered direct offering under its shelf registration statement. In a concurrent private placement, the Company also issued such investors warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,396,826 shares of our common stock. The Shares and the Warrants were sold at a combined offering price of $1.575 per Share and associated Warrant. Each Warrant is exercisable immediately upon issuance at an exercise price of $1.45 per share and will expire five and one-half years from the issue date. The sale of the offering shares and associated warrants resulted in gross proceeds of $2,200,001 and net proceeds of $1,930,100 after deducting the placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. The Company granted to the placement agent, or its assigns warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 104,762 shares of its common stock at an exercise price of $1.9688.
On June 25, 2020, the Company entered into agreements with the holders of an aggregate of 1,396,826 of the warrants issued in connection with the May 2020 registered direct offering, under which the investors exercised the warrants and received the same number new warrants. The investors paid an exercise price of $1.45 per share plus an additional $0.125 for each new warrant. The Company issued 1,396,826 shares and issued new warrants which are exercisable immediately and have a term of five and one-half years and an exercise price per share equal to $1.80. The Company received $2,130,701 in gross proceeds and net proceeds of $1,865,800 after deducting the placement agent fees and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company. Before deducting placement agent fees and expenses, the Company received approximately $2,200,000 from the transactions. Pursuant to an engagement letter, the Company agreed to pay the Placement Agent a cash fee equal to 7.5% of the gross proceeds received from the exercise and the sale of the New Warrants. The Company also paid the Placement Agent a management fee equal to 1% of the aggregate gross aggregate gross proceeds received by the Company in the offering and reimbursed the Placement Agent for $25,000 in non-accountable expenses and up to $40,000 in legal and other out-of-pocket expenses. In addition, the Company granted to the Placement Agent, or its assigns warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 104,763 shares of its common stock (which represents 7.5% of the shares sold to investors in the exercise transaction) at an exercise price equal to 125% of the exercise price of the New Warrants, or $2.25.
In connection with the equity line arrangement entered into with Oasis Capital, LLC (“Oasis”) in October 2019, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued an aggregate 4,231,073 shares of common stock to Oasis for net proceeds of $4,891,348.
2020 Conversions
In June through September 2019, the Company entered into a private placement securities purchase agreement with investors for shares of Series E convertible preferred stock. The Company issued 258 preferred shares. In May 2020, we notified the holders of our Series E Convertible Preferred Stock of our election to convert the outstanding shares of Series E Stock into common stock effective on June 13, 2020 pursuant to the terms of the Series E Stock. Prior to the conversion, there were 207.7 shares of Series E Stock outstanding. Each share of Series E Stock converted into 0.056857% of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock immediately prior to conversion; therefore, the 207.7 outstanding shares of Series E Stock on June 13, 2020 converted into 1,257,416 shares of common stock equal to 11.8% of the outstanding shares of common stock as of June 12, 2020.
2020 Paycheck Protection Program Loan and Forgiveness
On April 20, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note with Park State Bank, which provides for an unsecured loan of $541,867 pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act and applicable regulations (the “CARES Act”). The promissory note has a term of 2 years with a 1% per annum interest rate. Payments are deferred for 6 months from the date of the promissory note and the Company can apply for forgiveness of all or a portion of the promissory note after 60 days for covered use of funds.
Pursuant to the terms of the PPP, the promissory note, or a portion thereof, may be forgiven if proceeds are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act, such as payroll costs, costs used to continue group health care benefits, mortgage interest payments, rent and utilities. The Company has used all proceeds for qualifying expenses. The Company received forgiveness for the loan under the Paycheck Protection Program and recognized a gain in other income for the full amount of the loan during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Issuances of Securities in Acquisitions
On April 4, 2019, the Company completed a forward triangular merger with Helomics Acquisition Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and Helomics, acquiring the remaining 75% of the capital stock of Helomics not already held by the Company. Upon the acquisition, all outstanding shares of Helomics stock not already held by the Company were converted into the right to receive a proportionate share of 400,000 shares of common stock and 3,500,000 shares of Series D convertible preferred stock of the Company. On April 4, 2020, the 3,500,000 shares of Series D convertible preferred stock were converted into 350,004 shares of common stock. Also, on April 4, 2019, the Company completed an exchange offer with the holders of certain notes and warrants of Helomics, in which the Company issued 863,732 shares of common stock to the noteholders in exchange for their notes and issued warrants to purchase up to 1,425,506 shares of common stock of the Company at an exercise price of $10.00 per share in exchange for the Helomics warrants held by the noteholders. An additional 59,700 Company warrants at an exercise price of $0.10 per share were exchanged for Helomics warrants held by other parties. On September 14, 2020, the Company agreed to amend the 1,425,506 Company warrants that were originally exercisable at $10.00 per share to allow the holders to exercise the warrants at an exercise price of $0.845 per share, equal to the then-current market value of the common stock.
On May 27, 2020, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with InventaBioTech, Inc. (“InventaBioTech”) and two of its subsidiaries, Soluble Therapeutics, Inc. (“Soluble”), and BioDtech, Inc. (“BioDtech”), and simultaneously completed the acquisition of substantially all of Soluble’s and BioDtech’s assets. In exchange, the Company issued 125,000 shares of common stock and waived all existing claims that the Company has or may have against InventaBioTech (f/k/a CytoBioscience, Inc.), including the nonpayment of $1,290,000 owed by InventaBioTech to the Company. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
On July 1, 2020, the Company entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement with Quantitative Medicine LLC (“Seller”), a Delaware limited liability company and its owners and simultaneously completed the acquisition of substantially all of the assets owned by Seller. Quantitative Medicine is a biomedical analytics and computational biology company that developed a novel, computational drug discovery platform called CoRE. CoRE is designed to dramatically reduce the time, cost, and financial risk of discovering new therapeutic drugs by predicting the main effects of drugs on target molecules that mediate disease. In exchange for Seller’s assets, including CoRE, the Company provided consideration in the form of 954,719 shares of common stock, which, when issued, had a fair value of $1,470,267. One half of the shares issued, or 477,359 shares were deposited and held in escrow upon issuance, while 207,144 of the remaining shares were issued to Carnegie Mellon University (“CMU”) in satisfaction of all pre-closing amounts owed to CMU under a technology licensing agreement that was assumed by the Company on the closing date. Half of the shares held in escrow will be released on the six-month anniversary of the closing date, and the other half will be released on the one-year anniversary of the closing date; provided, however, that all or some of the escrow shares may be released and returned to the Company for reimbursement in the event that the Company suffers a loss against which the Selling Parties have indemnified the Company pursuant to the Agreement. See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our audited consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of our financial statements, the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods presented, as well as our disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions, including, but not limited to, fair value of stock-based compensation, fair value of acquired intangible assets and goodwill, useful lives of intangible assets and fixed assets and income taxes.
We base our estimates and assumptions on our historical experience and on various other information available to us at the time that these estimates and assumptions are made. We believe that these estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the circumstances and form the basis for our making judgments about the carrying values of our assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results and outcomes could differ from our estimates primarily due to incorrect sales forecasting. We utilize a pipeline generated by our sales team and speak directly with all departments regarding estimates and assumptions. If, for any reason, those estimates, and assumptions vary substantially it would also impact our cost of goods and associated operating expenses. The other volatile area for estimates and assumptions is determining financing needs. Depending on how we choose to fund will affect numerous expense categories so the potential for underestimating those expenses is a viable concern.
Our significant accounting policies are described in “Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in Notes to audited consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe that the following discussion addresses our critical accounting policies and reflects those areas that require more significant judgments and use of estimates and assumptions in the preparation of our audited consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue Recognition.
Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606), which outlines a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers. The standard’s core principle is that an entity will recognize revenue when it transfers promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Revenue from Product Sales. We have medical device revenue consisting primarily of sales of the STREAMWAY System, as well as sales of the proprietary cleaning fluid and filters for use with the STREAMWAY System. This revenue stream is reported within both the domestic and international revenue segments. We sell our medical device products directly to hospitals and other medical facilities using employed sales representatives and independent contractors. Purchase orders, which are governed by sales agreements in all cases, state the final terms for unit price, quantity, shipping and payment terms. The unit price is considered the observable stand-alone selling price for the arrangements. Our sales agreement, Terms and Conditions, is a dually executed contract providing explicit criteria supporting the sale of the STREAMWAY System. We consider the combination of a purchase order and acceptance of our Terms and Conditions to be a customer’s contract in all cases.
Product sales for medical devices consist of a single performance obligation that we satisfy at a point in time. We recognize product revenue when the following events have occurred: (1) we have transferred physical possession of the products, (2) we have a present right to payment, (3) the customer has legal title to the products, and (d) the customer bears significant risks and rewards of ownership of the products. Based on the shipping terms specified in the sales agreements and purchase orders, these criteria are generally met when the products are shipped from our facilities (“FOB origin,” which is our standard shipping terms). As a result, we determined that the customer is able to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of the benefits from, the products at the time the products are shipped. We may, at our discretion, negotiate different shipping terms with customers which may affect the timing of revenue recognition. Our standard payment terms for customers are generally 30 to 60 days after we transfer control of the product to the customer. We allow returns of defective disposable merchandise if the customer requests a return merchandise authorization from us.
Customers may also purchase a maintenance plan for the medical devices from us, which requires us to service the STREAMWAY System for a period of one year subsequent to the one-year anniversary date of the original STREAMWAY System invoice. The maintenance plan is considered a separate performance obligation from the product sale, is charged separately from the product sale, and is recognized over time (ratably over the one-year period) as maintenance services are earned and provided. A time-elapsed output method is used to measure progress because we transfer control evenly by providing a stand-ready service. We have determined that this method provides a faithful depiction of the transfer of services to our customers.
All amounts billed to a customer in a sales transaction for medical devices related to shipping and handling, if any, represent revenues earned for the goods provided, and these amounts have been included in revenue. Costs related to such shipping and handling billing are classified as cost of goods sold.
Revenue from Clinical Testing. Clinic diagnostic testing is comprised of our Tumor Drug Response Testing (ChemoFx) and Genomic Profiling (BioSpeciFx) tests. The Tumor Drug Response Testing test determines how a patient’s tumor specimen reacts to a panel of various chemotherapy drugs, while the Genomic Profiling test evaluates the expression and/or status of a particular gene related to a patient’s tumor specimen. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The estimated uncollectible amounts are generally considered implicit price concessions that are a reduction in revenue. Payments terms vary for contracts and services sold by our Helomics subsidiary. Our performance obligations are satisfied at one point in time when test reports are delivered, and studies are completed.
For service revenues, we estimate the transaction price which is the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for providing services based on our historical collection experience using a portfolio approach as a practical expedient to account for patient contracts as collective groups rather than individually. We monitor our estimates of transaction price to depict conditions that exist at each reporting date. If we subsequently determine that we will collect more consideration than we originally estimated for a contract with a patient, we will account for the change as an increase to the estimate of the transaction price, provided that such downward adjustment does not result in a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized.
We recognize revenue from these patients when contracts as defined in ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers are established at the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled or when we receive substantially all of the consideration subsequent to the performance obligations being satisfied.
CRO Revenue. Contract revenues are generally derived from studies conducted with biopharmaceutical and pharmaceutical companies. The specific methodology for revenue recognition is determined on a case-by-case basis according to the facts and circumstances applicable to a given contract. We typically use an input method that recognizes revenue based on our efforts to satisfy the performance obligation relative to the total expected inputs to the satisfaction of that performance obligation. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation on the basis of the standalone-selling price of each distinct good or service in the contract. Advance payments received in excess of revenues recognized are classified as deferred revenue until such time as the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Payment terms are net 30 from the invoice date, which is sent to the customer as we satisfy the performance obligation relative to the total expected inputs to the satisfaction of that performance obligation.
Variable Consideration. We record revenue from distributors and direct end customers in an amount that reflects the transaction price we expect to be entitled to after transferring control of those goods or services. Our current contracts do not contain any features that create variability in the amount or timing of revenue to be earned.
Warranty. We generally provide one-year warranties against defects in materials and workmanship on product sales and will either repair the products or provide replacements at no charge to customers. As they are considered assurance-type warranties, we do not account for them as separate performance obligations. Warranty reserve requirements are based on a specific assessment of the products sold with warranties where a customer asserts a claim for warranty or a product defect.
Contract Balances. We record a receivable when we have an unconditional right to receive consideration after the performance obligations are satisfied. Our deferred revenues relate primarily to maintenance plans and CRO revenue.
Practical Expedients. We have elected the practical expedient not to determine whether contracts with customers contain significant financing components as well as the practical expedient to recognize shipping and handling costs at point of sale.
Stock-Based Compensation. We account for share-based compensation expense in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation, which requires us to measure and recognize compensation expense in our financial statements based on the fair value at the date of grant for our share-based awards. We recognize compensation expense for these equity-classified awards over their requisite service period and adjust for forfeitures as they occur.
ASC 718 requires companies to estimate the fair value of stock-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. We use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model which requires the input of significant assumptions including an estimate of the average period of time employees and directors will retain vested stock options before exercising them, the estimated volatility of our common stock price over the expected term, the number of options that will ultimately be forfeited before completing vesting requirements and the risk-free interest rate.
When an option or warrant is granted in place of cash compensation for services, we deem the value of the service rendered to be the value of the option or warrant. In most cases, however, an option or warrant is granted in addition to other forms of compensation and its separate value is difficult to determine without utilizing an option pricing model. For that reason we also use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to value options and warrants granted to non-employees, which requires the input of significant assumptions including an estimate of the average period that investors or consultants will retain vested stock options and warrants before exercising them, the estimated volatility of our common stock price over the expected term, the number of options and warrants that will ultimately be forfeited before completing vesting requirements and the risk-free interest rate. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of stock-based compensation and, consequently, the related expense recognizes that. We have been on the NASDAQ Capital Market since 2015 and have had a volatile stock including reverse stock splits. The assumptions we use in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent our best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management's judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our equity-based consulting and interest expense could be materially different in the future.
In the case of standard options to employees we determined the expected life to be the midpoint between the vesting term and the legal term. In the case of options or warrants granted to non-employees, we estimated the life to be the legal term unless there was a compelling reason to make it shorter.
Business Combination. We accounted for the zPREDICTA merger as a business combination, using the acquisition method of accounting. This method requires, among other things, that assets acquired, and liabilities assumed be recognized at fair value as of the acquisition date. The fair value for the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed are based on information knowable and determined by management as of the acquisition date. We allocate the purchase price to tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price, if any, over the aggregate fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is allocated to goodwill.
Fixed Assets. We account for assets acquired at fair value as of the acquisition date. The fair value for assets acquired are based on their estimated fair values. Fixed assets are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation of fixed assets is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the respective assets.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Impairment. In accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, goodwill is calculated as the difference between the acquisition date fair value of the consideration transferred and the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is an asset representing the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is an indefinite-lived intangible asset and is not amortized.
Goodwill is not amortized but is tested on an annual basis for impairment at the reporting unit level as of December 31, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be fully recoverable.
To determine whether goodwill is impaired, annually or more frequently if needed, the Company performs a multi-step impairment test. The Company first has the option to assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value. The Company may also elect to skip the qualitative testing and proceed directly to the quantitative testing. When performing quantitative testing, the Company first estimates the fair values of its reporting units using discounted cash flows. To determine fair values, the Company is required to make assumptions about a wide variety of internal and external factors. Significant assumptions used in the impairment analysis include financial projections of free cash flow (including significant assumptions about operations including the rate of future revenue growth, capital requirements, and income taxes), long-term growth rates for determining terminal value and discount rates. Comparative market multiples are used to corroborate the results of the discounted cash flow test. These assumptions require significant judgement. Pursuant to ASU 2017-04, Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment, the single step is to determine the estimated fair value of the reporting unit and compare it to the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill. To the extent the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds the implied goodwill, the difference is the amount of the goodwill impairment. The Company also completes a reconciliation between the implied equity valuation prepared and the Company’s market capitalization. The majority of the inputs used in the discounted cash flow model are unobservable and thus are considered to be Level 3 inputs. The inputs for the market capitalization calculation are considered Level 1 inputs. See Note 10 - Intangible Assets and Goodwill.
In the Helomics acquisition, the Company recorded goodwill of $23,790,290. The goodwill was recorded to the Helomics segment which represents a single reporting unit. The cumulative losses on goodwill are $23,790,290 as of December 31, 2021. See Note 10 to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this annual report.
On November 24, 2021, the Company acquired goodwill of $6,857,790 in connection with the acquisition of zPREDICTA. The Company determined the value of the goodwill associated with the zPREDICTA reporting unit was fully recoverable at December 31, 2021.
Long-lived Assets
The Company reviews finite-lived identifiable intangible assets for impairment in accordance with ASC 360, Property, Plant and Equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Events or changes in circumstances that indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable include, but are not limited to, a significant change in the medical device marketplace and a significant adverse change in the business climate in which the Company operates.
The Company prepared an undiscounted cash flow as of December 31, 2021 to evaluate long-lived assets based on a triggering event per ASC 360. The Company concluded that the undiscounted cash flows did not support the carrying values of its the long-lived assets within the Helomics asset group at December 31, 2021. The Company determined the value of the intangibles and the software license acquired were fully impaired as of December 31, 2021 and recognized an impairment loss on its long-lived intangible assets of $2,893,548 and $1,249,727 impairment loss related to the acquired software. See Note 10 - Intangible Assets and Goodwill.
Based on a triggering event as of December 31, 2020, the Company prepared an undiscounted cash flows per ASC 360 to evaluate its other long-lived assets. The Company concluded that the undiscounted cash flows of the long-lived assets exceeded the carrying values. The Company concluded there was no impairment of its finite lived assets as of December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes. Deferred income taxes are provided on a liability method, whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences, which are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are adjusted for the effects of changes in tax laws and rates on the date of enactment. The Company recognizes the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more-likely-than-not threshold, the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority.
Recent Accounting Developments
See “Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Adopted Accounting Standards” in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
We have no off-balance sheet transactions.