ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in the sections Item 1A “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto, which are included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report.
We operate a content-driven and technology-enabled shopping destination for appliances, furniture and home goods. With warehouse fulfillment centers in the Northeast and Midwest, as well as showrooms in Brooklyn, New York, St. Louis, Missouri and Largo, Florida, we offer one-stop shopping for national and global brands. We carry many household name-brands, including Bosch, Cafe, Frigidaire Pro, Whirlpool, LG, and Samsung, and also carry many major luxury appliance brands such as Miele, Thermador, La Cornue, Dacor, Ilve, Jenn-Air and Viking, among others. We also sell furniture, fitness equipment, plumbing fixtures, televisions, outdoor appliances, and patio furniture, as well as commercial appliances for builder and business clients.
Recent Developments
Appliances Connection Acquisition
On October 20, 2020, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement, which was amended on December 8, 2020 and April 6, 2021, with ACI, Appliances Connection and the sellers thereto, pursuant to which ACI agreed to acquire all of the issued and outstanding capital stock or other equity securities of Appliances Connection from the sellers (the “Appliances Connection Acquisition”). We completed the Appliances Connection Acquisition on June 2, 2021, for an aggregate purchase price of $224.7 million, consisting of (i) $180.0 million in cash, (ii) 5,895,973 shares of the Company’s common stock valued at $12.3 million, and (iii) $32.4 million as a result of the post-closing net working capital adjustment provision. The Company recorded $0.9 million in acquisition related expenses.
In connection with the Appliances Connection Acquisition, the sellers agreed not to compete with the business of 1 Stop for two years following the acquisition.
The Appliances Connection purchase agreement also contained customary demand and “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to the shares issued to the sellers. Each seller entered into a lock-up agreement not to transfer or assign or otherwise dispose of the shares that were issued to that seller for 180 days after the closing, which period expired on November 29, 2021, and thereafter the seller is permitted to sell shares at a rate of no more than one percent of our outstanding stock per quarter until the one year anniversary of the closing of the Appliances Connection Acquisition.
Appliance Gallery Acquisition
On July 29, 2021, we acquired substantially all of the assets of, and assumed substantially all of the liabilities of, Appliance Gallery, Inc., a retail appliance store in Largo, Florida (“Appliance Gallery”), for a total purchase price of $1.4 million.
New Headquarters
We have transitioned our corporate headquarters to our office space and showroom in Brooklyn, New York. On March 15, 2022, we entered into a lease agreement with 8780 19 Ave LLC, a related party, for additional office space in Brooklyn to expand our headquarter office, currently located in the adjacent building, as we continue scaling our business and consolidating our corporate functions in Brooklyn. The lease expires on December 31, 2026, with an option to extend for an additional five years thereafter.
Share Repurchase Plan
On December 17, 2021, we approved a new share repurchase program under which we may repurchase up to $25.0 million of our outstanding shares of common stock in the open market, in accordance with all applicable securities laws and regulations, including Rule 10b-18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. Our decision to repurchase shares, as well as the timing of such repurchases, will depend on a variety of factors that include ongoing assessments of our capital needs, obtaining requisite senior lender consent, market conditions and the price of our common stock, and other corporate considerations, as determined by our management. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time. As of December 31, 2021, no shares have been repurchased.
Ongoing Impact of Coronavirus Pandemic
Starting in late 2019, COVID-19 began to rapidly spread around the world and to every state in the United States and was declared a pandemic in March 2020.
Most states and cities, including in markets in which we operate, have at various times instituted quarantines, restrictions on travel, “stay at home” rules, social distancing measures and restrictions on the types of businesses that could continue to operate, as well as guidance in response to the pandemic and the need to contain it. Since a majority of our sales are completed online and our call center, warehouse and distribution operations and Appliances Connection’s retail facilities and warehouse continued to operate, the restrictions put in place have not had a material negative impact on our operations.
However, we are dependent upon suppliers to provide us with all of the products that we sell. While the home industry has fared much better during the COVID-19 pandemic than other sectors of the economy, the pandemic has negatively impacted and may continue to negatively impact suppliers, manufacturers and the overall supply chain of our products. As a result, we have faced and may continue to face delays or difficulty sourcing certain products, which could negatively affect our business and financial results. Even if we are able to find alternate sources for such products, they may cost more, which could adversely impact our profitability and financial condition.
The global deterioration in economic conditions, which may have an adverse impact on discretionary consumer spending, could also impact our business. For instance, consumer spending may be negatively impacted by general macroeconomic conditions, including a rise in unemployment, increased inflation, and decreased consumer confidence resulting from the pandemic and other economic conditions. Changing consumer behaviors as a result of the pandemic may also have a material impact on our revenue.
Furthermore, the spread of COVID-19 has adversely impacted global economic activity and has contributed to significant volatility and negative pressure in financial markets. The pandemic has resulted, and may continue to result, in a significant disruption of global financial markets, which may reduce our ability to access capital in the future, which could negatively affect our liquidity.
The COVID-19 pandemic also impacted our workforce, causing us to provide our employees the ability to work-from-home and adding administrative complexity to our everyday human resources and employee technology functions. Furthermore, if significant portions of our workforce are unable to work effectively, including because of illness, quarantines, government actions, the impact of vaccine mandates and the willingness of our employees to comply with such mandates, facility closures, remote working or other restrictions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, our operations will likely be adversely impacted. Further, the steps we have taken to protect the health, safety and financial security of our employees may result in other negative impacts on our operations, including increased costs, reduced efficiency levels or labor disputes resulting in a strike or other work stoppage or interruption.
Much is still unknown, including the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, the emergence of variants of COVID-19 that may continue to prolong the pandemic, the amount of time it will take for normal economic activity to resume, and future government actions that may be taken. Accordingly the situation remains dynamic and subject to rapid and possibly material change, including but not limited to changes that may materially affect the operations of our suppliers, logistics providers and customers, which ultimately could result in material adverse effects on our business, financial condition and operating results. We cannot at this time predict the full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, but it could have a larger material adverse effect on our business, liquidity, financial condition and operating results beyond what is discussed within this report. We will continue to actively monitor the COVID-19 situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our customers, employees, suppliers, partners, stockholders and communities. We cannot predict with any certainty whether and to what degree the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and reactions thereto will continue, and we expect to face difficulty in accurately forecasting our financial condition and operational results. See also Item 1A “Risk Factors” for more information.
Trends and Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
Our operating results are primarily affected by the following factors:
● our ability to acquire new customers or retain existing customers, including those shopping online as a result of COVID-19;
● our ability to offer competitive product pricing;
● our ability to broaden product offerings;
● industry demand and competition;
● market conditions and our market position; and
● our ability to successfully integrate the operations of Appliances Connection with our business.
Notably, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and associated supply chain crisis, our freight costs have increased materially as a proportion of sales, putting downward pressure on our gross margins. Our freight costs as percentage of sales increased from 8.0% in 2020 to 9.1% in 2021, on a consolidated proforma basis, and from 12.7% to 14.7%, excluding Appliances Connection. Recent increases in the fuel costs are putting additional downward pressure on our gross margins. Management believes that these trends are temporary in nature, and our margins will continue improving as supply chain stabilizes and fuel costs return back to normal.
Supply chain constraints also impacted our order fulfillment timing, further amplifying order cancellations and refunds caused by the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. While switching to the authorization model in July 2021 helped mitigate order cancellations, we continued to experience order cancellations related to customer deposits collected in 2020 and early 2021 throughout third and fourth quarter 2021, resulting in negative operating cash flow.
Factors Affecting Comparability of Our Future Results of Operations to Our Historical Results of Operations
The comparability of our results of operations between the periods discussed below is affected by the acquisitions we have completed during such periods. We may also evaluate and pursue acquisitions in the future, and such acquisitions, if completed, will continue to impact the comparability of our financial results. Our acquisitions may have materially different characteristics than our historical results, and such differences in economics may impact the comparability of our future results of operations to our historical results.
● On April 5, 2019, we completed the Goedeker Television Acquisition.
● On June 2, 2021, we completed the Appliances Connection Acquisition.
● On July 29, 2021, we completed the Appliance Gallery Acquisition.
The Company accounted for the above acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 805 “Business Combinations.” In accordance with ASC 805, the Company used its best estimates and assumptions to assign fair value to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The consolidated operating results presented below for the year ended December 31, 2021 include the results of Appliances Connection from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, and, therefore, are not comparable to the consolidated operating results for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, in thousands and as a percentage of our revenue.
Product sales, net. We generate revenue from the retail sale of appliances, furniture, home goods and related products. Our product sales were $362.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $314.5 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 (date of acquisition) to December 31, 2021, as compared to $55.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $307.2 million, or 557.2%. Such increases were primarily due to the impact of the Appliances Connection Acquisition. Excluding Appliances Connection, our product sales decreased by $7.4 million, or 13.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is the result of reduced advertising spend to drive traffic to the Company’s www.goedekers.com website as we develop a company-wide advertising program.
Our product sale, net by type is as follows (in thousands):
The percentage of furniture sales declined in the 2021 period as compared to the 2020 period as furniture sales comprised a lower percentage of Appliances Connection sales (3.2%) as compared to the total Company’s (5.4%).
Cost of goods sold. Our costs of goods sold are comprised of product costs and freight costs. Product costs represent the amount we pay the manufacturer for their product. We negotiate special terms and pricing with the manufacturer, which are generally based on the number of products we purchase. Periodically, manufacturers offer special pricing for purchasing a certain volume of products at one time. Funding might also be offered to support our marketing and advertising efforts. Freight is the cost of delivering products to customers. Our cost of goods sold was $282.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $47.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $234.8 million, or 490.4%. Excluding Appliances Connection, our cost of goods sold decreased by $9.0 million, or 18.9%. This decrease is the result of less sales (see above).
Our cost of goods sold by type is as follows (in thousands):
As a percentage of net sales, cost of goods sold was 78.0% and 86.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such decrease were primarily due to the impact of the Appliances Connection Acquisition. Excluding Appliances Connection, our cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales decreased from 86.8% to 81.3%. Product costs as a percentage of net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 68.1% compared to 74.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Such decrease was a result of increased vendor rebates because of increased purchase volume. Freight costs as a percentage of net sales was 9.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 12.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting better freight rates for Appliances Connection and our ability to leverage our larger scale business in the second half of 2021. Excluding Appliances Connection, freight costs increased as a percentage of net sales from 12.7% in 2020 to 14.7% in 2021.
Gross profit and gross margin. As a result of the foregoing, our gross profit was $79.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $70.7 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $72.4 million, or 998.0%. Our gross margin (gross profit as a percentage of net sales) was 22.0% (or 18.7% excluding Appliances Connection) for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 13.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Such increases were primarily due to the impact of the Appliances Connection Acquisition. Excluding Appliances Connection, our gross profit increased by $1.7 million, or 23.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and our gross margin increased from 13.1% to 18.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021, a result of having improved supply chain (new vendors, increased purchase volume discounts, better freight rates), driven by the acquisition of Appliances Connection.
Personnel expenses. Personnel expenses include employee salaries and bonuses plus related payroll taxes. It also includes health insurance premiums, 401(k) contributions, training costs and stock compensation expense. Our personnel expenses were $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $11.4 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $15.0 million, or 228.7%. As a percentage of net sales, personnel expenses were 6.0% (or 21.4% excluding Appliances Connection) and 11.9% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such increases were primarily due to the impact of the Appliances Connection Acquisition. Excluding Appliances Connection, our personnel expenses increased by $3.6 million, or 55.5% the year ended December 31, 2021, and our personnel expenses as a percentage of net sales increased to 21.4% the year ended December 31, 2021. Such increase is the result of accruing the severance payments due a former officer.
Advertising expenses. Advertising expenses include the cost of marketing our products and primarily include online search engine expenses. Our advertising expenses were $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $7.9 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to $4.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $7.1 million, or 145.9%. As a percentage of net sales, advertising expenses were 3.3% (or 8.5% excluding Appliances Connection) and 8.8% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such increases were primarily due to the impact of the Appliances Connection Acquisition. Excluding Appliances Connection, our advertising expenses decreased by $0.8 million, or 16.3% the year ended December 31, 2021, and our advertising expenses as a percentage of net sales decreased from 8.8% the year ended December 31, 2020 to 8.5% the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease relates to our efforts at improving the efficiency of our company-wide advertising program.
Bank and credit card fees. Bank and credit card fees are primarily the fees we pay credit card processors for processing credit card payments made by customers and to third party sellers on whose websites we sell parts and other small items. Our bank and credit card fees were $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $12.2 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11.8 million, or 652.6%. As a percentage of net sales, bank and credit card fees were 3.8% (or 2.8% excluding Appliances Connection) and 3.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Bank and credit card fees are based on customer orders that are paid with a credit card (substantially all orders), so the increase was largely due to the increase in customer orders associated with the acquisition of Appliances Connection. Excluding Appliances Connection, our bank and credit card fees decreased by $0.5 million, or 25.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, and our bank and credit card fees as a percentage of net sales decreased to 2.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was a result of adopting an authorization model for charging customer credit cards rather than charging at the time of purchase. This change resulted in lower credit fees.
Acquisition Expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred expenses related to the acquisitions of Appliances Connection and Appliance Gallery in the amount of $0.9 million, or 0.2% of net sales.
Depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and amortization was $6.6 million, or 1.8% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.6 million, or 1.0% of net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is the result of amortizing intangible assets acquired in the Appliances Connection acquisition.
Loss on abandonment of right-of-use asset. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a loss in the amount of $1.4 million, or 0.4% of net sales, related to the closure of our old warehouse and showroom and write-off of related leasehold improvements.
General and administrative expenses. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional advisor fees, rent expense, insurance, unremitted sales tax, and other expenses incurred in connection with general operations. Our general and administrative expenses were $15.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $7.8 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $7.4 million, or 94.2%. As a percentage of net sales, general and administrative expenses were 4.2% (or 15.8% excluding Appliances Connection) and 14.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Such decreases were primarily due to the impact of the Appliances Connection Acquisition. Excluding Appliances Connection, our general and administrative expenses decreased by $0.3 million, or 4.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was largely due to some of our insurance expenses and other professional fees handled on a consolidated basis for the newly combined company.
Total other income (expense). We had $5.0 million in total other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $0.5 million of other expense, net, from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to total other expense, net, of $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Total other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of interest expense of $3.2 million, financing costs of $0.5 million and a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.7 million. Total other expense, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of interest expense of $0.8 million, loss on debt modification and extinguishment of $1.8 million, loss on acquisition working capital receivable of $0.8 million and change in the warrant liability of $2.1 million.
Income tax benefit (expense). We had an income tax net benefit of $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to an income tax expense of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the Appliances Connection Acquisition, the Company is able utilize previously derived net operating losses, as it is more likely than not that the Company will be profitable.
Net Income (Loss). As a result of the cumulative effect of the factors described above, we had net income of $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included net income of $30.6 million from Appliances Connection for the period from June 2, 2021 to December 31, 2021, as compared to a net loss of $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $29.2 million, or 135.6%. Excluding Appliances Connection, our net loss increased by $1.4 million, or 6.3% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-GAAP to GAAP Reconciliation
This report contains financial measures, such as Adjusted net income (loss) before income taxes, that are not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”). We define Adjusted net income (loss) before income taxes as Income (loss) from operations adjusted for non-cash charges such as: (i) adjustments in the value of contingencies and (ii) loss on extinguishment of debt.
The non-GAAP financial information should be considered supplemental to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. Management, however, believes that these non-GAAP financial measures, when used in conjunction with the results presented in accordance with GAAP, may provide a more complete understanding of our results and may facilitate a fuller analysis of our results, particularly in evaluating performance from one period to another. Management has chosen to provide this supplemental information to investors, analysts, and other interested parties to enable them to perform additional analyses of results and to illustrate the results giving effect to the non-GAAP adjustments shown in the reconciliation described in the next paragraph. Furthermore, the economic substance behind our decision to use such non-GAAP measures is that such measures approximate our controllable operating performance more closely than the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. Management strongly encourages investors to review our consolidated financial statements and publicly filed reports in their entirety and cautions investors that the non-GAAP measures used by us may differ from similar measures used by other companies, even when similar terms are used to identify such measures.
The following tables provide a reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures disclosed above to the comparable GAAP measure, in thousands.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $25.7 million and restricted cash of $8.1 million, $5.5 million of which has been subsequently released. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred operating income of approximately $8.3 million, cash flows used in operations of $18.3 million, and working capital of $16.0 million. On June 2, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Appliances Connection. Appliances Connection has historically been profitable; however, less than 7 months of their operations are included in our results for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, $58.5 million was outstanding under the Term Loan, and we had not utilized any of our $10.0 million Revolving Loan.
We have previously generated significant losses since our acquisition of Goedeker Television and have relied on cash on hand, external bank lines of credit, proceeds from public offerings, issuance of third-party and related-party debt and the issuance of a note to support cashflow from operations. Notably, we reported positive cash flow from operations in 2020 as money was collected from the customers at the time orders were placed, instead of the time orders were shipped, leading to accumulation of customer deposits ($21.9 million as of December 31, 2020). On June 2, 2021, we acquired Appliances Connection, which historically has been a profitable company with strong operating cash flow; however due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and resulting supply chain constraints, we refunded to the customers $34.0 million in customer deposits throughout 2021, $27.4 million of which was due to order cancellations, leading to a negative operating cash flow in 2021. At this point we have been able to clear the majority of the historical customer deposit balances, and based on current facts and circumstances, we believe that we will have adequate cash flow from operations, external bank lines of credit, and proceeds from any future issuances of debt or equity to fund operations and service debt obligations for at least the next twelve months.
We may, however, in the future require additional cash resources due to changing business conditions, implementation of our strategy to expand our business, or other investments or acquisitions we may decide to pursue. If our own financial resources are insufficient to satisfy our capital requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain additional credit facilities. The sale of additional equity securities could result in dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of indebtedness would result in increased debt service obligations and could require us to agree to operating and financial covenants that would restrict our operations. Financing may not be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Any failure by us to raise additional funds on terms favorable to us, or at all, could limit our ability to expand our business operations and could harm our overall business prospects.
We assess liquidity and going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine whether there are sufficient cash on hand and working capital, including available borrowings on loans, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued or available to be issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period”, as defined in GAAP. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to management, we will consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, estimates and will make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, our ability to delay or curtail expenditures or programs and our ability to raise additional capital, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period.
We have prepared estimates of operations for fiscal years 2022 and 2023 and believe that sufficient funds will be generated from operations to fund our operations and to service our debt obligations for one year from the date of the filing of this report. We have considered the impact of COVID-19 on our business in these assumptions; however, it is too early to know the full impact of COVID-19 or its timing on a return to more normal operations.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis under which we are expected to be able to realize our assets and satisfy our liabilities in the normal course of business. We believe, based on relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable, that our forecasts, for one year from the date of the filing of this report, indicate improved operations and our ability to continue operations as a going concern. See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Liquidity and Going Concern Assessment.”
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flow for all consolidated financial statement periods presented in this report.
Cashflows (used in) provided by operating activities. Our net cash used in operating activities was $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Significant changes in operating assets and liabilities affecting cash flows during these years included:
● Net income (loss) was $7.7 million and $(21.6) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively,
● Cash used by accounts receivable was $(5.6) million and $(0.7) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due primarily to increases in sales volume as a result of the Acquisition of Appliances Connection,
● Cash used by inventories was $(18.5) million and $(3.8) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due primarily to efforts to manage inventory levels to support the growth in sales as a result of the Acquisition of Appliances Connection, and
● Cash (used by) provided by customer deposits was $(19.0) million and $17.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to increases in sales volume as a result of the Acquisition of Appliances Connection and the timing it can take to fulfill orders as a result of supply chain shortages as during the economic downturn related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cashflows used in investing activities. Our net cash used in investing activities was $204.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The significant increase was a primarily a result of $202.9 million net cash paid in the acquisitions of Appliances Connection and Appliance Gallery.
Cashflows provided by financing activities. Our net cash provided by financing activities was $247.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Significant changes in financing activities affecting cash flows during these years included:
● Net cash received from public offerings (including warrant exercises) of $196.8 million and $8.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and
● Net cash received from debt issuances of $60.8 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Public Offerings
On August 4, 2020, the Company sold 1,111,200 shares of common stock for total gross proceeds of $10.0 million. After deducting the underwriting commission and expenses, the Company received net proceeds of $8.6 million.
On June 2, 2021, the Company sold 91,111,111 units, consisting of one share of common stock and a warrant to purchase one share of common stock, at a public offering price of $2.25 per unit to ThinkEquity, a division of Fordham Financial Management, Inc. (the “Underwriter”), pursuant to an underwriting agreement dated May 27, 2021, for total gross proceeds of $205.0 million. Under the underwriting agreement, the Company granted the Underwriter a 30-day option to purchase up to 2,000,000 additional shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $2.0832 per share, and/or warrants to purchase up to 2,000,000 additional shares of common stock, at a purchase price of $0.0093 per warrant, in any combination thereof, solely to cover over-allotments, if any. The Underwriter exercised its option to purchase 2,000,000 additional warrants and 2,000,000 additional shares for total gross proceeds of $4.5 million. After deducting the underwriting commission and expenses, the Company received net proceeds of approximately $194.4 million. The Company used the proceeds of the offering to fund a portion of the purchase price for the AC Acquisition.
From June 25 through July 16, 2021, 1,052,248 shares of common stock were issued as a result of the exercise of 1,052,248 warrants for proceeds of $2.4 million.
Debt
Arvest Loan
On August 25, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note and security agreement with Arvest Bank for a loan in the principal amount of $3.5 million. As of December 31, 2020, the outstanding balance of this loan was $3.2 million, comprised of principal of $3.3 million, net of unamortized loan costs of $0.1 million. On May 10, 2021, the Company repaid this loan.
Credit Facilities
On June 2, 2021, the Company and ACI, as borrowers, entered into a credit and guaranty agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Appliances Connection and certain other subsidiaries of the Company party thereto from time to time as guarantors (the “Guarantors”), the financial institutions party thereto from time to time (“Lenders”), and Manufacturers and Traders Trust Company, as sole lead arranger, sole book runner, administrative agent and collateral agent (“M&T), pursuant to which the Lenders have agreed to make available to the Company and ACI senior secured credit facilities in the aggregate initial amount of $70.0 million, including (i) a $60.0 million term loan (the “Term Loan”) and (ii) a $10.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Loan”), which revolving credit facility includes a $2.0 million swingline subfacility (the “Swing Line Loan” and together with the Term Loan and the Revolving Loan, the “Loans”) and a $2.0 million letter of credit subfacility, in each case, on the terms and conditions contained in the Credit Agreement. On June 2, 2021, the Company borrowed the entire amount of the Term Loan and issued term loan notes to the Lenders in the aggregate principal amount of $60.0 million.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has not borrowed any amounts under the Revolving Loan. As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of the Term Loan is $55.2 million, comprised of principal of $58.5 million, net of unamortized loan costs of $3.3 million. Loan costs before amortization included $3.5 million of lender and placement agent fees and $0.3 million of legal other fees. The Company classified $7.5 million as a current liability and the balance as a long-term liability.
Each of the Loans matures on June 2, 2026. The Loans will bear interest on the unpaid principal amount thereof as follows: (i) if it is a Loan bearing interest at a rate determined by the Base Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement), then at the Base Rate plus the Applicable Margin (as defined in the Credit Agreement) for such Loan; (ii) if it is a Loan bearing interest at a rate determined by the LIBOR Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement), then at the LIBOR Rate plus the Applicable Margin for such Loan; and (iii) if it is a Swing Line Loan, then at the rate applicable to Loans bearing interest at a rate determined by the Base Rate. The Term Loan initially bears interest at the LIBOR Rate plus Applicable Margin (3.9%), with an initial interest period of six months. The Company may elect to continue or convert the existing interest rate benchmark for the Term Loan from LIBOR Rate to Base Rate, and may elect the interest rate benchmark for future Revolving Loans as either LIBOR Rate or Base Rate (and, with respect to any Loan made at the LIBOR Rate, may also select the interest period applicable to any such Loan), by notifying M&T and Lenders from time to time in accordance with the provisions of the Credit Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, following an Event of Default, the Loans will bear interest at a rate that is 2% per annum higher than the interest rate then in effect for the applicable Loan.
The Company must repay the principal amount of the Term Loan in quarterly installments of $1.5 million each, payable on the last business day of each March, June, September, and December, commencing on September 30, 2021 (the December 2021 payment was in January 2022). The remaining unpaid principal amount of the Term Loan must be repaid on the Term Loan Maturity Date (as defined in the Credit Agreement) unless payment is required sooner by the Credit Agreement. Revolving Loans may be repaid and reborrowed at any time until the Revolving Commitment Termination date (as defined in the Credit Agreement).
The Company may voluntarily prepay the Loans from time to time in accordance with the provisions of the Credit Agreement, and will be required to prepay the Loans under certain limited circumstances as set forth in the Credit Agreement, including upon receipt of cash proceeds in connection with certain specified asset sales, receipt of insurance or condemnation proceeds or other cash proceeds received other than in the ordinary course of business or upon receipt of cash proceeds from the incurrence of indebtedness that is not permitted under the Credit Agreement, all as more specifically set forth in the Credit Agreement. Additionally, mandatory repayments of amounts borrowed under the Revolving Loan facility are required if the amount borrowed at any time exceeds the commitment amount.
Under the Credit Agreement, the Company is required to pay certain fees to M&T, including a commitment fee of up to 0.5% per annum with respect to the unused portion of the Lenders’ revolving loan commitments, determined as set forth in the Credit Agreement, and certain fees in connection with the issuance of any letters of credit under the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations, warranties, affirmative and negative financial and other covenants, including leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratios, and events of default for loans of this type. The Loans are guaranteed by the Guarantors and are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of the Company, ACI and the Guarantors.
Northpoint Loan
On June 3, 2021, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Northpoint Commercial Finance LLC (“Northpoint”), pursuant to which Northpoint may from time-to-time advance funds for the acquisition, financing and/or refinancing by the Company of inventory purchased from Samsung Electronics America, Inc. and/or affiliates and for such other purposes as are acceptable Northpoint. The loan and security agreement provides that Northpoint may establish a credit limit and may adjust such credit limit from time to time; provided that such credit limit does not constitute a commitment or committed line of credit to Northpoint. As of December 31, 2021, such credit limit is $2.0 million, of which $0.2 million was owed and included in accounts payable.
The applicable per annum interest rates for a loan, including any default rates, will be determined at the time of the loan. The loan and security agreement contains customary events of default and is secured by a security interest in all of the Company’s inventory (i) that is manufactured, distributed, or sold by Samsung Electronics America, Inc. and/or its affiliates and/or (ii) that bears any trade names, trademarks, or logos of Samsung Electronics America, Inc. and/or its affiliates; all returns, repossessions, exchanges, substitutions, replacements, attachments, parts, accessories and accessions of any of the foregoing; all price protection payments, discounts, rebates, credits, factory holdbacks and incentive payments related to any of the foregoing; supporting obligations to any of the foregoing; and products and proceeds in whatever form of any of the foregoing.
10% OID Senior Promissory Notes
On March 19, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with two institutional investors, pursuant to which the Company issued to each investor (i) a 10% OID senior secured promissory note in the principal amount of $2.8 million and (ii) a four-year warrant to purchase 200,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $12.00 (subject to adjustments), which may be exercised on a cashless basis, for a purchase price of $2.5 million each, or $5.0 million in the aggregate, the relative fair value of which is $1.3 million and was recorded as debt discount. After deducting a placement fee and other expenses, the Company received net proceeds of $4.6 million. The original issue discount and warrant expense were amortized as interest expense. On June 2, 2021, the Company repaid these notes from the proceeds of the Term Loan. At the time of repayment, the Company wrote off the balance of the debt discount of $1.7 million, as a loss on early extinguishment of debt.
Vehicle Loans
The Company has financed purchases of transportation vehicles with notes payable, which are secured by the vehicles purchased. These notes have five-year terms and interest rates ranging from 3.59% to 5.74%. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of these vehicle loans is $1.5 million.
Management Services Agreement
On April 5, 2019, the Company entered into a management services agreement with 1847 Partners LLC (the “Manager”), a company owned and controlled by Ellery W. Roberts, the Company’s chairman and prior significant stockholder, which was amended effective on August 4, 2020. Pursuant to the offsetting management services agreement, as amended, the Company appointed the Manager to provide certain services to it for a quarterly management fee equal to $62,500; provided, however, that under certain circumstances specified in the management services agreement, the quarterly fee may be reduced if similar fees payable to the Manager by subsidiaries of the Company’s former parent company, 1847 Holdings LLC, exceed a threshold amount.
The Company shall also reimburse the Manager for all costs and expenses of the Company which are specifically approved by the board of directors of the Company, including all out-of-pocket costs and expenses, that are actually incurred by the Manager or its affiliates on behalf of the Company in connection with performing services under the management services agreement. The Company did not pay any expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company expensed management fees of $0.3 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Earn Out Payments
On January 18, 2019, the Company entered into an asset purchase agreement with Goedeker Television, Steve Goedeker and Mike Goedeker, pursuant to which on April 5, 2019 the Company acquired substantially all of the assets of Goedeker Television used in its retail appliance and furniture business (the “Goedeker Business”).
Pursuant to the asset purchase agreement, Goedeker Television is entitled to receive an earn out payment of $0.2 million if the EBITDA (as defined in the asset purchase agreement) of the Goedeker Business for the trailing twelve (12) month period from April 5, 2022 is $2.5 million or greater, and may be entitled to receive a partial earn out payment if the EBITDA of the Goedeker Business is less than $2.5 million but greater than $1.5 million. The Company expects to meet this target and adjusted the contingent note payable in the consolidated balance sheet to the present value of the amount due of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Leases
On April 5, 2019, the Company entered into a lease agreement with S.H.J., L.L.C for its prior principal office in Ballwin, Missouri. The lease is for a term of five years and provides for a base rent of $45,000 per month. In addition, the Company is responsible for all taxes and insurance premiums during the lease term. The lease agreement contains customary events of default, representations, warranties, and covenants.
On May 31, 2019, YF Logistics entered into a sublease agreement with DMI for its warehouse space in Hamilton, NJ. The initial term of the sublease was for a period commencing on June 1, 2019 and terminating on April 30, 2020, with automatic renewals for successive one year terms until the earlier of (i) termination by either upon thirty days’ prior written notice or (ii) April 30, 2024. The sublease provides for a base rent equal to 71.43% of the base rent paid by DMI under its lease for the premises, plus 71.43% of any taxes, operating expenses, additional charges or any other amounts due by DMI, for a total of $56,250 per month. The initial right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and liability associated with this lease is $3.0 million.
On January 13, 2021, the Company entered into a lease agreement with Westgate 200, LLC, which was amended on March 31, 2021, for its new principal office and showroom in St. Charles, Missouri. The lease terminates on April 30, 2027, with two options to renew for additional five year periods. The base rent is $20,977 per month until September 30, 2021, and increases to $31,465 per month until April 30, 2022, after which time the base rent increases at approximately 2.5% per year thereafter. The Company must also pay its 43.4% pro rata portion of the property taxes, operating expenses and insurance costs and is also responsible to pay for the utilities used on the premises. The lease contains customary events of default. The initial ROU asset and liability associated with this lease is $2.0 million.
On June 2, 2021, 1 Stop entered into a new lease agreement with 1870 Bath Ave. LLC, a related party, for the premises located at 1870 Bath Avenue, Brooklyn, New York. The lease is for a term of ten years and provides for a base rent of $74,263 per month during the first year with annual increases to $96,896 during the last year of the term. 1 Stop is also responsible for all property taxes, insurance costs and the utilities used on the premises. The lease contains customary events of default. This lease replaces the prior lease entered into between the parties on September 1, 2018. The initial ROU asset and liability associated with this lease is $8.4 million.
On June 2, 2021, Joe’s Appliances entered into a new lease agreement with 812 5th Ave Realty LLC, a related party, for the premises located at 7812 5th Avenue, Brooklyn, New York. The lease is for a term of ten years and provides for a base rent of $6,365 per month during the first year with annual increases to $8,305 during the last year of the term. Joe’s Appliances is also responsible for all property taxes, insurance costs and the utilities used on the premises. The lease contains customary events of default. This lease replaces the prior lease entered into between the parties on September 1, 2018. The initial ROU asset and liability associated with this lease is $0.7 million.
On June 30, 2021, the Company closed an old warehouse and retail showroom in anticipation of relocating to a new facility. Accordingly, the Company wrote-off $1.4 million representing the remaining ROU asset and related leasehold improvements as of that date.
On July 29, 2021, AC Gallery entered into a lease agreement with Tom’s Flooring, LLC for the showroom and warehouse located in Largo, Florida. The lease is for a term of four months commencing on September 1, 2021 and ending on December 31, 2021 and provides for a base rent of $6,500 per month. AC Gallery must also pay its one-third pro rata portion of the common area maintenance charges, utilities and sales taxes. The lease contains customary events of default. The lease is short term and therefore not recorded as a ROU asset and liability.
On September 9, 2021, the Company entered into a warehouse agreement for a new warehouse in Somerset, New Jersey. The warehouse agreement is for a term of 26 months commencing on October 1, 2021, and ending November 29, 2023, unless the master lease for the premises is terminated earlier. The monthly storage fee is $136,274 for the first year, $140,274 for the second year, and $144,573 for the last two months. The Company also paid a security deposit of $272,549. The lease agreement contains customary events of default, representations, warranties, and covenants. The initial ROU and liability associated with this operating lease is $3.4 million.
On March 15, 2022, the Company entered into a lease agreement by and between the Company and 8780 19 Ave LLC, a New York limited liability company and related party, for the lease of a new office building located in Brooklyn, New York. The lease commenced on March 1, 2022 and shall expire on December 31, 2026. The Company has the option to extend the term of the lease for one additional term of five years. The premises of the lease contain approximately 5,835 rentable square feet. Under the terms of the lease, the Company will lease the premises at the monthly rate of $22,000 for the first year, with scheduled annual increases. The Company will receive a four-month rent concession so that its first rental payment shall become due on or before July 1, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion relates to critical accounting policies and estimates for our company. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
The Company records revenue in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers”. Revenue is recognized to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. ASC 606 also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer purchase orders, including significant judgments.
Substantially all the Company’s sales are to individual retail consumers (homeowners), builders and designers. The Company’s performance obligation is to deliver the customer’s order. Each customer order generally contains only one performance obligation based on the merchandise sale to be delivered, at which time revenue is recognized.
Control of the delivery transfers to customers when the customer can direct the use of, and obtain substantially all the benefits from, the Company’s products, which generally occurs when the customer assumes the risk of loss. The risk of loss shifts to the customer at different times depending on the method of delivery. The Company delivers products to its customers in three possible ways. The first way is through a shipment of the products through a third-party carrier from the Company’s warehouse to the customer (a “Company Shipment”). The second way is through a shipment of the products through a third-party carrier from a warehouse other than the Company’s warehouse to the customer (a “Drop Shipment”) and the third way is where the Company itself delivers the products to the customer and often also installs the product (a “Local Delivery”). In the case of a Local Delivery, the Company loads the product on to its own trucks and delivers and installs the product at the customer’s location. When a product is delivered through a Local Delivery, risk of loss passes to the customer at the time of installation and revenue is recognized upon installation at the customer’s location. In the case of a Company Shipment and a Drop Shipment, the delivery to the customer is made free on board, or FOB, shipping point (whether from the Company’s warehouse or a third party’s warehouse). Therefore, risk of loss and title transfers to the customer once the products are shipped (i.e., leaves the Company’s warehouse or a third-party’s warehouse). After shipment and prior to delivery, the customer is able to redirect the product to a different destination, which demonstrates the customer’s control over the product once shipped. Once the risk of loss has shifted to the customer, the Company has satisfied its performance obligation and the Company recognizes revenue.
The Company agrees with customers on the selling price of each transaction. This transaction price is generally based on the agreed upon sales price. In the Company’s contracts with customers, it allocates the entire transaction price to the sales price, which is the basis for the determination of the relative standalone selling price allocated to each performance obligation. Any sales tax, value added tax, and other tax the Company collects concurrently with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue.
We offer promotional financing and credit cards issued by third-party banks that manage and directly extend credit to our customers. The banks are the sole owners of the accounts receivable generated under the program and, accordingly, we do not hold any customer receivables related to these programs and act as an agent in the financing transactions with customers. We frequently offer sales incentives that entitle our customers to discounts at the time of purchase (if 3rd party financing is obtained or a seasonal sale discounts). This is not a performance obligation but is recognized as a reduction of the transaction price when the transaction occurs.
The Company also sells extended warranty contracts, acting as an agent for the warranty company and earns a commission on the warranty contracts purchased by customers; therefore, the cost of the warranty contracts is netted against warranty revenue in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. The Company assumes no liability for repairs to products on which it has sold a warranty contract or products for which no warranty is sold, as the warranty obligations associated with the sale of our products are assurance-type warranties that are a guarantee of the product’s intended functionality and, therefore, do not represent a distinct performance obligation within the context of the contract.
Sales returns are estimated based on historical return levels and our expectation of future returns. We also recognize a return asset, and corresponding adjustment to cost of sales, for our right to recover the goods returned by the customer, measured at the former carrying amount of the goods, less any expected recovery cost. At each financial reporting date, we assess our estimates of expected returns, refund liabilities, and return assets.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of purchase price over the fair value of the net assets acquired. We evaluate goodwill for impairment annually, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances that indicate the goodwill is not recoverable. When impairment indicators are identified, we may elect to perform an optional qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units has fallen below their carrying value. This assessment is based on several factors, including industry and market conditions, overall financial performance, including an assessment of cash flows in comparison to actual and projected results of prior periods. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value based on our qualitative analysis, or if we elect to skip this step, we perform a Step 1 quantitative analysis to determine the fair value of the reporting unit. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no impairments of goodwill.
Intangible Assets
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, definite-lived intangible assets primarily consisted of tradenames and customer relationships which are being amortized over their estimated useful lives, or 5 years.
The Company periodically evaluates the reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets. Once these assets are fully amortized, they are removed from the accounts. These assets are reviewed for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If impaired, intangible assets are written down to fair value based on discounted cash flows or other valuation techniques. The Company has no intangibles with indefinite lives. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no impairments in intangible assets.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company reviews its property and equipment and ROU assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. The test for impairment is required to be performed by management upon triggering events. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the future undiscounted cash flow expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Long-lived assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Impairments for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1.4 million due to an abandonment of certain right-of-use assets. There were no impairments for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Under the asset and liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases.
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recorded with respect to temporary differences in the accounting treatment of items for financial reporting purposes and for income tax purposes. Where, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some amount of recorded deferred tax assets will not be realized, a valuation allowance is established for the amount that, in management’s judgment, is sufficient to reduce the deferred tax asset to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. A tax position must meet a minimum probability threshold before a financial statement benefit is recognized. The minimum threshold is defined as a tax position that is more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by the applicable taxing authority, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefit to be recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement.