Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer Angel Pond Holdings Corporation The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K
including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K,
words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
The Company is a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. The Company intends to effectuate its initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and sale of the private placement warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our securities in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into), our shares, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional ordinary shares in a business combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B Ordinary Shares resulted in the issuance of Class A Ordinary Shares on a greater than one-to-one
basis upon conversion of the Class B Ordinary Shares;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our ordinary shares;
•
could cause a change of control if a substantial number of our ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A Ordinary Shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if the Company issues debt securities, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
the Company’s immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
•
the Company’s inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
•
the Company’s inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
•
using a substantial portion of the Company’s cash flow to pay principal and interest on the Company’s debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on the Company’s ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on the Company’s flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in the Company’s business and in the industry in which the Company operates;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on the Company’s ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of the Company’s strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to the Company’s competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $487,993 held outside the trust account that is available to us to fund our working capital requirements and $265,524,231 held inside the trust account.
Results of Operations
For the period from January 18, 2021 (date of inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $1,876,897, which consists of formation and operating costs of $1,995,702, interest income of $9,410 on monies held in our Trust Account and income related to the change in fair value of the warrant liability of $3,863,189. Our entire activity from inception to May 20, 2021 was in preparation for our initial public offering. Since the consummation of our initial public offering through December 31, 2021, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of potential initial business combination candidates, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We are incurring increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the consummation of our initial public offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of founder shares for $25,000 by the sponsor, and a total of $300,000 of loans and advances by the sponsor.
On May 20, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering in which we sold 25,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000 before underwriting fees and expenses. Simultaneously with the consummation of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,000,000 private placement warrants, each exercisable to purchase one Class A Ordinary Share at $11.50 per shares, to the sponsor, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $7,000,000.
In connection with the IPO, the underwriters were granted an option to purchase up to an additional 3,750,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any. On June 30, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option, and on July 2, 2021, the underwriters purchased 1,551,482 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) at an offering price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $15,514,820. On July 2, 2021, simultaneously with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the Company completed a private placement with the Sponsor for an additional 310,297 warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant (the “Additional Private Placement Warrants”), generating gross proceeds of $310,297. Approximately $15,514,820 of the net proceeds from the Over-Allotment Units and Additional Private Placement Warrants have been deposited in the Trust Account.
Transaction costs amounted to $15,137,827 consisting of $5,310,293 of underwriting fees, $9,293,019 of deferred underwriting fees (see Note 6) and $534,515 of other costs. $514,236 of the total underwriting costs were expenses in connection with the warrant liability and the balance was charged to equity.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us $487,993 of cash on our balance sheet and working capital of $228,329. We will use these funds primarily to find and evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. The interest income earn on the investments in our trust account are unavailable to fund operating expenses.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with the initial business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes the initial business combination, the Company would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that the initial business combination does not occur, the Company may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants issued to the sponsor. The terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Company does not expect to seek loans from parties other than the sponsor or its directors or officers or their respective affiliates as it does not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in the trust account.
Off-Balance
Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance
sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance
sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance
sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial
assets.
Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting fee of 2% of gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $6,900,000. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to aggregate deferred underwriting commissions of $9,293,019 consisting of (i) 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement by and among the Company, Goldman Sachs (Asia) L.L.C. and J.P. Morgan.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging
growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
Basic income per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income applicable to ordinary shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Consistent with FASB 480, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption, as well as their pro rata share of undistributed trust earnings consistent with the two-class
method, have been excluded from the calculation of income per ordinary share for the period from January 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Such shares, if redeemed, only participate in their pro rata share of trust earnings. Diluted income per share includes the incremental number of ordinary shares to be issued to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury method. For the period from January 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive warrants, securities or other contracts that could potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares. As a result, diluted income per ordinary share is the same as basic income per ordinary share for all periods presented.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under FASB ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” approximates the carrying amounts represented in the balance sheet primarily due to their short-term nature.
Offering Cost
Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to our initial public offering. Offering costs amounting to $15,137,827 consisting of $5,310,293 of underwriting fees, $9,293,019 of deferred underwriting fees and $534,515 of other costs. $514,236 of the total underwriting costs were expenses in connection with the warrant liability and the balance was charged to equity.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes under FASB ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not
to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2011. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position.
There is currently no taxation imposed on income by the Government of the Cayman Islands.
Ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
The Company accounts for its ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.