Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
We are a recently incorporated blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not identified any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds from our IPO and the Private Placement, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, capital stock and debt.
On December 14, 2021, we completed our IPO of 23,000,000 units (including 3,000,000 units pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriter’s over-allotment option) and the Private Placement of an aggregate of 11,700,000 private placement warrants. An aggregate of $234,600,000 in proceeds from our IPO and the Private Placement has been placed in the Trust Account.
For the period from April 13, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,325,692, which consisted of formation and operating expenses of $838,998, offset by a gain of $3,164,000 for the change in fair value of the warrant liability and an unrealized gain of $690 on marketable securities held in the Trust Account.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We did not commence operations until after the closing of our IPO in December 2021, and we have not engaged in any significant operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. There has been no material adverse change in our financial condition since the date of our audited financial statements. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The funds in the Trust Account have been and will continue to be invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds that meet certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act and that invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting fees) to complete our initial business combination. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Under the authorized shares method, each share is taxed at a graduated rate based on the number of authorized shares with a maximum aggregate tax of $200,000 per year. Under the assumed par value capital method, Delaware taxes each $1,000,000 of assumed par value capital at the rate of $400; where assumed par value would be (1) our total gross assets, divided by (2) our total issued shares of common stock, multiplied by (3) the number of our authorized shares. Our annual franchise tax obligation is expected to be capped at the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation of $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the Trust Account will be income and franchise taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we held $1,950,543 outside the Trust Account. We expect to use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $1,010,298. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our management team or our sponsor or any of their respective affiliates may, but none of them is obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. These warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our management team, or our sponsor or any of their affiliates, if any, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in the Trust Account.
Prior to our initial business combination, we expect our primary liquidity requirements to include approximately $300,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses in connection with any business combinations; $150,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; $650,000 for directors and officers insurance premiums; $270,000 for office space, utilities, and secretarial and administrative services pursuant to our agreement with our sponsor to pay our sponsor $15,000 per month for these services from December 10, 2021 until our initial business combination or liquidation; $85,000 for NYSE continued listing fees; and approximately $195,000 for working capital to cover miscellaneous expenses (including franchise taxes net of anticipated interest income).
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds held outside the Trust Account to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we may target businesses with enterprise values that are greater than we could acquire with the net proceeds from our IPO and the Private Placement, and, as a result, if the cash portion of the purchase price exceeds the amount available from the Trust Account, net of amounts needed to satisfy redemptions by public stockholders, we may be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. We may also obtain financing prior to the closing of our initial business combination to fund our working capital needs and transaction costs in connection with our search for and completion of our initial business combination. There is no limitation on our ability to raise funds through the issuance of equity or equity-linked securities or through loans, advances or other indebtedness in connection with our initial business combination, including pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop arrangements we may enter into. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Pursuant to the underwriting agreement for our IPO, the underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit sold, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee is payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination within the prescribed time period.
We have entered into a letter agreement with our sponsor pursuant to which we are required to pay our sponsor a total of $15,000 per month for office space, utilities, and secretarial and administrative services, commencing on December 10, 2021, the date that our securities were first listed on the NYSE, through the earlier of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
Please refer to Note 8 - Commitments and Contingencies of our financial statements for more information on our commitments and contractual obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Please refer to the information in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of our financial statements for a description of our critical accounting policies and estimates.