ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of Post Holdings, Inc. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements under Item 8 of this report and the “Cautionary Statement on Forward-Looking Statements” on page 1 of this report. The terms “our,” “we,” “us,” “Company” and “Post” as used herein refer to Post Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
On March 10, 2022, we completed the BellRing Spin-off (as defined below), which represented a strategic shift that had a major effect on our operations and consolidated financial results. Accordingly, the historical results of BellRing Intermediate Holdings, Inc. (formerly known as BellRing Brands, Inc.) (“Old BellRing”) and BellRing Distribution, LLC prior to the BellRing Spin-off have been presented as discontinued operations in our Consolidated Statements of Operations, Consolidated Balance Sheets and Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. The following discussion reflects continuing operations only, unless otherwise indicated. See below for additional information.
OVERVIEW
We are a consumer packaged goods holding company, operating in four reportable segments: Post Consumer Brands, Weetabix, Foodservice and Refrigerated Retail. Our products are sold through a variety of channels, including grocery, club and drug stores, mass merchandisers, foodservice, food ingredient and eCommerce.
At September 30, 2022, our reportable segments were as follows:
•Post Consumer Brands: North American ready-to-eat (“RTE”) cereal and Peter Pan nut butters;
•Weetabix: primarily United Kingdom (the “U.K.”) RTE cereal, muesli and protein-based ready-to-drink shakes;
•Foodservice: primarily egg and potato products; and
•Refrigerated Retail: primarily side dish, egg, cheese and sausage products.
Transactions
BellRing Brands, Inc.
On October 21, 2019, Old BellRing (our subsidiary at the time) closed its initial public offering (the “BellRing IPO”) of 39.4 million shares of its Class A common stock, $0.01 par value per share (the “Old BellRing Class A Common Stock”). As a result of the BellRing IPO and certain other transactions completed in connection with the BellRing IPO, Old BellRing became a publicly-traded company, with the Old BellRing Class A Common Stock being traded on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) under the ticker symbol “BRBR”, and the holding company of BellRing Brands, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“BellRing LLC”), owning 28.8% of its non-voting membership units (the “BellRing LLC units”) with us owning 71.2% of the BellRing LLC units and one share of Old BellRing’s Class B common stock, $0.01 par value per share (the “Old BellRing Class B Common Stock”). Our ownership of the BellRing LLC units and the share of Old BellRing Class B Common Stock gave us a controlling interest in Old BellRing following the BellRing IPO. This controlling interest resulted in the full consolidation of Old BellRing and its subsidiaries into our financial statements prior to the BellRing Spin-off, while the remaining interest in Old BellRing’s consolidated net earnings and net assets not held by us were allocated to noncontrolling interest (“NCI”) prior to the BellRing Spin-off.
On March 9, 2022, pursuant to the Transaction Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 26, 2021 (as amended by Amendment No.1 to the Transaction Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of February 28, 2022, the “Spin-off Agreement”), by and among us, Old BellRing, BellRing Brands, Inc. (formerly known as BellRing Distribution, LLC) (“BellRing”) and BellRing Merger Sub Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of BellRing (“BellRing Merger Sub”), we contributed our share of Old BellRing Class B Common Stock, all of our BellRing LLC units, and $550.4 million of cash to BellRing in exchange for certain limited liability company interests of BellRing and the right to receive $840.0 million in aggregate principal amount of BellRing’s 7.00% senior notes maturing in 2030 (the “BellRing Notes” and such transactions, collectively, the “BellRing Contribution”).
On March 10, 2022, BellRing converted into a Delaware corporation and changed its name to “BellRing Brands, Inc.”, and we distributed an aggregate of 78.1 million, or 80.1%, of our shares of BellRing common stock, $0.01 par value per share (“BellRing Common Stock”), to our shareholders of record as of the close of business, Central Time, on February 25, 2022 (the “Record Date”) in a pro-rata distribution (the “BellRing Distribution”). Our shareholders received 1.267788 shares of BellRing Common Stock for every one share of our common stock held as of the Record Date. No fractional shares of BellRing Common Stock were issued, and instead, cash in lieu of any fractional shares was paid to our shareholders.
Upon completion of the BellRing Distribution, BellRing Merger Sub merged with and into Old BellRing (the “BellRing Merger”), with Old BellRing continuing as the surviving corporation and becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of BellRing. Pursuant to the BellRing Merger, each outstanding share of Old BellRing Class A Common Stock was converted into one share of BellRing Common Stock plus $2.97 in cash. The transactions described above, including the BellRing Contribution, the BellRing Distribution and the BellRing Merger, as well as the Debt-for-Debt Exchange described under “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below, are collectively referred to as the “BellRing Spin-off.”
Immediately following the BellRing Spin-off, we owned approximately 14.2% of the BellRing Common Stock and our shareholders owned approximately 57.3% of the BellRing Common Stock. The former Old BellRing stockholders owned approximately 28.5% of the BellRing Common Stock, maintaining the same effective percentage ownership interest in the Old BellRing business as prior to the BellRing Spin-off. As a result of the BellRing Spin-off, the dual class voting structure in the BellRing business was eliminated. The BellRing Distribution was structured in a manner intended to qualify as a tax-free distribution to our shareholders for United States (“U.S.”) federal income tax purposes, except to the extent of any cash received in lieu of fractional shares of BellRing Common Stock.
On March 17, 2022, we utilized proceeds received in connection with the BellRing Spin-off to redeem a portion of our existing 5.75% senior notes.
On August 11, 2022, we transferred 14.8 million of our remaining shares of BellRing Common Stock to repay certain outstanding debt obligations as part of a Debt-for-Equity Exchange (as defined in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” below). As of September 30, 2022, we owned 4.6 million shares of BellRing Common Stock, or 3.4% of the equity interest in BellRing.
We incurred separation-related expenses of $29.9 million during the year ended September 30, 2022 related to the BellRing Spin-off and subsequent partial divestment of our Investment in BellRing (as defined below). For additional discussion, refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” within this section. These expenses generally included third party costs for advisory services, fees charged by other service providers and government filing fees and were included in “Selling, general and administrative expenses” in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
For additional information on the BellRing Spin-off, refer to Notes 4 and 16 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this report.
Initial Public Offering of Post Holdings Partnering Corporation
In May and June of 2021, we and Post Holdings Partnering Corporation, a special purpose acquisition company (“PHPC”), consummated the initial public offering of 34.5 million units of PHPC (the “PHPC Units” and such transaction, the “PHPC IPO”), of which PHPC Sponsor, LLC, our wholly-owned subsidiary (“PHPC Sponsor”), purchased 4.0 million PHPC Units. Each PHPC Unit consists of one share of Series A common stock of PHPC, $0.0001 par value per share (“PHPC Series A Common Stock”), and one-third of one redeemable warrant of PHPC, each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of PHPC Series A Common Stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share (the “PHPC Warrants”). The PHPC Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per PHPC Unit, generating gross proceeds to PHPC of $345.0 million. The PHPC Units, PHPC Series A Common Stock and PHPC Warrants each trade on the NYSE under the ticker symbols “PSPC.U”, “PSPC” and “PSPC WS”, respectively. Under the terms of the PHPC IPO, PHPC is required to consummate a partnering transaction by May 28, 2023 (which may be extended to August 28, 2023 in certain circumstances).
Substantially concurrently with the closing of the PHPC IPO, PHPC completed the private sale of 1.1 million units of PHPC (the “PHPC Private Placement Units”), at a purchase price of $10.00 per PHPC Private Placement Unit, to PHPC Sponsor, generating proceeds to PHPC of $10.9 million (the “PHPC Private Placement”). The PHPC Private Placement Units sold in the PHPC Private Placement are identical to the PHPC Units sold in the PHPC IPO, except that, with respect to the warrants underlying the PHPC Private Placement Units (the “PHPC Private Placement Warrants”) that are held by PHPC Sponsor or its permitted transferees, such PHPC Private Placement Warrants (i) may be exercised for cash or on a cashless basis, (ii) are not subject to being called for redemption (except in certain circumstances when the PHPC Warrants are called for redemption and a certain price per share of PHPC Series A Common Stock threshold is met) and (iii) subject to certain limited exceptions, will be subject to transfer restrictions until 30 days following the consummation of PHPC’s partnering transaction. If the PHPC Private Placement Warrants are held by holders other than PHPC Sponsor or its permitted transferees, the PHPC Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by PHPC in all redemption scenarios and exercisable by holders on the same basis as the PHPC Warrants.
In addition, we, through PHPC Sponsor’s ownership of 8.6 million shares of Series F common stock of PHPC, $0.0001 par value per share, have certain governance rights in PHPC relating to the election of PHPC directors and voting rights on amendments to PHPC’s certificate of incorporation.
In connection with the completion of the PHPC IPO, PHPC also entered into a forward purchase agreement with PHPC Sponsor (the “Forward Purchase Agreement”), providing for the purchase by PHPC Sponsor, at the election of PHPC, of up to 10.0 million units of PHPC (the “PHPC Forward Purchase Units”), subject to the terms and conditions of the Forward Purchase Agreement, with each PHPC Forward Purchase Unit consisting of one share of PHPC’s Series B common stock, $0.0001 par value per share, and one-third of one warrant to purchase one share of PHPC Series A Common Stock, for a purchase price of $10.00 per PHPC Forward Purchase Unit, in an aggregate amount of up to $100.0 million in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of PHPC’s partnering transaction.
In determining the accounting treatment of our equity interest in PHPC, management concluded that PHPC is a variable interest entity (“VIE”) as defined by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 810, “Consolidation.” A VIE is an entity in which equity investors at risk lack the characteristics of a controlling financial interest. VIEs are consolidated by the primary beneficiary, the party who has both the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance, as well as the obligation to absorb losses of the VIE or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. PHPC Sponsor is the primary beneficiary of PHPC as it has, through its equity interest, the right to receive benefits or the obligation to absorb losses from PHPC, as well as the power to direct a majority of the activities that significantly impact PHPC’s economic performance, including target identification. As such, PHPC is fully consolidated into our financial statements.
As of both September 30, 2022 and 2021, we beneficially owned 31.0% of the equity of PHPC and the net earnings and net assets of PHPC were consolidated within our financial statements. The remaining 69.0% of the consolidated net earnings and net assets of PHPC, representing the percentage of economic interest in PHPC held by the public stockholders of PHPC through their ownership of PHPC equity, were allocated to redeemable NCI. All transactions between PHPC and PHPC Sponsor, as well as related financial statement impacts, eliminate in consolidation.
Acquisitions
We completed the following acquisitions during the reporting period:
Fiscal 2022
•Lacka Foods Limited (“Lacka Foods”), acquired on April 5, 2022 and reported in our Weetabix segment.
Fiscal 2021
•Private label RTE cereal business of TreeHouse Foods, Inc. (the “PL RTE Cereal Business”), acquired on June 1, 2021 and reported in our Post Consumer Brands segment;
•Egg Beaters liquid egg brand (“Egg Beaters”), acquired on May 27, 2021 and reported in our Refrigerated Retail segment;
•Almark Foods business and related assets (“Almark”), acquired on February 1, 2021 and reported in our Foodservice and Refrigerated Retail segments; and
•Peter Pan nut butter brand (“Peter Pan”), acquired on January 25, 2021 and reported in our Post Consumer Brands segment.
Fiscal 2020
•Henningsen Foods, Inc. (“Henningsen”), acquired on July 1, 2020 and reported in our Foodservice segment.
Divestitures
We completed the sale of the Willamette Egg Farms business (the “WEF Transaction”) on December 1, 2021. Prior to the WEF Transaction, Willamette Egg Farms’ operating results were reported in our Refrigerated Retail segment.
COVID-19
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our businesses. We have experienced higher demand in our foodservice business during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 as away-from-home food demand has continued to recover from the impacts of the pandemic. While foodservice volumes remain slightly below pre-pandemic levels, we continue to expect foodservice profitability will return to pre-pandemic levels in fiscal 2023. Our products sold through retail channels generally experienced an uplift in sales through the first half of fiscal 2021, driven by increased at-home consumption in reaction to the COVID-19 pandemic, and returned to normalized levels in fiscal 2022. We have experienced inflationary headwinds across all segments of our business and we continue to mitigate these impacts through sales price increases and cost saving measures. We expect this trend to continue into fiscal 2023.
As the overall economy continues to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, uncertainty remains and such trends ultimately depend on the length and severity of the pandemic and introduction of new strains and variants of the virus;
the federal, state, and local government actions taken in response; and the macroeconomic environment. We have experienced some challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, including labor shortages, input and freight inflation and other supply chain disruptions, including input availability. We cannot predict the ultimate impact from the COVID-19 pandemic on customer and consumer demand, our suppliers or the labor market.
For additional discussion, refer to “Liquidity and Capital Resources” within this section, as well as “Cautionary Statement on Forward-Looking Statements” on page 1 of this report and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this report.
Conflict in Ukraine
The ongoing conflict in Ukraine and the subsequent economic sanctions imposed by some countries have had, and may continue to have, an adverse impact on fuel, transportation and commodity costs and may cause supply and demand disruptions in the markets we serve, including Europe. While we do not have operations in Russia, Ukraine or Belarus and do not have significant direct exposure to customers or suppliers in those countries, our businesses and operations have been negatively impacted by increased inflation, escalating energy and fuel prices and constrained availability, and thus increasing costs, of certain raw materials and other commodities, and declarations of force majeure by certain suppliers during fiscal 2022. We expect certain energy costs and raw material costs to remain elevated as a result of the ongoing conflict. To date, the economic sanctions imposed on Russian businesses have not had a direct impact on our procurement of energy and raw materials, however, there can be no assurance that additional sanctions will not be implemented. If our energy and raw materials purchases are directly impacted by sanctions, we may incur additional costs to procure such commodities. Our ability to procure energy and raw materials in the quantities necessary for the normal operations of our business may be limited. In addition, the U.K. government has established an energy price cap, which is currently keeping our U.K.-based business energy costs below prevailing market rates. The price cap is set to expire in April 2023, after which energy costs to operate our U.K.-based facilities could increase materially.
Avian Influenza
During fiscal 2022 and continuing into fiscal 2023, our Foodservice and Refrigerated Retail segments were impacted by outbreaks of avian influenza (“AI”). As a result of AI, we have incurred, and anticipate will continue to incur, increased costs related to production inefficiencies, egg supply constraints and higher market-based egg prices due to the decreased availability of eggs on the open market. We have mitigated, and plan to continue to mitigate, these increased costs through the management of volume needs with customers and pricing actions to cover the higher cost structure. Through these actions, we anticipate we will continue to mitigate the impact of AI on the profitability of our egg business. However, these actions do not contemplate further AI outbreaks, and we expect AI to have continued impact on our egg business.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Net Sales
Fiscal 2022 compared to 2021
Net sales increased $870.5 million, or 17%, during the year ended September 30, 2022. This increase was due to growth in our Foodservice, Post Consumer Brands and Refrigerated Retail segments, which included incremental contributions from our fiscal 2021 acquisitions. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020
Net sales increased $269.7 million, or 6%, during the year ended September 30, 2021. This increase was due to growth in our Foodservice, Weetabix and Refrigerated Retail segments, which included incremental contributions from our fiscal 2021 and 2020 acquisitions. These positive impacts were partially offset by a decline in our Post Consumer Brands segment. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Operating Profit
Fiscal 2022 compared to 2021
Operating profit decreased $72.1 million, or 15%, for the year ended September 30, 2022. This decrease was due to increased general corporate expenses and lower segment profit within our Refrigerated Retail, Weetabix and Post Consumer Brands segments, partially offset by increased segment profit within our Foodservice segment. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Fiscal 2021 compared to 2020
Operating profit decreased $48.8 million, or 9%, for the year ended September 30, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to lower segment profit within our Post Consumer Brands and Refrigerated Retail segments, partially offset by increased segment profit within our Foodservice and Weetabix segments, as well as decreased general corporate expenses and other. For further discussion, refer to “Segment Results” within this section.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense decreased $14.8 million, or 4%, for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by a lower weighted-average interest rate when compared to fiscal 2021, lower average outstanding principal amounts of debt compared to the prior year and increased interest income. Our weighted-average interest rate on our total outstanding debt was 5.0% and 5.1% for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Interest expense decreased $1.3 million, or less than 1%, for the year ended September 30, 2021, compared to the prior year. The decrease was driven by a lower weighted-average interest rate when compared to fiscal 2020, decreased amortization of debt issuance costs, deferred financing fees and debt discount of $1.7 million and increased amortization of debt premium of $1.7 million. These positive impacts were partially offset by lower interest income of $5.6 million on our cash balances. Our weighted-average interest rate on our total outstanding debt was 5.1% and 5.3% for the years ended September 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
For additional information on our debt, refer to Note 16 within “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” in Item 8 of this report and “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” in