Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “Powered Brands,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Powered Brands. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on September 18, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses that we have not yet selected (“Business Combination”). We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, engaged in any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with any business combination target with respect to an initial business combination with us.
Our Sponsor is PB Management, a Cayman Islands exempted company. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on January 7, 2021. On January 12, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 3,600,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments (the “Over-Allotment Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $276.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $15.8 million, of which approximately $9.7 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,180,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7.8 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $276.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and were invested by the trustee only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination by January 12, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from September 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for Business Combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We generated non-operating income in the form of investment income from the investments held in the Trust Account following the closing of the Initial Public Offering.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $2.8 million, which consisted of income of approximately $4.4 million from the changes in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $167,000 from the issuance of working capital warrants and approximately $26,000 from the investments held in the Trust Account, partially offset by approximately $1.1 million in general and administrative expenses, approximately $177,000 in general and administrative expenses - related party, and approximately $480,000 in transaction costs associated with the issuance of warrants.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.6 million in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $0.7 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from Sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, a loan of approximately $141,000 from our Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note (“Note”), and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. We repaid the Note in full on January 19, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. On October 15, 2021, we entered into a promissory note with our Sponsor and may borrow up to $277,649 from our Sponsor for ongoing expenses reasonably related to our business and the consummation of the Business Combination (“Working Capital Promissory Note”). The full amount of the Working Capital Promissory Note was drawn on October 15, 2021, and immediately converted into warrants. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, no balance was outstanding under the Working Capital Loans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” our management has determined that the mandatory liquidation date and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. If we are unable to complete a business combination by January 12, 2023, then we will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 12, 2023.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services
On October 15, 2021, we entered into an Administrative Services Agreement with the Sponsor, pursuant to which the Sponsor will provide certain administrative services to us, and we will reimburse the Sponsor up to $10,000 a month based on receipts submitted by the Sponsor to us, and $12,650 per month, in each case subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the agreement. In addition, we made a one-time payment to Sponsor on the date of the agreement equal to $125,849. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred and expensed approximately $177,000 under this agreement, included in general and administrative expenses - related party on the accompanying statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, no amounts were outstanding for these services.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, Class A ordinary shares underlying the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 12, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or approximately $5.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate is payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When the Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When the Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheets at fair
value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities are included in income on investments held in the Trust Account in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information. As of December, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had approximately $276.0 million and $0 of investments held in the Trust Account, respectively.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging, Embedded Derivatives” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We account for our Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering, our Private Placement Warrants and our Working Capital Warrants as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering was initially measured using a Monte-Carlo simulation and subsequently has been measured at each measurement date based on the listed trading price of such warrants when separately listed and traded. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the Private Placement was initially estimated using a modified Black-Scholes model and, as of December 31, 2021, determined by reference to the Public Warrant listed trading price. On October 15, 2021, we issued Working Capital Warrants to our Sponsor. Like with the Private Placement Warrants, the fair value of the Working Capital Warrants has been measured by reference to the Public Warrant trading price. As the transfer of Private Placement Warrants and Working Capital Warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the Private Placement Warrants and the Working Capital Warrants having substantially the same terms as the Public Warrants, the Company determined that the fair value of each Private Placement Warrant and each Working Capital Warrant is equivalent to that of each Public Warrant. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Share Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders' equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, 27,600,000 and 0 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, respectively, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of the balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering, the Private Placement and the Working Capital Loan to purchase an aggregate of 14,565,099 ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. The number of weighted average Class B ordinary shares for calculating basic net income per ordinary share was reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 900,000 Class B ordinary shares that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or part by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied as of December 31, 2021, we included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.