ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is intended to provide a better understanding of the significant changes in trends relating to the Company’s financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and capital resources. This section should be read in conjunction with the disclosures regarding “Forward-Looking Statements” set forth in Item I. Business-Forward Looking Statements, as well as the discussion set forth in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, including the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Summary
Our principal business is attracting deposits from small- and middle-market businesses, corporations, and consumers, and investing those deposits, together with funds generated from operations and borrowings, primarily in commercial loans and various types of commercial real estate loans. The Company expects to fund substantially all of the loans that it originates or purchases through deposits, FHLB advances and other borrowings, and internally generated funds. Deposit flows and cost of funds are influenced by prevailing market rates of interest primarily on competing investments, account maturities, and the levels of savings in the Company’s market area. The Company generates the majority of its revenues from interest income on loans that it originates and purchases, and income from investments in securities. The Company also provides its clients with financial products and services which generate noninterest income such as service charges on customer accounts, trust custodial account fees, and escrow and exchange fees. The Company’s revenues are partially offset by interest expense paid on deposits and borrowings, the provision for credit losses, and noninterest expenses, such as operating expenses. The Company’s operating expenses primarily consist of employee compensation and benefit expenses, premises and occupancy expenses, data processing expenses, deposit expenses, and other general expenses. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by prevailing economic conditions, competition, acquisitions, government policies, and other actions of regulatory agencies.
The COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 outbreak was declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern by the World Health Organization on January 30, 2020 and a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and national health emergency has caused significant disruption in the U.S. and international economies and financial markets. The operations and business results of the Company have been and could be materially adversely affected in future periods.
In early March 2020, the Company began preparing for potential disruptions and government limitations of activity in the markets in which we serve. We activated our Business Continuity Program and Pandemic Preparedness Plan, and were able to quickly execute on multiple initiatives to adjust our operations to protect the health and safety of our employees and clients. We expanded remote-access availability to ensure a greater number of employees have the capability to work from home or other remote locations without impacting our operations while continuing to provide a superior level of customer service. We also reconfigured our corporate offices and branches to promote social distancing for employees by erecting physical barriers. In addition, the Company issued a Company-wide employee appreciation bonus related to the COVID-19 pandemic during the fourth quarter of 2020 and created a vaccine award program. Beginning in April 2021, non-exempt employees receive up to four hours of paid time off for COVID-19 vaccination appointments and exempt employees will receive flexibility for vaccination appointments. The Company also offered rapid and PCR COVID-19 testing to all employees.
Since the beginning of the crisis, we have been in close contact with our clients, assessing the level of impact on their businesses, and implementing a process to evaluate each client’s specific situation, and where appropriate, providing relief programs. We also enhanced client awareness of our digital banking offerings to ensure that we continue to provide a superior level of customer service. We have taken steps to comply with various government directives regarding social distancing and use of personal protective equipment in the work place, and we are following the guidance from the Centers for Disease Control (“CDC”) to protect our employees.
The Company continued its efforts to monitor the loan portfolio to identify potential at-risk segments and line of credit draws for deviations from normal activity, and support our customers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to the following:
•Participated in the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”).
We were able to quickly establish our process for participating in the SBA PPP that enabled our clients to utilize this valuable resource beginning in April 2020. Our team executed PPP loans in the initial two rounds of the program, which allowed us to further strengthen and deepen our client relationships, while positively impacting tens of thousands of individuals. In July 2020, the Bank sold its entire SBA PPP loan portfolio with an aggregate amortized cost of $1.13 billion to a seasoned and experienced nonbank lender and servicer of SBA loans, resulting in improved balance sheet liquidity and a gain on sale of approximately $18.9 million, net of net deferred origination fees and net purchase discounts.
•Implemented a temporary loan modification program for borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, including payment deferrals, fee waivers, and extensions of repayment terms.
In keeping with regulatory guidance to work with borrowers during this unprecedented situation and as outlined in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), the Bank established a COVID-19 temporary modification program, including interest-only payments, or full payment deferrals for clients that are adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act also addressed COVID-19 related modifications and specified that such modifications made during the eligible periods on loans that were current as of December 31, 2019 are not classified as TDRs. In accordance with interagency guidance issued in April 2020, these short-term modifications made to a borrower affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental shutdown orders, including payment deferrals, fee waivers, and extensions of repayment terms, do not need to be classified as TDRs if the loans were current at the time a modification plan was implemented. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (“CAA”), signed into law on December 27, 2020, extended the period to include modifications to loans held by financial institutions executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022, or (ii) 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency. As of December 31, 2021, there were no loans outstanding under a modification due to COVID-19 hardship under the CARES Act. Please also see Note 4 - Loans Held for Investment for additional information.
Additionally, the CARES Act provides for relief on existing and new SBA loans through the Small Business Debt Relief program. As part of this program, the SBA will automatically pay principal, interest, and fees of certain SBA loans for a period of six months for both existing loans and new loans issued prior to September 27, 2020. On December 27, 2020, the CAA authorized a second round of SBA payments on covered loans approved before March 27, 2020, for a two-month period beginning with the first payment due on the loan on or after February 1, 2021 and for an additional three-month period for certain eligible borrowers. For new loans approved beginning on February 2, 2021 and ending on September 30, 2021, the SBA will make the payments for a three-month period subject to the availability of funds. At December 31, 2021, approximately $5.3 million of loans are eligible for this relief. The CARES Act also provides for mortgage payment relief and a foreclosure moratorium.
The extent to which the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the potential existence of additional COVID-19 variants, impacts the Company’s business, asset valuations, financial condition, and results of operations, as well as its regulatory capital and liquidity ratios, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the effectiveness and the level of acceptance of COVID-19 vaccines, and the actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Material adverse impacts may include all or a combination of valuation impairments on our intangible assets, investments, loans, and deferred tax assets.
While economic conditions have improved, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has placed strain on certain businesses and service providers, many of which have not been able to conduct operations in their usual manner. Should the COVID-19 pandemic persist, we anticipate it could have an impact on the following:
•Loan growth and interest income - Economic activity expanded during 2021, but macroeconomic conditions have not yet fully recovered to the levels observed prior to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Further, supply chain disruption and inflationary pressures have increased in 2021. If the economic recovery begins to wane, it may have an impact on our borrowers, the businesses they operate, and their financial condition. Our borrowers may have less demand for credit needed to invest in and expand their businesses, as well as less demand for real estate and consumer loans; such factors would place pressure on the level of interest-earning assets, which may negatively impact our interest income.
•Credit quality - Should there be a decline in economic activity, the markets we serve could experience increases in unemployment, declines in consumer confidence, and a reluctance on the part of businesses to invest in and expand their operations, among other things. Such factors may result in additional weakness in economic conditions, place strain on our borrowers, and ultimately impact the credit quality of our loan portfolio. We expect this could result in increases in the level of past due, nonaccrual, and classified loans, as well as higher net charge-offs. While economic conditions have improved considerably since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the first quarter of 2020, there can be no assurance the recovery will continue. As such, should we experience future deterioration in the credit quality of our loan portfolio, it may contribute to the need for additional provisions for credit losses.
•CECL - On January 1, 2020, the Company adopted ASC 326, which requires the Company to measure credit losses on certain financial assets, such as loans and debt securities, using the CECL model. The CECL model for measuring credit losses is highly dependent upon expectations of future economic conditions and requires management judgment. Should the recovery in economic conditions begin to wane and expectations concerning future economic conditions deteriorate, the Company may be required to record additional provisions for credit losses under the CECL model.
•Impairment charges - Should the recovery in economic conditions fail to continue, it may adversely impact the Company’s operating results and the value of certain of our assets. As a result, the Company may be required to write-down the value of certain assets such as goodwill, intangible assets, or deferred tax assets when there is evidence to suggest their value has become impaired or will not be realizable at a future date.
The U.S. government as well as other state and local policy makers have responded to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic with actions geared to support not only the health and well-being of the public, but also consumers, businesses, and the economy as a whole. In addition, during the first quarter of 2021, the President signed into law the American Rescue Plan, which provides approximately $1.9 trillion in various forms of economic stimulus and aid to individuals and state and local governments that have been affected by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. However, the ultimate impact and overall effectiveness of these actions is difficult to determine at this time.
Acquisition of Opus
Effective as of June 1, 2020, the Corporation completed the acquisition of Opus, a California-chartered state bank headquartered in Irvine, California, pursuant to a definitive agreement dated as of January 31, 2020. At closing, Opus had $8.32 billion in total assets, $5.94 billion in gross loans, and $6.91 billion in total deposits and operated 46 banking offices located throughout California, Washington, Oregon, and Arizona. As a result of the Opus acquisition, the Corporation acquired specialty lines of business, including trust and escrow services.
Pursuant to the terms of the merger agreement, the consideration paid to Opus shareholders consisted of whole shares of the Corporation’s common stock and cash in lieu of fractional shares of the Corporation’s common stock. Upon consummation of the transaction, (i) each share of Opus common stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the acquisition was canceled and exchanged for the right to receive 0.900 shares of the Corporation’s common stock, with cash to be paid in lieu of fractional shares at a rate of $19.31 per share, and (ii) each share of Opus Series A non-cumulative, non-voting preferred stock issued and outstanding immediately prior to the effective time of the acquisition was converted into and canceled in exchange for the right to receive that number of shares of the Corporation’s common stock equal to the product of (X) the number of shares of Opus common stock into which such share of Opus preferred stock was convertible in connection with, and as a result of, the acquisition, and (Y) 0.900, in each case, plus cash in lieu of fractional shares of the Corporation’s common stock.
The Corporation issued 34,407,403 shares, net of 165,136 shares for tax withholding from Opus equity award holders, of the Corporation’s common stock valued at $21.62 per share, which was the closing price of the Corporation’s common stock on May 29, 2020, the last trading day prior to the consummation of the acquisition, and paid cash in lieu of fractional shares. The Corporation assumed Opus’s warrants and options, which represented the issuance of up to approximately 406,778 and 9,538 additional shares of the Corporation’s common stock, valued at approximately $1.8 million and $46,000, respectively, and issued substitute restricted stock units in an aggregate amount of $328,000. The value of the total transaction consideration paid amounted to approximately $749.6 million. The Opus warrants assumed by the Corporation expired unexercised on September 30, 2020 and no longer remain outstanding. The Opus options assumed by the Corporation have been fully exercised during the third quarter of 2020.
As a result of the Opus acquisition, the Company acquired Opus and recorded net assets of $656.6 million. The estimated fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed primarily consist of the following:
•$5.81 billion of loans
•$937.1 million of cash and cash equivalents
•$829.9 million of investment securities
•$93.0 million of goodwill
•$16.1 million of core deposit intangible
•$3.2 million of customer relationship intangible
•$6.92 billion of deposits
The fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed were determined based on the requirements of FASB ASC Topic 820: Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. Such fair values are preliminary estimates and are subject to adjustment for up to one year after the merger date or when additional information relative to the closing date fair values becomes available and such information is considered final, whichever is earlier. Since the acquisition, the Company has made a net adjustment of $146,000 related to loans, deferred tax assets, other assets, and other liabilities. During the second quarter of 2021, the Company finalized its fair values analysis of the acquired assets and assumed liabilities associated with this acquisition.
The client account integration and system conversion of Opus was completed in October 2020. At the same time, as a result of the Opus acquisition, the Bank consolidated 20 branch offices primarily in California, Washington, and Arizona into nearby branch offices. The consolidated branches were identified largely based on the proximity of neighboring branches, historic growth, and market opportunity to improve further the overall efficiency of operations in line with the Bank's ongoing cost reduction initiatives. For additional information about the acquisition of Opus, please see Note 25 - Acquisitions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements contained in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We have established various accounting policies that govern the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements in Item 8 hereof. The Company’s significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain accounting policies require management to make estimates and assumptions that have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities as well as the Company’s results of operations; management considers these to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions management uses associated with these policies are based on historical experience and other factors, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions, which could have a material impact on the carrying value of the Company’s assets and liabilities as well as the Company’s results of operations in future reporting periods.
Allowance for Credit Losses on Loans and Off-Balance Sheet Commitments
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company accounts for credit losses on loans and off-balance sheet commitments, such as unfunded loan commitments, in accordance with ASC 326 - Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, which requires the Company to record an estimate of expected lifetime credit losses for loans and unfunded loan commitments at the time of origination or acquisition. The ACL is maintained at a level deemed appropriate by management to provide for expected credit losses in the portfolio as of the date of the consolidated statements of financial condition. Estimating expected credit losses requires management to use relevant forward-looking information, including the use of reasonable and supportable forecasts. The estimation process in determining the ACL involves a significant degree of judgement, requiring management to make numerous estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are subject to change in future periods, which may have a material impact on the level of the ACL and the Company’s results of operations.
The measurement of the ACL is performed by collectively evaluating loans with similar risk characteristics, as well as the individual evaluation of loans that are deemed to no longer possess characteristics similar to others in the loan portfolio. The Company measures the ACL on commercial real estate loans and commercial loans through a discounted cash flow approach using a loan’s effective interest rate, while a historical loss rate methodology is used to determine the ACL on retail loans. The Company’s discounted cash flow methodology incorporates a probability of default and loss given default model, which is impacted by expectations of future economic conditions. The Company’s ACL methodology also incorporates estimates and assumptions concerning loan prepayments, future draws on revolving credit facilities, and the probability an unfunded commitment will be drawn upon.
The use of reasonable and supportable forecasts in the ACL methodology requires significant judgment, such as selecting forecast scenarios and related scenario-weighting, as well as determining the appropriate length of the forecast horizon. Management leverages economic projections from a reputable and independent third party to inform and provide its reasonable and supportable economic forecasts. Other internal and external indicators of economic forecasts may also be considered by management when developing forecast metrics. Forecasts of economic conditions and expected credit losses are made over a two-year time horizon, before reverting to long-term average loss rates over a period of three years. Changes in economic forecasts, in conjunction with changes in loan specific attributes, have an impact on a loan’s probability of default and loss given default, which can drive changes in the determination of the ACL and can have a significant impact on the provision for credit losses.
The Company’s ACL methodology also includes adjustments for qualitative factors, where appropriate. Qualitative adjustments may be related to and include, but not limited to, factors such as: (i) management’s assessment of economic forecasts used in the model and how those forecasts align with management’s overall evaluation of current and expected economic conditions, (ii) organization specific risks such as credit concentrations, collateral specific risks, regulatory risks, and external factors that may ultimately impact credit quality, (iii) potential model limitations such as limitations identified through backtesting, and other limitations associated with factors such as underwriting changes, acquisition of new portfolios, changes in portfolio segmentation, and (iv) management’s overall assessment of the adequacy of the ACL, including an assessment of model data inputs used to determine the ACL.
The Company has a credit portfolio review process designed to detect problem loans. Problem loans are typically those of a substandard or worse internal risk grade, and may consist of loans on nonaccrual status, troubled debt restructurings, loans where the likelihood of foreclosure on underlying collateral has increased, collateral dependent loans, and other loans where concern or doubt over the ultimate collectability of all contractual amounts due has become elevated. Such loans may, in the opinion of management, be deemed to no longer possess risk characteristics similar to other loans in the loan portfolio, and as such may require individual evaluation to determine an appropriate ACL for the loan. When a loan is individually evaluated, the Company typically measures the expected credit loss for the loan based on a discounted cash flow approach, unless the loan has been deemed collateral dependent. Collateral dependent loans are loans where the repayment of the loan is expected to come from the operation of and/or eventual liquidation of the underlying collateral. The ACL for collateral dependent loans is determined using estimates for the fair value of the underlying collateral, less costs to sell.
Although management uses the best information available to derive estimates necessary to measure an appropriate level of the ACL, future adjustments to the ACL may be necessary due to economic, operating, regulatory, and other conditions that extend beyond the Company’s control. In addition, various regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review the Company’s ACL. Such agencies may require the Company to recognize changes to the ACL based on judgments different from those of management. Further, as the size, complexity, and composition of the loan portfolio changes over time, such as through the acquisition of other financial institutions, new product offerings, client demand for various types of credit, and changes in our geographic footprint, the Company may seek to make additional enhancements to its ACL methodology. Such enhancements may have an impact on the level of the ACL in future periods.
The ACL is recorded through a charge to provision for credit losses and is reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries on loans previously charged-off. It is the Company’s policy to promptly charge-off loan balances at the time they have been deemed uncollectible.
Please also see Note 5 - Allowance for Credit Losses, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional discussion concerning the Company’s ACL methodology.
Allowance for Loan Losses
Prior to the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, the Company maintained an allowance for loan and leases losses (“ALLL”) in accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies and ASC 310, Receivables. The ALLL was maintained at a level deemed appropriate by management to provide for known or probable incurred losses in the portfolio as of the date of the consolidated statements of financial condition. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the ALLL was based on an evaluation of the composition of the portfolio, actual historical loss experience, industry charge-off experience on income property loans, current economic conditions, and other relevant factors in the area in which the Company’s lending and real estate activities are based. These factors may affect a borrower’s ability to pay as well as the value of the underlying collateral securing loans. The allowance was calculated by applying loss factors to loans held for investment according to loan type and loan credit classification. The loss factors were based primarily upon the Bank’s historical loss experience and industry charge-off experience, and are evaluated on a quarterly basis. Loan credit classifications were based on an internal loan review system, which was designed to provide for the detection of problem loans and assign an appropriate level of ALLL to them. The ALLL was periodically adjusted to reflect the estimated potential impact that relevant internal and external factors may have on losses inherent in the loan portfolio. These factors typically consisted of:
•Changes in lending policies and procedures, including underwriting standards and collection, charge-offs, and recovery practices;
•Changes in the nature and volume of the loan portfolio, including new types of lending;
•Changes in the experience, ability, and depth of lending management and other relevant staff that may have an impact on our loan portfolio;
•Changes in the volume and severity of adversely classified or graded loans;
•Changes in the quality of our loan review system and the management oversight;
•The existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations;
•Changes in national, regional, and local economic conditions, including trends in real estate values and the interest rate environment;
•Changes in the value of the underlying collateral for collateral-dependent loans; and
•The effect of external factors, such as competition, legal developments, and regulatory requirements on the level of estimated credit losses in our current loan portfolio.
The ALLL was increased by provisions for loan losses, and reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries of amounts previously charged-off.
Business Combinations
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting. Upon obtaining control of an acquired entity, the Company records all identifiable assets and liabilities at their estimated fair values. Goodwill is recorded when the consideration paid for an acquired entity exceeds the estimated fair value of the net assets acquired. Changes to the acquisition date fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be made as adjustments to goodwill during a one year measurement period following the date of acquisition. Such adjustments are attributable to additional information obtained related to fair value estimates of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred.
Income Taxes
The Company is subject to federal and state taxation in various tax jurisdictions within the United States. Current income taxes are based on estimates for amounts payable or receivable on tax returns for the current year. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns using the asset-liability method. In estimating future tax consequences, all expected future events other than enactments of changes in tax laws or tax rates are considered. The effect on deferred taxes of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. Deferred tax assets are to be recognized for temporary differences that will result in deductible amounts in future years and for tax carryforwards if, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. Changes in income taxes can occur when, among other things, there are changes in tax laws, changes in tax rates, and/or changes in statutory or regulatory guidance; any of which may have an impact on current and deferred income taxes, and may have a material impact on our results of operations. The Company’s income tax positions are evaluated quarterly. See also Note 14 - Income Taxes of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional disclosure related to income taxes.
Non-GAAP Measurements
The Company uses certain non-GAAP financial measures to provide meaningful supplemental information regarding the Company’s operational performance and to enhance investors’ overall understanding of such financial performance. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance, financial position, or cash flows that exclude (or include) amounts that are included in (or excluded from) the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. However, these non-GAAP financial measures are supplemental and are not a substitute for an analysis based on GAAP measures and may not be comparable to non-GAAP financial measures that may be presented by other companies. Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information to gain an understanding of the operating results of our core business. The non-GAAP measures the Company uses include the following:
•Tangible common equity amounts and ratios, tangible assets, and tangible book value per share: These figures represent total shareholders’ equity reduced by the amount of intangible assets, including goodwill. Given that the use of these measures is prevalent among banking regulators, investors, and analysts, we disclose them in addition to equity-to-assets ratio, total assets, and book value per share, respectively.
•Return on average tangible common equity: This figure is calculated by excluding amortization of intangible assets from net income and excluding the average intangible assets and average goodwill from the average stockholders’ equity during the period.
•Efficiency ratio: This figure represents the ratio of noninterest expense less other real estate owned operations, amortization of intangible assets, and merger-related expense to the sum of net interest income before provision for credit losses and total noninterest income, less gain/(loss) on sale of securities, other income - security recoveries on investment securities, gain/(loss) on sale of other real estate owned, and gain/(loss) from debt extinguishment.
•Core net interest income and core net interest margin: Core net interest income is calculated by excluding scheduled accretion income, accelerated accretion income, premium amortization on CDs, and nonrecurring nonaccrual interest paid from net interest income. The core net interest margin is calculated as the ratio of core net interest income to average interest-earning assets.
•Pre-provision net revenue: Pre-provision net revenue is calculated by excluding income tax, provision for credit losses, and merger-related expenses from net income.
•Noninterest expense excluding merger-related expense as a percent of average assets: We calculate noninterest expense (excluding merger-related expense) as a percent of average assets by excluding merger-related expenses from the noninterest expense and dividing by average assets.
The following tables provide reconciliations of the non-GAAP measures with financial measures defined by GAAP:
Tangible Common Equity Amounts and Ratios
Return on Average Tangible Common Equity
______________________________
(1) Adjusted by statutory tax rate
Efficiency Ratio
Core Net Interest Margin
Pre-Provision Net Revenue
Noninterest Expense Excluding Merger-Related Expense
Financial Highlights
The following table sets forth certain of our financial highlights at or for each of the years presented. This data should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included herein at Item 8.
Operating Results
The Company’s results of operations are presented for 2021 compared to 2020. Some tables include additional periods to comply with disclosure requirements or to illustrate the trend of financial results for the periods presented in the financial statements. For a discussion of Company’s results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019 and other 2019 information not included herein, please refer to Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Overview. The comparability of financial information is affected by our acquisition of Opus, completed on June 1, 2020.
Net Income. For 2021, we reported net income of $339.9 million, or $3.58 per diluted share, compared to net income of $60.4 million, or $0.75 per diluted share, for 2020, and net income of $159.7 million, or $2.60 per diluted share, for 2019. The increase from 2020 was primarily due to a $70.9 million provision recapture in 2021, compared to a $191.8 million provision expense in 2020, an $88.2 million increase in net interest income, and a $49.1 million decrease in merger-related expense, partially offset by a $108.7 million increase in income tax expense in 2021. Our pre-provision net revenue, which excludes provision recapture, merger-related expense, and tax expense from net income, was $390.0 million in 2021, compared to $313.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an $88.2 million increase in net interest income and a $36.5 million increase in noninterest income, partially offset by a $48.3 million increase in our operating expense (noninterest expense excluding merger-related expense). The increase in our pre-provision net revenue largely reflected our organic loan growth and revenue from our fee-based businesses from Pacific Premier Trust and Commerce Escrow divisions acquired from the Opus acquisition.
For 2021, the Company’s return on average assets was 1.66%, return on average equity was 12.14%, and return on average tangible common equity was 19.30%. For 2020, the Company’s return on average assets was 0.36%, return on average equity was 2.49%, and return on average tangible common equity was 4.93%. For 2019, the Company’s return on average assets was 1.38%, return on average equity was 8.00%, and return on average tangible common equity was 15.69%.
Net Interest Income. Our primary source of revenue is net interest income, which is the difference between the interest earned on loans, investment securities, and interest-earning balances with financial institutions (“interest-earning assets”) and the interest paid on deposits and borrowings (“interest-bearing liabilities”). Net interest margin is net interest income expressed as a percentage of average interest-earning assets. Net interest income is affected by changes in volume, mix, and rates of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as days in a period.
For 2021, net interest income totaled $662.4 million, an increase of $88.2 million, or 15.35%, from 2020. This reflected an increase in average interest-earning assets of $3.52 billion, primarily due to a full year’s impact of the acquisition of Opus on June 1, 2020, which added $5.81 billion of loans, $937.1 million of cash and cash equivalents, and $829.9 million of investment securities, as well as organic loan growth of $4.07 billion, investment securities purchases of $2.28 billion, and a lower cost of funds, partially offset by an increase in average interest-bearing liabilities of $2.02 billion, loan maturities and prepayments, investment securities principal payments, amortization, and redemption, as well as lower average loan and investment yields. Net interest margin decreased 23 basis points to 3.51% in 2021 from 3.74% in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to yields on interest-earning assets decreasing 41 basis points, driven primarily by the shift in interest-earning asset mix, and the deployment of excess liquidity into highly rated, lower-yielding investment securities, as well as the impact of the lower-yielding Opus loan portfolio added in June 2020, partially offset by our cost of funds decreasing 20 basis points, driven principally by lower rates paid on deposits as well as a favorable shift in average deposit mix.
The following table presents the average dollar amounts from selected balance sheet categories calculated from daily average balances and the total dollar amount, including adjustments to yields and costs, of:
•interest income earned from average interest-earning assets and the resultant yields; and
•interest expense incurred from average interest-bearing liabilities and resultant costs, expressed as rates.
The table also sets forth our net interest income, net interest rate spread, and net interest rate margin for the periods indicated. The net interest rate spread represents the difference between the yield on interest-earning assets and the cost of interest-bearing liabilities. The net interest rate margin reflects the ratio of net interest income as a percentage of interest-earning assets for the year.
______________________________
(1) Average balance includes loans held for sale and nonperforming loans and is net of deferred loan origination fees/costs and discounts/premiums.
(2) Interest income includes net discount accretion of $36.7 million, $33.2 million, and $20.6 million, respectively.
(3) Represents net interest income divided by average interest-earning assets.
(4) Represents annualized interest expense on deposits divided by the sum of average interest-bearing deposits and noninterest-bearing deposits.
(5) Represents annualized total interest expense divided by the sum of average total interest-bearing liabilities and noninterest-bearing deposits.
Changes in our net interest income are a function of changes in volume, mix, and rates of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as days in a period. The following table presents the impact the volume, days in period, and rate changes have had on our net interest income for the years indicated. For each category of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, we have provided information on changes to our net interest income with respect to:
•Changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by the prior period rate);
•Changes in days in a period (changes in days in a period multiplied by daily interest);
•Changes in interest rates (changes in interest rates multiplied by the prior period volume and includes the recognition of discounts/premiums and deferred fees/costs); and
•The net change or the combined impact of volume, days in a period, and rate changes allocated proportionately to changes in volume, days in a period, and changes in interest rates.
Provision for Credit Losses. For 2021, we recorded a total of $70.9 million provision recapture, compared to a $191.8 million provision expense in 2020. The provision recapture for 2021 was comprised of a $67.1 million provision recapture for loan losses, a $3.8 million provision recapture for unfunded commitments, and a $22,000 provision expense for held-to-maturity securities that were either transferred from available-for-sale securities or purchased during 2021. The provision recaptures for loans and unfunded commitments were reflective of improving economic forecasts employed in the Company’s CECL model and the favorable asset quality profile of the loan portfolio relative to prior periods, partially offset by an increase in loans held for investment and unfunded commitments.
The provision for credit losses in 2020 included a $172.3 million provision expense for loan losses and $19.6 million provision expense for unfunded commitments, primarily reflective of unfavorable economic forecasts in the Company’s CECL model driven by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the Day 1 provision for credit losses of $84.4 million resulting from the acquisition of Opus, which included $75.9 million for loans held for investment and the provision for unfunded commitments of $8.6 million.
Net loan charge-offs for 2021 totaled $3.2 million, compared to $16.9 million in 2020. The decrease from 2020 was due to lower charge-offs across all loan portfolio segments.
Noninterest Income. For 2021, noninterest income totaled $107.9 million, an increase of $36.5 million, or 51.2%, from 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $21.5 million increase in trust custodial account fees from our Pacific Premier Trust division, a $4.6 million increase in escrow and exchange fee income attributable to our Commerce Escrow division, and a $4.1 million increase in earnings on bank-owned life insurance (“BOLI”), all primarily attributable to the acquisition of Opus. The increase in earnings on BOLI was also due in part to a $150.0 million addition to BOLI in June 2021. Additionally, net gain on sales from investments securities increased $3.0 million as the Bank sold $884.2 million of securities during 2021 compared to $752.6 million in 2020, and other income increased $3.8 million, driven by a $2.9 million increase in SBA PPP referral fees and a $2.0 million increase in income on CRA-related equity investments. These increases were partially offset by a $4.2 million decrease in net gain from loan sales, to $4.4 million in 2021 from $8.6 million in 2020.
During 2021, we sold $41.1 million of loans with an average price of 110.0%, compared to 2020 in which we sold $1.38 billion of loans with an average price of 100.4%. In 2021, total loans sold included $41.1 million in SBA and U.S. Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) loans, for a net gain of $4.1 million, and fully charged-off loans for a net gain of $292,000, compared with sales of $1.18 billion in SBA loans, primarily PPP loans, and USDA loans for a net gain of $20.3 million, and $193.8 million in other loans for a net loss of $11.7 million in 2020.
In addition, the Bank had increases of $2.5 million and $963,000 in service charges on deposit accounts and debit card interchange fee income, respectively, from 2020, reflecting growth in core transaction deposit accounts from both organic growth and the Opus acquisition.
Noninterest Expense. For 2021, noninterest expense totaled $380.3 million, a decrease of $842,000, or 0.2%, from 2020. Merger-related expense relating to the acquisition of Opus on June 1, 2020, decreased $49.1 million as compared to 2020. The increase in noninterest expense excluding merger-related expense was primarily due to higher compensation and benefits of $35.2 million, higher premises and occupancy expense of $4.9 million, and higher data processing expense of $3.3 million, all of which was attributable to increases in personnel, branches, and operations retained from the acquisition of Opus. The remaining expense categories grew by $4.8 million, or 5.5%, in 2021, due to both a combination of expense growth related to the acquisition of Opus and increased expenses to support the Company’s organic growth in loans and deposits. The most significant increases in expense from these remaining categories were $4.7 million in other expense, $2.9 million in legal professional services, and $1.7 million in FDIC insurance premiums. These increases were partially offset by decreases of $4.0 million in deposit expense, $1.3 million in office expenses, and $1.1 million in amortization of intangible assets.
Our efficiency ratio was 48.4% for 2021, compared to 49.8% for 2020 and 50.8% for 2019.
Income Taxes. The Company recorded income tax expense of $120.9 million in 2021, compared to $12.3 million in 2020, and $58.0 million in 2019. Our effective tax rate was 26.2% for 2021, 16.9% for 2020, and 26.7% for 2019. The effective tax rate for each year differs from the 21% federal statutory rate due to the impact of state taxes as well as various permanent tax differences, including tax-exempt income from municipal securities and loans, BOLI income, tax benefits associated with low-income housing tax credit (“LIHTC”) investments, merger-related expenses, the settlement of stock compensation, and other permanent differences.
The lower effective tax rate from 2020 is primarily attributable to the effect of favorable permanent differences on lower pre-tax book income and a favorable tax rate benefit associated with changes to the 2018 net operating loss (“NOL”) carryback rules from the enactment of the CARES Act on March 27, 2020.
See Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 hereof for further discussion of income taxes and an explanation of the factors that impact our effective tax rate.
Financial Condition
At December 31, 2021, total assets of the Company were $21.09 billion, an increase of $1.36 billion, or 7%, from total assets of $19.74 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $1.07 billion increase in loans, a $700.7 million increase in investment securities, a $156.8 million increase in BOLI, the result of a $150.0 million purchase of additional BOLI in June 2021, and a $70.3 million decrease in allowance for credit losses on loans, reflective of a $67.1 million provision recapture, due to improved economic forecasts used in the Company’s ACL model and improved asset quality results. These increases were partially offset by a $576.1 million decrease in cash and cash equivalents.
Investment Securities
Our investment policy, as established by our Asset Liability Committee, attempts to provide and maintain liquidity, capital preservation, complement our lending activities, support our interest rate risk management strategies, and generate a favorable return on investments without incurring undue interest rate and credit risks. Specifically, our investment policy generally limits our investments to U.S. government securities, federal agency-backed securities, U.S. government-sponsored enterprise (“GSE”) guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”), which are guaranteed by Fannie Mae (“FNMA”), Freddie Mac (“FHLMC”), Federal Farm Credit Banks (“FFCB”), or Ginnie Mae (“GNMA”), U.S. Treasury, municipal bonds, and corporate bonds, specifically bank debt notes. The Bank has designated all investment securities, other than investments made for CRA purposes, as available-for-sale or held-to-maturity. Debt securities classified as available-for-sale are carried at estimated fair value and debt securities classified as held-to-maturity are carried at amortized cost, net of ACL.
Our investment securities portfolio amounted to $4.66 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $700.8 million, or 18%, from $3.95 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase was a result of $2.28 billion in purchases, partially offset by $884.2 million in sales, $603.9 million in principal payments, amortization, and redemptions, and an $89.1 million decrease in mark-to-market fair value adjustment. In general, the purchase of investment securities is primarily related to investing excess liquidity from our banking operations. During 2021, we have maintained a meaningful portion of the available-for-sale securities portfolio in highly liquid, short-term securities while also lowering the effective duration of this portfolio to 4.1 years at December 31, 2021 from 5.0 years at December 31, 2020. This strategy enhances our interest rate sensitivity profile to the current rate environment and provides us with the flexibility to quickly redeploy these funds into higher-yielding assets as opportunities arise.
At December 31, 2021, available-for-sale securities and held-to-maturity securities were $4.3 billion and $381.7 million, respectively, compared to $3.9 billion and $23.7 million at December 31, 2020, respectively. The increase to the held-to-maturity securities during 2021 was primarily due to the transfer of approximately $326.5 million of municipal bonds from available-for-sale to held-to-maturity securities. The transfer of these securities was accounted for at fair value with a net carrying amount of $319.9 million and a pre-tax unrealized loss of $6.6 million reflected as a discount on the date of transfer. This discount, as well as the related unrealized loss in accumulated other comprehensive income, is amortized into interest income as a yield adjustment over the remaining term of the securities. The amortization of the unrealized loss reported in AOCI offsets the effect on interest income of the amortization of the discount. No gains or losses were recorded at the time of transfer. See Note 3 - Investment Securities to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.
Effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted the new CECL accounting standard. The Company’s assessment of held-to-maturity and available-for-sale investment securities as of January 1, 2020 indicated that an ACL was not required. The Company determined the likelihood of default on held-to-maturity investment securities was remote, and the amount of expected non-repayment on those investments was zero. The Company also analyzed available-for-sale investment securities that were in an unrealized loss position as of January 1, 2020 and determined the decline in fair value for those securities was not related to credit, but rather related to changes in interest rates and general market conditions. There were no investment securities classified as PCD upon acquisition of Opus during the second quarter of 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an ACL of $22,000 for held-to-maturity investment securities classified as municipal bonds, which primarily consisted of the securities transferred from available-for-sale during the third and fourth quarters of 2021. The Company did not record an ACL for held-to-maturity investment securities at December 31, 2020, because the likelihood of non-repayment was remote. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was no ACL for the Company’s available-for-sale investment securities. We recorded a $22,000 and a zero provision for credit losses for held-to-maturity and available-for-sale investment securities, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2021. We recorded no provision for credit losses for available-for-sale or held-to-maturity investment securities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Below is a breakdown of the investment security portfolio for the past two years by investment type and designation.
The following table sets forth the amortized cost and weighted average yields on our held-to-maturity investment security portfolio by contractual maturity as of the date indicated. Weighted-average yields are an arithmetic computation of income within each maturity range based on the amortized cost of securities, not on a tax-equivalent basis.
As of December 31, 2021, our investment securities portfolio consisted of $1.46 billion in municipal bonds, $1.58 billion in GSE MBS, $432.1 million of agency bonds, $676.6 million in GSE CMOs, $453.9 million in corporate bonds, $57.9 million in U.S. Treasury securities, and $1.5 million in other securities. The total end of period weighted average interest rate based on the amortized costs of the investments at December 31, 2021 was 1.58%, compared to 1.79% at December 31, 2020, reflecting investment securities purchases at lower market yields during 2021.
The following table presents the fair value of available-for-sale and the amortized cost of held-to-maturity investment securities portfolios by Moody’s credit ratings at December 31, 2021.
All of the municipal bond securities in our portfolio have an underlying rating of investment grade, with the majority insured by the largest bond insurance companies to bring each of these securities to a Moody’s A rating or better. The Company has predominantly purchased general obligation bonds that are risk-weighted at 20% for regulatory capital purposes. The Company reduces its exposure to any single adverse event by holding securities from geographically diversified municipalities. We are continually monitoring the quality of our municipal bond portfolio in accordance with current financial conditions. To our knowledge, none of the municipalities in which we hold bonds are exhibiting financial problems that would require us to record an allowance for credit losses.
The following is a listing of the breakdown by state for our municipal holdings, for all states with greater than 5% of the portfolio listed. 77% of the Texas issues are insured by The Texas Permanent School Fund.
Loans
Loans held for investment totaled $14.30 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.06 billion, or 8.0%, from $13.24 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to new loan fundings partially offset by loan maturities and prepayments, loans sold, and lower business line credit utilization, which decreased to an average of 34% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an average of 41% for the year ended December 31, 2020 . The increase in loans was primarily attributed to increases in multifamily loans of $720.6 million, C&I loans of $334.3 million, CRE owner-occupied loans of $137.0 million, and CRE non-owner-occupied loans of $96.1 million, partially offset by decreases from retail loans of $138.5 million, franchise non-real estate secured loans of $52.2 million, and construction and land loans of $44.4 million.
The total end of period weighted average interest rate on loans, excluding fees and discounts, as of December 31, 2021 was 3.95%, compared to 4.27% at December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects the impact from prepayments of higher rate loans, lower rates on new loan originations, and the change in the mix of loans.
Loans held for sale primarily represent the guaranteed portion of SBA loans, which the Bank originates for sale, and totaled $10.9 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $10.3 million from $601,000 at December 31, 2020.
The Company participated in the SBA PPP under the CARES Act during the second quarter of 2020 and originated SBA PPP loans. At June 30, 2020, the Company’s SBA PPP loan balance was $1.13 billion. In July 2020, the Company sold its entire SBA PPP loan portfolio with an aggregate amortized cost of $1.13 billion to a seasoned and experienced nonbank lender and servicer of SBA loans, resulting in improved balance sheet liquidity and a gain on sale of approximately of $18.9 million, net of net deferred origination fees and net purchase discounts.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio in dollar amounts and as a percentage of the portfolio at the dates indicated:
______________________________
(1) Includes net deferred origination fees of $3.5 million and $2.6 million and unaccreted fair value net purchase discounts of $77.1 million and $113.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table shows the contractual maturity of the Company’s loans without consideration of prepayment assumptions, at the date indicated:
The following table sets forth the dollar amount of gross loans receivable at December 31, 2021 that are contractually due after December 31, 2022 and whether such loans have fixed interest rates or adjustable interest rates.
Delinquent Loans. When a borrower fails to make required payments on a loan and does not cure the delinquency within 30 days, we normally initiate proceedings to pursue our remedies under the loan documents. For loans secured by real estate, we record a notice of default and, after providing the required notices to the borrower, commence foreclosure proceedings. If the loan is not reinstated within the time permitted by law, we may sell the property at a foreclosure sale. At these foreclosure sales, we generally acquire title to the property. At December 31, 2021, loans delinquent 30 or more days as a percentage of total loans held for investment was 0.14%, compared to 0.10% at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth delinquencies in the Company’s loan portfolio at the dates indicated:
Credit Quality
We separate our loans by type, and we use various loan classifications to segregate the loans into various risk grade categories. We use the various loan classifications as a means of measuring risk for determining the valuation allowance for groups and individual assets at a point in time. Currently, we designate our assets into a category of “Pass,” “Special Mention,” “Substandard,” “Doubtful,” or “Loss.” Risk grades are reviewed regularly by the Company’s Credit and Portfolio Review committee, and the portfolio management and risk grading process is reviewed on an ongoing basis by an independent loan review function, as well as by regulatory agencies during scheduled examinations.
At December 31, 2021, we had $121.8 million of loans classified as substandard, compared to $128.3 million at December 31, 2020. The year-over-year decrease was driven by the net changes in risk rating during fiscal year 2021. There were no loans classified as doubtful as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
The following tables stratify the loan portfolio by the Company’s internal risk grading as of the dates indicated:
Troubled Debt Restructurings
We sometimes modify or restructure loans when the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties by making a concession to the borrower in the form of changes in the amortization terms, reductions in the interest rates, the acceptance of interest-only payments, and, in limited cases, concessions to the outstanding loan balances. These loans are classified as TDRs. At December 31, 2021, there were $17.3 million of loans modified as TDRs, comprised of three CRE owner-occupied loans and one C&I loan totaling $5.2 million belonging to one borrower relationship with the terms modified due to bankruptcy, and two franchise non-real estate secured loans totaling $12.1 million belonging to another borrower relationship with the terms modified for payment deferral. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the three CRE owner-occupied loans and one C&I loan classified as TDRs were in payment default, and all TDRs were on nonaccrual status as of December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2020, there were no loans classified as TDRs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were two loans modified as TDRs that experienced payment defaults after modifications within the previous 12 months, consisting of a C&I loan of $1.3 million and a franchise non-real estate secured loan of $344,000 that were charged off in 2020.
In accordance with the CARES Act, the Company has implemented various loan modification programs to provide its borrowers relief from the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and determined none of the related loan modifications need to be characterized as TDRs. The CAA, signed into law on December 27, 2020, extends the applicable period to include modification to loans held by financial institutions executed between March 1, 2020 and the earlier of (i) January 1, 2022, or (ii) 60 days after the date of termination of the COVID-19 national emergency. As of December 31, 2021, no loans remained under modification due to the COVID-19 pandemic hardship under Section 4013 of the CARES Act, and no loans were in-process for potential modification. As of December 31, 2020, 52 loans with an aggregate amortized cost of $79.5 million, or 0.56% of total loans held for investment, remained under modification due to the COVID-19 pandemic hardship. No loans were in-process for potential modification as of December 31, 2020. See Note 4 - Loans Held for Investment for additional information.
Nonperforming Assets
Nonperforming assets consist of loans on which we have ceased accruing interest (nonaccrual loans), OREO, and other repossessed assets owned. Nonaccrual loans consisted of all loans 90 days or more past due and on loans where, in the opinion of management, there is reasonable doubt as to the collection of principal and interest.
At December 31, 2021, we had $31.3 million of nonperforming assets, compared with $29.2 million of nonperforming assets at December 31, 2020, all of which consisted of nonperforming loans. It is our policy to take appropriate, timely, and aggressive action when necessary to resolve nonperforming assets. When resolving problem loans, it is our policy to determine collectability under various circumstances, which are intended to result in our maximum financial benefit. We accomplish this by working with the borrower to bring the loan current, selling the loan to a third party, or by foreclosing upon and selling the asset.
The Company had no loans 90 days or more past due and still accruing at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
The Company also had no OREO reported at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Properties acquired through or in lieu of foreclosure are recorded at fair value less costs to sell. The Company generally obtains an appraisal and/or a market evaluation on all OREO prior to obtaining possession. After foreclosure, valuations are periodically performed by management as needed due to changing market conditions or factors specifically attributable to the property’s condition. If the carrying value of the property exceeds its fair value, less estimated cost to sell, the asset is written down and a charge to other expense is recorded.
The following table sets forth the composition of nonperforming assets at the date indicated:
Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company determines the ACL for loans and unfunded loan commitments in accordance with ASC 326, which the Company adopted on January 1, 2020. The Company’s adoption of ASC 326 resulted in a $55.7 million increase to the ACL for loans held for investment and an $8.3 million increase to the ACL for off-balance sheet loan commitments on January 1, 2020. The Company applied the modified retrospective transition approach, and recorded an after-tax decrease of $45.6 million to the beginning balance of retained earnings as of January 1, 2020 for the cumulative effect adjustment, commonly referred to as the “Day 1” adjustment.
ASC 326 requires the Company to record an estimate of expected lifetime credit losses for loans and unfunded loan commitments at the time of origination or acquisition. The ACL is maintained at a level deemed appropriate by management to provide for expected credit losses in the portfolio as of the date of the consolidated statements of financial condition. Estimating expected credit losses requires management to use relevant forward-looking information, including the use of reasonable and supportable forecasts. The measurement of the ACL is performed by collectively evaluating loans with similar risk characteristics. Loans that have been deemed by management to no longer possess similar risk characteristics are evaluated individually under a discounted cash flow approach, and loans that have been deemed collateral dependent are evaluated individually based on the expected estimated fair value of the underlying collateral. The ACL is recorded through a charge to provision for credit losses and is reduced by charge-offs, net of recoveries, on loans previously charged-off.
The Company measures the ACL on commercial real estate and commercial loans using a discounted cash flow approach, using the loan’s effective interest rate, while the ACL for retail loans is based on a historical loss rate model. The discounted cash flow methodology relies on several significant components essential to the development of estimates for future cash flows on loans and unfunded loan commitments. These components consist of: (i) the estimated probability of default (“PD”), (ii) the estimated loss given default (“LGD”), which represents the estimated severity of the loss when a loan is in default, (iii) estimates for prepayment activity on loans, and (iv) the estimated exposure to the Company at default (“EAD”). In the case of unfunded loan commitments, the Company’s incorporates estimates for utilization, based on its own historical data. Probability of default and loss given default for investor loans secured by real estate loans are derived from a third party, using proxy loan information, and loan and property level attributes. Additionally, loss given default for these loans incorporates an estimate for the loss severity associated with loans where the borrower fails to meet their debt obligation at maturity. External factors that impact loss given default for commercial real estate loans include: changes in the index for CRE pricing, GDP growth rate, unemployment rates, and the Moody’s Baa rating corporate debt interest rate spread.
For business loans secured by real estate and commercial loans, probability of default is based on an internally developed rating scale that assigns probability of default based on the Company’s internal risk grades for each loan. Changes in risk grades for these loans result in changes in probability of default. The Company obtains loss given default for these loans from a third party that has a considerable database of credit-related information specific to the financial services industry and the type of loans within this segment.
Probability of default for both investor and business real estate loans are also heavily impacted by changes in current and expected economic conditions.
The ACL for retail loans is based on a historical loss rate model, which incorporates loss rates derived from a third party that has a considerable database of credit related information for retail loans. Loss rates for retail loans are dependent upon loan level and external factors such as: FICO, vintage, geography, unemployment rates, and changes in consumer real estate prices.
The Company’s ACL includes assumptions concerning current and future economic conditions using reasonable and supportable forecasts and how those forecasts are expected to impact a borrower’s ability to satisfy their obligation to the Bank and the ultimate collectability of future cash flows over the life of the loan. The Company uses economic forecast scenarios from Moody’s Analytics. These economic forecast scenarios are based on past events, current conditions, and the likelihood of future events occurring. Management periodically evaluates economic forecast scenarios, determines whether to utilize multiple probability-weighted scenarios in the Company’s ACL model, and, if multiple scenarios are utilized, evaluates and determines the weighting for each scenario used in the Company’s ACL model, and thus the scenarios and their weightings may change in future periods. Economic forecast scenarios as well as assumptions within those scenarios can vary based on changes in current and expected economic conditions and due to the occurrence of specific events such as the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s ACL model used three probability-weighted scenarios, representing a forecasted base-case scenario, an upside scenario, and a downside scenario. The weightings assigned to each scenario were as follows: the base-case scenario, or most likely scenario, was assigned a weighting of 40%, while the upside and downside scenarios were each assigned weightings of 30%. The Company evaluated the weightings of each economic forecasted scenario in the current period with the assistance of an independent third party, Moody’s Analytics, and determined the current weightings appropriately reflect the likelihood of outcomes for each scenario given the current economic environment. The use of three probability-weighted scenarios at December 31, 2021 is consistent with the approach used in the Company’s ACL model at December 31, 2020.
The Company, with the assistance of Moody’s Analytics, currently forecasts PDs and LGDs based on economic scenarios over a two-year period, which we believe is a reasonable and supportable period. Beyond this point, PDs and LGDs revert to historical long-term averages. The Company has reflected this reversion over a period of three years in each of its economic scenarios used to generate the overall probability-weighted forecast. Changes in economic forecasts impact the PD, LGD, and EAD for each loan, and therefore influence the amount of future cash flows from each loan the Company does not expect to collect.
It is important to note that the Company’s ACL model relies on multiple economic variables, which are used under several economic scenarios. Although no one economic variable can fully demonstrate the sensitivity of the ACL calculation to changes in the economic variables used in the model, the Company has identified certain economic variables that have significant influence in the Company’s model for determining the ACL. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s ACL model incorporated the following assumptions for key economic variables in the base-case, upside and downside scenarios:
Base-case Scenario:
•U.S. unemployment declines to 3.5% through the end of 2022 and holds relatively constant at approximately 3.5% throughout 2023.
•U.S. real GDP decelerates throughout 2022 from approximately 5.4% to approximately 2.7% by the end of 2022. U.S. real GDP growth decelerates from approximately 3.1% from the beginning of 2023 to 2.9% towards the end of 2023.
•CRE index growth accelerates in 2022 from 0.4% at the beginning of the year to approximately 11% by the end of 2022. Growth in the CRE index then decelerates from approximately 9% to 8% in 2023.
Upside Scenario:
•U.S. unemployment rate declines to 3% through the end of 2022 and holds relatively constant at approximately 3% throughout 2023.
•U.S. real GDP decelerates throughout 2022 from approximately 9.3% to approximately 4.4% by the end of 2022. U.S. real GDP experiences growth within a range of 1.2% to 1.9% throughout 2023.
•CRE index growth accelerates in 2022 from 1.9% at the beginning of the year to approximately 15% by the end of 2022. Growth in the CRE index then decelerates from approximately 12% to 8% in 2023.
Downside Scenario:
•U.S. unemployment rate increases to 8.7% through the end of 2022 and declines moderately to approximately 7.1% by the end of 2023.
•U.S. real GDP experiences decelerating declines in the first three quarters of 2022, from -4.0% to -1.9% before returning to growth of 0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2022. U.S. real GDP experiences accelerating growth throughout 2023 of approximately 1.0% to 4.5%.
•CRE index experiences accelerating declines through the third quarter of 2022 of -3.5% to -19.5%. The CRE index then experiences decelerating declines through the second quarter of 2023 from approximately -11% to -4%. The CRE index returns to growth in the second half of 2023.
The Company periodically considers the need for qualitative adjustments to the ACL. Qualitative adjustments may be related to and include, but not be limited to, factors such as: (i) management’s assessment of economic forecasts used in the model and how those forecasts align with management’s overall evaluation of current and expected economic conditions, (ii) organization specific risks such as credit concentrations, collateral specific risks, regulatory risks, and external factors that may ultimately impact credit quality, (iii) potential model limitations such as limitations identified through backtesting, and other limitations associated with factors such as underwriting changes, acquisition of new portfolios and changes in portfolio segmentation, and (iv) management’s overall assessment of the adequacy of the ACL, including an assessment of model data inputs used to determine the ACL. As of December 31, 2021, qualitative adjustments included in the ACL totaled $4.0 million. These adjustments primarily relate to continued uncertainty concerning the strength of the economic recovery and how it may impact certain classes of loans in the loan portfolio. Management determined through additional review that the uneven recovery as well as labor shortages, continued supply chain disruptions, and inflationary pressures may not be fully reflected in the quantitative component of the ACL for the SBA real estate secured, construction and franchise classes of the loan portfolio, and as such a qualitative adjustment has been assigned.
At December 31, 2021, our ACL on loans was $197.8 million, a decrease of $70.3 million from $268.0 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease in the ACL for loans held for investment during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $70.3 million is reflective of a $67.1 million provision recapture and net charge-offs of $3.2 million. The provision recapture for the year ended December 31, 2021 is reflective of improved economic forecasts used in the Company’s ACL model, including a more favorable outlook for real estate prices and commercial vacancy rates. A favorable asset quality profile of the loan portfolio also contributed to the provision recapture and was partially offset by increases in loans held for investment during 2021.
The following quantifies certain factors attributable to the change in the ACL on loans held for investment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The increase in ACL during 2020 is reflective of a $55.7 million adjustment to the ACL for loans held for investment associated with the Company’s adoption of ASC 326 on January 1, 2020, which was recorded through a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings, as well as $172.3 million in provision for credit losses on loans, net charge-offs of $16.9 million, and the establishment of $21.2 million in net ACL for PCD loans acquired in the Opus acquisition. In accordance with ASC 326, the ACL for PCD loans was established through an adjustment to the initial amortized cost of the loan. The provision for credit losses during the year ended December 31, 2020 is inclusive of approximately $75.9 million related to the initial ACL required for the acquisition of non-PCD loans in the Opus acquisition. Under ASC 326, the Company is required to record an ACL for estimates of lifetime credit losses on loans at the time of acquisition. For non-PCD loans, the initial ACL is established through a charge to provision for credit losses at the time of acquisition. Excluding the impact of the Opus acquisition, the provision for credit losses of $96.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 is largely reflective of unfavorable economic forecasts employed in the Company’s ACL model driven by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company incurred net charge-offs during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $16.9 million.
No assurance can be given that we will not, in any particular period, sustain credit losses that exceed the amount reserved, or that subsequent evaluation of our loan portfolio, in light of prevailing factors, including economic conditions that may adversely affect our market area or other circumstances, will not require significant increases in the ACL. In addition, regulatory agencies, as an integral part of their examination process, periodically review our ACL and may require us to recognize additional provisions to increase the allowance and record charge-offs in anticipation of future losses. Should any of the factors considered by management in evaluating the appropriate level of the ACL change, including the size and composition of the loan portfolio, the credit quality of the loan portfolio, as well as forecasts of future economic conditions, the Company’s estimate of current expected credit losses could also significantly change and affect the level of future provisions for credit losses.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company believes the ACL was adequate to cover current expected credit losses in the loan portfolio.
At December 31, 2021, the ratio of allowance for credit losses to loans held for investment was 1.38%, a decrease from 2.02% at December 31, 2020. Our unamortized fair value discount on the loans acquired totaled $77.1 million, or 0.54% of total loans held for investment, at December 31, 2021, compared to $113.8 million, or 0.85% of total loans held for investment, at December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth the Company’s ACL and its corresponding percentage of the loan category balance and the percent of loan balance to total gross loans in each of the loan categories listed at the dates indicated:
The following table sets forth the Company’s net charge-offs as a percentage to the average loan held for investment balances in each of the loan categories, as well as other credit related percentages at and for the periods indicated:
Deposits
At December 31, 2021, total deposits were $17.12 billion, an increase of $901.4 million, or 5.6%, from December 31, 2020. The increase in deposits included increases in noninterest-bearing checking of $746.2 million, interest-bearing checking of $580.1 million, and money market and savings of $143.8 million, partially offset by the decrease of $568.6 million in time deposits. The increase in deposits during 2021 was primarily due to organic non-maturity deposit growth of $1.47 billion. This strong inflow of non-maturity deposits enabled the Company to run off higher cost retail and brokered time deposits during the year. The total end-of-period weighted average interest rate of total deposits was 0.04% and 0.18% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table sets forth the average balance of deposit accounts and the weighted average rates paid for the periods indicated:
The decrease in the weighted average cost of deposits was principally driven by lower pricing across all deposit product categories and higher average noninterest-bearing deposits.
The following table sets forth the estimated deposits exceeding the FDIC insurance limit:
The estimated aggregate amount of time deposits in excess of the FDIC insurance limit is $357.1 million at December 31, 2021. The following table sets forth the maturity distribution of the estimated uninsured time deposits:
Borrowings
Borrowings represent a secondary source of funds for our lending and investing activities. The Company has a variety of borrowing relationships that it can draw upon to fund its activities. At December 31, 2021, total borrowings amounted to $888.6 million, an increase of $356.1 million, or 66.9%, from December 31, 2020. The increase in borrowings at December 31, 2021 from December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase of $519.0 million in FHLB overnight advances and $8.0 million in other short-term borrowing, partially offset by the redemptions of $160.0 million in subordinated notes and $10.4 million in junior subordinated debt securities.
At December 31, 2021, total borrowings represented 4.2% of total assets and had an end-of-period weighted average rate of 2.12%, compared with 2.7% of total assets at a weighted average rate of 5.16% at December 31, 2020.
FHLB Advances
The FHLB system functions as a source of credit to financial institutions that are members. Advances are secured by certain real estate loans, investment securities, and the capital stock of the FHLB owned by the Company. Subject to the FHLB’s advance policies and requirements, these advances can be requested for any business purpose in which the Company is authorized to engage. In granting advances, the FHLB considers a member’s creditworthiness and other relevant factors. The Company has a line of credit with the FHLB, which provides for advances totaling up to 40% of its assets. At December 31, 2021, the maximum amount we could borrow through the FHLB was $8.40 billion, of which $5.50 billion was remaining available for borrowing based on collateral pledged of $8.74 billion in real estate loans. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $550.0 million in overnight FHLB advances, compared to $31.0 million in term FHLB advances at December 31, 2020.
Other Borrowings
The Company maintains additional sources of liquidity at the Corporation level. The Corporation renewed the line of credit of $15.0 million with U.S. Bank that matured in September 2021, extended the maturity date to September 27, 2022, and increased the aggregate principal amount to $25.0 million. At December 31, 2021, the Corporation had $8.0 million outstanding under the current line of credit, compared to no outstanding balances against this line at December 31, 2020.
The Company maintains unsecured lines of credit to purchase federal funds totaling $330.0 million and access through the Federal Reserve discount window to borrow $20.4 million based upon current pledged investment security collateral, to be utilized as business needs dictate. Federal funds purchased are short-term in nature and utilized to meet short-term funding needs.
Subordinated Debentures
At December 31, 2021, total subordinated debentures amounted to $330.6 million with a weighted interest rate of 5.33%, compared to $501.5 million with a weighted interest rate of 5.38% at December 31, 2020. The decrease of $170.9 million, or 34.09%, was primarily driven by the redemptions of $160.0 million in subordinated notes and $10.4 million in junior subordinated debt securities. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, outstanding subordinated notes were $330.6 million and $493.4 million, respectively. At December 31, 2020, junior subordinated debentures to affiliated trusts in connection with the issuance of trust preferred securities by such trusts were $7.7 million, net of purchase accounting fair value adjustments. No junior subordinated debentures remained at December 31, 2021.
For additional information, see Note 13 - Subordinated Debentures to Consolidated Financial Statements included Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table sets forth certain information regarding the Company’s borrowed funds at or for the years ended on the dates indicated:
Stockholders’ Equity
At December 31, 2021, our stockholders’ equity amounted to $2.89 billion, compared with $2.75 billion at December 31, 2020. The increase of $139.7 million, or 5%, is primarily due to net income in 2021 of $339.9 million, partially offset by $121.9 million in cash dividends, $68.2 million in other comprehensive loss, and $18.1 million in stock repurchases effected during 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of funds are deposits, principal and interest payments on loans, FHLB advances and other borrowings, and income from investments, to meet our financial obligations, which arise primarily from the withdrawal of deposits, extension of credit, and payment of operating expenses. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans are a predictable source of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by market interest rates, economic conditions, and competition.
The Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) is ultimately responsible for ensuring policies and procedures are in place that provide for the safety and soundness management of assets and liabilities of the Bank, including liquidity management and interest rate risk policies to ensure these policies are effectively implemented. At the management level, the Bank’s Asset Liability Committee (“ALCO”) establishes the liquidity guidelines and review its ongoing compliance with the policies approved by the Board.
The objective of liquidity management is to ensure liquidity risk is monitored and controlled. Liquidity risk is the possibility that the Company will not be able to fund present and future obligations as they come due because of an inability to liquidate assets or obtain adequate funding at a reasonable cost. The Bank and the Company have developed tools to appropriately identify, measure, monitor, and control funding and liquidity risk. These tools include cash flow projections, stress testing, and a formalized Contingency Funding Plan (“CFP”) as primary tools for measuring and managing liquidity risk. The CFP provides a framework for the Company to evaluate increasingly severe illiquid situations and monitor the availability of funding over these scenarios and addresses the actions that the Company would take in response to both a short-term and long-term funding crisis.
We seek to maintain a level of liquid assets to ensure a safe and sound operation. Our liquid assets are comprised of unrestricted cash and unpledged available-for-sale investments securities. As part of our daily monitoring, we calculate a liquidity ratio by dividing the sum of cash balances plus unpledged available-for-sale securities by total deposits, excluding time deposits maturing one year or more, plus FHLB advances maturing within one year. At December 31, 2021, our liquidity ratio was 25.01%, compared with 28.32% at December 31, 2020.
We believe our level of liquid assets is sufficient to meet current anticipated funding needs. At December 31, 2021, liquid assets of the Company represented approximately 21.1% of total assets, compared to 23.6% at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021, the Company had seven unsecured lines of credit with other correspondent banks to purchase federal funds totaling $330.0 million and access through the Federal Reserve Bank discount window to borrow $20.4 million secured by investments securities, as business needs dictate. We also have a line of credit with the FHLB allowing us to borrow up to 40% of the Bank’s total assets equating to a credit line of $8.40 billion, of which $5.50 billion was available for borrowing. The amount available for borrowing was based on collateral pledged by real estate loans with an aggregate balance of $8.74 billion. At December 31, 2021, FHLB outstanding borrowings totaled $550.0 million.
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s loan to deposit and borrowing ratio was 79.5%, compared with 79.0% at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily associated with our loans increasing at a faster rate relative to our deposits and borrowings during the period. Certificates of deposit, which are scheduled to mature in one year or less from December 31, 2021, totaled $983.7 million.
The Bank maintains liquidity guidelines in the Company’s Liquidity Policy that permits the purchase of brokered deposit funds, in an amount not to exceed 10% of total deposits, or 8% of total assets, as a secondary source for funding. At December 31, 2021, the Company had no brokered time deposits. At December 31, 2020, the Company had $155.3 million, or 0.8% of total assets, in brokered time deposits.
The Corporation is a corporate entity separate and apart from the Bank that must provide for its own liquidity. The Corporation’s primary sources of liquidity are dividends from the Bank. There are statutory and regulatory provisions that limit the ability of the Bank to pay dividends to the Corporation. Management believes that such restrictions will not have a material impact on the ability of the Corporation to meet its ongoing cash obligations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Bank paid $121.7 million in dividends to the Corporation, compared to $29.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Corporation maintains a line of credit with US Bank with availability of $25.0 million line of credit that will expire on September 27, 2022. The Corporation anticipates renewing the line of credit upon expiration. This line of credit provides an additional source of liquidity at the Corporation level. At December 31, 2021, the Corporation had $8.0 million outstanding under the current line of credit. At December 31, 2020, the Corporation had no outstanding balances against this line.
During the second and third quarters of 2021, the Company redeemed the subordinated debentures for an aggregate amount of $170.4 million. See Note 13 - Subordinated Debentures for additional information.
The Financial Code provides that a bank may not make a cash distribution to its stockholders in excess of the lesser of a (i) bank’s retained earnings; or (ii) bank’s net income for its last three fiscal years, less the amount of any distributions made by the bank or by any majority-owned subsidiary of the bank to the stockholders of the bank during such period. However, a bank may, with the approval of the DFPI, make a distribution to its stockholders in an amount not exceeding the greatest of (i) its retained earnings; (ii) its net income for its last fiscal year; or (iii) its net income for its current fiscal year. In the event that the DFPI determines that the stockholders’ equity of a bank is inadequate or that the making of a distribution by the bank would be unsafe or unsound, the DFPI may order the bank to refrain from making a proposed distribution. Under these provisions, the amount available for distribution from the Bank to the Corporation was approximately $404.9 million at December 31, 2021.
During 2021, the Corporation declared dividends of $121.9 million, or $1.29 per share on its common stock. On January 18, 2022, the Company's Board of Directors declared a $0.33 per share dividend, payable on February 11, 2022 to stockholders of record on February 4, 2022. The Corporation anticipates that it will continue to pay quarterly cash dividends in the future, although there can be no assurance that payment of such dividends will continue or that they will not be reduced. The payment and amount of future dividends remain within the discretion of the Corporation’s Board of Directors and will depend on the Corporation’s financial condition and operating results, regulatory limitations, tax considerations, and other factors. Interest on deposits will be paid prior to payment of dividends on the Corporation’s common stock.
On January 11, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a new stock repurchase program, which authorized the repurchase of up to 4,725,000 shares of its common stock, representing approximately 5% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares of common stock and approximately $150 million of common stock as of December 31, 2020 based on the closing price of the Company’s common stock on December 31, 2020. The stock repurchase program may be limited or terminated at any time without notice. See Part II, Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities for additional information.
Our material cash requirements may include funding existing loan commitments, funding equity investments, withdrawal/maturity of existing deposits, repayment of borrowings, operating lease payments, and expenditures necessary to maintain current operations.
The Company enters into contractual obligations in the normal course of business as a source of funds for its asset growth and to meet required capital needs. The following schedule summarizes maturities and principal payments due on our contractual obligations, excluding accrued interest:
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into various transactions to meet the financing needs of our customers, which, in accordance with GAAP, are not included in our consolidated balance sheets. These transactions include off-balance sheet commitments, including commitments to extend credit and standby letters of credit, and commitments to fund investments that qualify for CRA credit. The following table presents a summary of the Company’s commitments to extend credit by expiration period:
Since many commitments to extend credit are expected to expire, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. For further information, see Note 15 - Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Commitments, and Contingencies, in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Capital Requirements
The Corporation and the Bank are subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can trigger certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of the Bank’s assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The Bank’s capital amounts and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk weightings, and other factors.
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s and the Bank’s Tier 1 capital was $2.02 billion and $2.32 billion, respectively, and total capital was $2.43 billion and $2.45 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2021, the Company’s and the Bank’s Tier 1 capital leverage ratio was 10.08% and 11.62%, common equity Tier 1 capital ratio was 12.11% and 13.96%, Tier 1 capital ratio was 12.11% and 13.96%, and total capital ratio was 14.62% and 14.70%, respectively. These capital ratios exceeded the “well capitalized” standards defined by the federal banking regulators under prompt corrective action rules of 5.00% for Tier 1 leverage ratio, 6.50% for common equity Tier 1 capital ratio, 8.00% for Tier 1 capital ratio, and 10.00% for total capital ratio and exceeded the minimum capital ratio levels inclusive of the fully phased-in capital conservation buffer of 4.00%, 7.00%, 8.50% and 10.50%, respectively.
Provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act require that if a depository institution holding company exceeds $15 billion in assets due to an acquisition, then trust preferred securities are to be excluded from Tier 1 capital beginning in the period in which the transaction occurred. The Corporation’s acquisition of Opus in the second quarter of 2020 resulted in total consolidated assets exceeding $15 billion. As a result, trust preferred securities were excluded from the Corporation’s Tier 1 capital and included as Tier 2 capital at December 31, 2020. The trust preferred securities were redeemed during the third quarter of 2021. Following these redemptions, the regulatory total capital ratios of the Company and the Bank continued to exceed regulatory minimums, inclusive of the fully phased-in capital conservation buffer at December 31, 2021. See Note 2 - Regulatory Capital Requirements and Other Regulatory Matters to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 hereof for a discussion of the Bank’s and Corporation’s capital ratios.