Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
Certain statements contained in this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"), which can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as "may," "will," "expect," "continue," "remains," "intend," "aim," "should," "prospects," "could," "future," "potential," "believes," "plans," "likely," and "probable," or the negative thereof or other variations thereon or comparable terminology, constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act and are subject to the safe harbors created thereby. These statements should be considered as subject to the many risks and uncertainties that exist in the Company's operations and business environment. Such risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those under the headings Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward Looking Information and Item 1A. Risk Factors.
The analysis presented below and discussed in more detail throughout this MD&A was organized to provide instructive information for better understanding the Company's results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. However, this MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including the notes thereto and the risk factors contained herein. The Company's fiscal year ends on January 31. Years, results and balances described as 2021 and 2020 are for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
The Company is engaged in the manufacture and sale of products in one reportable segment: Piping Systems. Since the Company's revenues are significantly dependent upon discrete projects, the Company's operating results in any reporting period could be negatively impacted as a result of variations in the level of the Company's discrete project orders or delays in the timing of the specific project phases.
COVID-19 and the Oil and Gas Market
The Company’s results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flow in 2021 were materially adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and the then depressed market prices for oil and gas. During 2021, the Company experienced improved results as the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic diminished and delayed projects were turned to production. Increases in oil prices also helped to improve the Company's results in Canada and in the Middle East. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information.
Liquidity Position
As discussed further below, on April 14, 2021, the Company entered into a purchase and sale agreement to sell its land and buildings in Lebanon, Tennessee (the "Property"), and subsequently enter into a fifteen-year lease agreement to lease back the Property. The transaction generated net cash proceeds of $9.1 million, following the release of the escrowed amount of $0.4 million in June 2021. The transaction provided significant liquidity for the Company, which used a portion of the proceeds to repay its borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility. The Company expects to use its liquidity for strategic investments and general corporate needs. The Company will lease back the Property at an annual rental rate of approximately $0.8 million, subject to annual rent increases of 2.0%.
The Company further enhanced its liquidity position on September 17, 2021 when the North American Loan Parties executed an extension of the Credit Agreement with PNC, providing for a new five-year $18.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility, subject to a borrowing base including various reserves (the “Renewed Senior Credit Facility”). See further discussion below and in Note 5 - Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Supply Chain Constraints
The Company's global supply chains have been negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the current inflationary environment, raw material supply shortages and transportation delays, the Company routinely experiences significant delays and increased prices for raw materials used in our production processes. To mitigate these impacts, the Company has implemented several strategies, including purchasing from alternative suppliers and planning for material purchases farther in advance to ensure the Company has materials when needed. The Company has also updated its pricing to customers to offset the impacts of the raw material price increases. While these impacts are expected to continue into 2022, the resulting future disruptions to the Company’s operations are uncertain. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for additional information.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations:
2021 Compared to 2020
Net sales:
Net sales were $138.6 million in 2021, an increase of $53.9 million, or 63.6%, from $84.7 million in 2020. The increase was a result of increased sales volumes in both North America and the Middle East, North Africa and India ("MENA") due largely to recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross profit:
Gross profit increased to $32.5 million, or 23.5% of net sales, in 2021, an increase of $21.4 million, or 191.0%, from $11.2 million, or 13.2% of net sales, in 2020. This increase was primarily driven by higher sales volumes without a corresponding increase in fixed plant costs. In addition, the Company's U.A.E. business benefitted from the introduction of a high margin new product line in late 2020.
General and administrative expenses:
General and administrative expenses were $19.9 million in 2021 compared to $17.2 million in 2020, an increase of $2.7 million, or 15.5%. This increase was driven primarily by the increase in headcount as operations returned to pre-pandemic levels, as well as incentive compensation associated with the improved financial results in 2021.
Selling expenses:
Selling expenses decreased by $0.8 million, or 15.1%, from $5.3 million in 2020 to $4.5 million in 2021. This decrease was primarily due to organizational changes during the year.
Interest expense:
Interest expense increased to $0.8 million in 2021 from $0.4 million in 2020. This increase is primarily related to the sale and leaseback of the Company's land and buildings in Lebanon, Tennessee in April 2021, whereby a portion of the Company's monthly rent payments are recorded to interest expense.
Other income, net:
Other income was $1.1 million in 2021 compared to $4.0 million in 2020, a decrease of $2.9 million. This decrease was primarily the result of income recorded in 2020 for funds received under the PPP program of $3.2 million. Funds received under the Canadian Emergency Wage Subsidy ("CEWS") and Canadian Emergency Rent Subsidy ("CERS") programs in Canada during 2021 were also less than in 2020, as CEWS and CERS grants ceased in the second quarter of 2021. These decreases were offset by individually immaterial increases in our North American businesses.
Income/(loss) from operations before income taxes:
Income from operations before income taxes increased to income of $8.3 million in 2021 compared to a loss of ($7.8) million in 2020. The increase was a result of increased sales volumes in both North America and MENA. In addition, the Company's U.A.E. business benefitted from the introduction of a new product line in late 2020.
Income taxes:
The Company's worldwide effective tax rates ("ETR") were 27.2% and 1.7% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in the ETR from the prior year to the current year is largely due to changes in the mix of income and loss in various jurisdictions and the absence of recognizing tax benefits on losses in the United States due to a full valuation allowance applied against its deferred tax assets.
As a result of the one-time transition tax from the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (“Tax Act”), the Company estimates that distributions from foreign subsidiaries will not be subject to incremental U.S. tax as they will either be remittances of previously taxed earnings and profits or eligible for a full dividends received deduction. Current and future earnings in the Company's subsidiaries in Canada and Egypt are not permanently reinvested. Earnings from these subsidiaries are subject to tax in their local jurisdiction, and withholdings taxes in these jurisdictions are considered. The Company's liability has remained consistent at $0.2 million as of January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, related to these taxes.
For further information, see Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net income/(loss):
The resulting net income of $6.1 million in 2021 was a $13.7 million increase from the net loss of ($7.6) million in 2020. The increase was a result of increased sales volumes in both North America and MENA due to recovery from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the Company's U.A.E. business benefitted from the introduction of a new product line in late 2020.
Liquidity and capital resources
Cash and cash equivalents as of January 31, 2022 and 2021 were $8.2 million and $7.2 million, respectively. On January 31, 2022, less than $0.1 million was held in the United States and $8.2 million was held by the Company's foreign subsidiaries. The Company has no plans to repatriate any foreign earnings, but the potential repatriation of foreign earnings is discussed further in Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Further, the Company's Renewed Senior Credit Facility permits the repatriation of foreign earnings to cure a breach of its debt covenants, should one occur. See further discussion in Note 5 - Debt, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The Company's working capital was $40.0 million on January 31, 2022 compared to $25.6 million on January 31, 2021. Of the working capital components, cash increased $1.0 million primarily as a result of the activity discussed below.
Net cash used in operating activities was $(2.6) million in 2021 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $0.2 million in 2020. This decrease of $2.8 million was due primarily to increases in accounts receivable and inventory, partially offset by increases in net income and increases in accounts payable and accrued compensation and payroll taxes in the current period compared to the prior year period.
Net cash used in investing activities during 2021 and 2020 was $2.3 million and $2.0 million, respectively. The increase of $0.3 million was primarily due to increased capital investment in the Middle East and Canada during the period.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6.2 million in 2021 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $4.1 million in 2020. The main source of cash from financing activities during 2021 was net proceeds of $8.6 million as a result of the sale and leaseback of the Company's land and buildings in Lebanon, Tennessee during 2021. Additionally, during the current period, the Company had approximately $0.5 million less net repayments under its revolving credit facility, as compared to $3.2 million in the prior year period. Further, the Company's debt totaled $21.9 million and $13.2 million as of January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. This large increase in the Company's debt is mainly attributable to the sale and leaseback transaction noted above. For additional information, see Note 5 - Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company believes it will have the ability to satisfy all working capital needs and any planned capital expenditures for the twelve months following the issuance of these financial statements, based on its existing cash on hand, positive cash flows from operations and available credit facilities.
There was no restricted cash held in the United States on January 31, 2022 or January 31, 2021. Restricted cash held by foreign subsidiaries was $1.6 million and $1.2 million as of January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Restricted cash held by foreign subsidiaries related to fixed deposits that also serve as security deposits and guarantees.
The following table summarizes the Company's estimated contractual obligations on January 31, 2022
(1)
Interest obligations exclude floating rate interest on debt payable under the North American revolving line of credit. Based on the amount of such debt on January 31, 2022, and the weighted average interest rate of 4.25% on that debt, such interest was being incurred at an annual rate of less than $0.1 million.
(2)
Scheduled maturities, excluding interest.
(3)
Scheduled maturities of foreign revolver line, excluding interest.
(4) This schedule represents the cash payments to be made under the lease agreement for the land and buildings sold by the Company in Lebanon, Tennessee and leased back from the purchaser in April 2021. These amounts differ from the liabilities presented as debt in the consolidated balance sheet as the debt amount represents future payments discounted to the present date. Refer to Note 5 - Debt, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the transaction.
(5)
Minimum contractual amounts, assuming no changes in variable expenses.
(6)
Refer to Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the uncertain tax position obligations.
Financing
Revolving line - North America. On September 20, 2018, the Company and certain of its U.S. and Canadian subsidiaries (collectively, together with the Company, the “North American Loan Parties”) entered into a Revolving Credit and Security Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with PNC Bank, National Association ("PNC"), as administrative agent and lender, providing for a three-year $18 million Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility, subject to a borrowing base including various reserves (the “Senior Credit Facility”).
On September 17, 2021, the North American Loan Parties executed an extension of the Credit Agreement with PNC, providing for a new five-year $18.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility, subject to a borrowing base including various reserves (the “Renewed Senior Credit Facility”). The Company's obligations under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility are currently guaranteed by Perma-Pipe Canada, Inc. Each of the North American Loan Parties other than Perma-Pipe Canada, Inc. is a borrower under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility (collectively, the “Borrowers”).
The Borrowers are using borrowings under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility (i) to fund capital expenditures; (ii) to fund ongoing working capital needs; and (iii) for other corporate purposes, including potentially additional stock repurchases under the Company's $3.0 million stock repurchase program. Borrowings under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility bears interest at a rate equal to an alternate base rate, the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) or a LIBOR successor rate index, plus, in each case, an applicable margin. The applicable margin is based on a fixed charge coverage ratio ("FCCR") range. Interest on alternate base rate borrowings are based on the alternate base rate as defined in the Renewed Senior Credit Facility plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 1.50%, based on the FCCR in the most recently reported period. Interest on LIBOR or LIBOR successor rate borrowings will be the LIBOR rate as defined in the Renewed Senior Credit Facility plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 2.50%, based on the FCCR in the most recently reported period. Additionally, the Borrowers pay a 0.25% per annum facility fee on the unused portion of the Renewed Senior Credit Facility.
Subject to certain exceptions, borrowings under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility are secured by substantially all of the North American Loan Parties’ assets. The Renewed Senior Credit Facility will mature on September 20, 2026. Subject to certain qualifications and exceptions, the Renewed Senior Credit Facility contains covenants that, among other things, restrict the North American Loan Parties’ ability to create liens, merge or consolidate, consummate acquisitions, make investments, dispose of assets, incur debt, and pay dividends and other distributions. In addition, the North American Loan Parties may not make capital expenditures in excess of $5.0 million annually, plus a limited carryover of unused amounts. Further, the North American Loan Parties may not make repurchases of the Company's common stock in excess of $3.0 million.
The Renewed Senior Credit Facility also contains financial covenants requiring the North American Loan Parties to achieve a ratio of its EBITDA to the sum of scheduled cash principal payments on indebtedness for borrowed money and interest payments on the advances under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility to be not less than 1.10 to 1.00 if for any five consecutive days the undrawn availability is less than $3.0 million or any day in which the undrawn availability is less than $2.0 million. As of January 31, 2022, the calculated ratio was substantially greater than 1.10 to 1.00. In order to cure any future breach of the FCCR covenant by the North American Loan Parties, the Company may repatriate cash from any of its foreign subsidiaries that are otherwise not a party to the Renewed Senior Credit Facility in an amount which, when added to the amount of the Company’s Consolidated EBITDA, would result in pro forma compliance with the covenant. The Company was in compliance with these covenants as of January 31, 2022.
The Renewed Senior Credit Facility contains customary events of default. If an event of default occurs and is continuing, then PNC may terminate all commitments to extend further credit and declare all amounts outstanding under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility due and payable immediately. In addition, if any of the North American Loan Parties or certain of their subsidiaries become the subject of voluntary or involuntary proceedings under any bankruptcy, insolvency or similar law, then any outstanding obligations under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility will automatically become immediately due and payable. Loans outstanding under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility will bear interest at a rate of 2.00% per annum in excess of the otherwise applicable rate (i) while a bankruptcy event of default exists or (ii) upon the lender's request, during the continuance of any other event of default.
As of January 31, 2022, the Company had borrowed an aggregate of $0.6 million at a rate of 4.25% and had $8.5 million available under the Renewed Senior Credit Facility, before application of a $2.5 million availability block that can be reduced by the Company's financial performance. This block on the Company's availability under its Renewed Senior Credit Facility was removed completely based on its financial performance as of and for the year ended January 31, 2022.
Revolving lines - foreign . The Company also has credit arrangements used by its Middle Eastern subsidiaries in the U.A.E. and Egypt as discussed further below.
The Company has a revolving line for 8.0 million U.A.E. Dirhams (approximately $2.2 million at January 31, 2022) from a bank in the U.A.E. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 3.77% and was originally set to expire in November 2020, however, the expiration was extended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company has submitted final documentation to complete the renewal process and is awaiting official notification from the bank of the renewal completion. This process is expected to be completed in May 2022.
The Company has a second revolving line for 19.5 million U.A.E. Dirhams (approximately $5.3 million at January 31, 2022) from a bank in the U.A.E. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 4.5% and is set to expire in January 2023.
The Company has a third credit arrangement for project financing with a bank in the U.A.E. for 3.0 million U.A.E. Dirhams (approximately $0.8 million at January 31, 2022). This credit arrangement is in the form of project financing at rates competitive in the U.A.E. The line is secured by the contract for a project being financed by the Company's U.A.E. subsidiary. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 4.5% and is expected to expire in June 2023 in connection with the completion of the project.
These credit arrangements are in the form of overdraft facilities and project financing at rates competitive in the countries in which the Company operates. The lines are secured by certain equipment, certain assets (such as accounts receivable and inventory), and a guarantee by the Company. Some credit arrangement covenants require a minimum tangible net worth to be maintained, including maintaining certain levels of intercompany subordinated debt. In addition, some of the revolving credit facilities restrict payment of dividends or undertaking of additional debt by the respective subsidiary.
In June 2021, the Company's Egyptian subsidiary entered into a credit arrangement with a bank in Egypt for a revolving line of 100.0 million Egyptian Pounds (approximately $6.2 million at January 31, 2022). This credit arrangement is in the form of project financing at rates competitive in Egypt. The line was secured by certain assets (such as accounts receivable) of the Company's Egyptian subsidiary. Among other covenants, the credit arrangement established a maximum leverage ratio allowable and restricted the Company's Egyptian subsidiary's ability to undertake any additional debt. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 8.0% and is set to expire in August 2022.
In December 2021, the Company entered into a credit arrangement for project financing with a bank in Egypt for 28.2 million Egyptian Pounds (approximately $1.8 million at January 31, 2022). This credit arrangement is in the form of project financing at rates competitive in Egypt. The line is secured by the contract for a project being financed by the Company's Egyptian subsidiary. The facility has an interest rate of approximately 8.0% and is expected to expire in June 2022 in connection with the completion of the project.
The Company’s credit arrangements used by its Middle Eastern subsidiaries are subject to renewal on an annual basis.
The Company was in compliance with the covenants under the credit arrangements in the U.A.E. as of January 31, 2022. The Company was not in compliance with a covenant under its 28.2 million Egyptian Pound project financing in Egypt as of January 31, 2022. The Company did not meet its required debt to equity ratio as of January 31, 2022. The Company has received a waiver from the bank as of January 31, 2022. On January 31, 2022, interest rates were based on the Emirates Inter Bank Offered Rate plus 3.0% to 3.5% per annum for the U.A.E. credit arrangements, two of which have a minimum interest rate of 4.5% per annum, and based on the stated interest rate in the agreement for the Egypt credit arrangement. Based on these base rates, as of January 31, 2022, the Company's interest rates ranged from 3.77% to 8.0%, with a weighted average rate of 7.31%, and the Company had facility limits totaling $16.4 million under these credit arrangements. As of January 31, 2022, $1.2 million of availability was used to support letters of credit to guarantee amounts committed for inventory purchases and for performance guarantees. Additionally, as of January 31, 2022, the Company had borrowed $6.0 million, and had an additional $6.1 million of borrowing remaining available under the foreign revolving credit arrangements. The foreign revolving lines balances as of January 31, 2022 and 2021 were included as current maturities of long-term debt in the Company's consolidated balance sheets.
Finance obligation - buildings and land. On April 14, 2021, the Company entered into a purchase and sale agreement (the "Purchase and Sale Agreement"). Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase and Sale Agreement, the Company sold its land and buildings in Lebanon, Tennessee (the "Property") for a purchase price of $10.4 million. The transaction generated net cash proceeds of $9.1 million, following the release of the escrowed amount in June 2021 discussed below. The Company used a portion of the proceeds to repay its borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility. The Company expects to use its liquidity for strategic investments and general corporate needs. Concurrent with the sale of the Property, the Company entered into a fifteen-year lease agreement (the “Lease Agreement”), whereby the Company will lease back the Property at an annual rental rate of approximately $0.8 million, subject to annual rent increases of 2.0%. Under the Lease Agreement, the Company has four consecutive options to extend the term of the lease by five years for each such option. Concurrently with the sale of the Property, the Company paid off the approximately $0.9 million remaining on the mortgage note on the Property to its lender. At closing, $0.4 million was placed in a short-term escrow account to cover certain post-closing contingencies that may arise. The contingencies were resolved in May 2021 and the Company received the escrowed funds in June 2021.
In accordance with ASC Topic 842, "Leases", this transaction was recorded as a failed sale and leaseback as the present value of lease payments exceeded substantially all of the fair value of the underlying asset. The Company utilized an incremental borrowing rate of 8.0% to determine the finance obligation to record for the amounts received and will continue to depreciate the assets. The current portion of the finance obligation of $0.1 million is recognized in current maturities of long-term debt and the long-term portion of $9.3 million is recognized in long-term finance obligation on the Company's consolidated balance sheets as of January 31, 2022. The net carrying amount of the financial liability and remaining assets will be zero at the end of the lease term.
Prior additional liquidity from the PPP
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a loan agreement under the SBA's PPP and received proceeds of approximately $3.2 million. Interest on the loan accrued at a fixed interest rate of 1.0%. Under Section 1106 of the CARES Act, borrowers were eligible for forgiveness of principal and accrued interest on the loans to the extent that the proceeds were used to cover eligible payroll costs, mortgage interest costs, rent and utility costs, otherwise described as qualified expenses. During the three months ended July 31, 2020, the Company used all of the PPP loan proceeds to pay for qualified expenses, 100% of which were used for payroll related expenses. The Company submitted its application and supporting documentation for forgiveness to its bank, which submitted the application and supporting documentation to the Small Business Administration ("SBA"). On June 24, 2021, the Company was notified by its lender that its PPP loan had been forgiven by the SBA.
Based on the facts and circumstances of the Company's PPP loan and according to the applicable accounting guidance described herein, the Company elected to account for the PPP loan proceeds as a grant that had reasonable assurance of being forgiven. As such, the Company recognized the proceeds in earnings during the year ended January 31, 2021. The amounts were recognized in other income, net in the consolidated statements of operations.
Prior additional liquidity from the CEWS and CERS Programs
Beginning in April 2020, the Company's subsidiary, Perma-Pipe Canada, Ltd. ("PPCA"), applied for relief in the form of grants from the Canadian government under the CEWS program. Based on the program rules, the grants were applied for each month and were granted based on the amount of eligible employee expenses incurred over the previous month. Beginning in October 2020, PPCA also applied for grants under the CERS program. PPCA was approved for and received approximately $0.6 million and $0.1 million in grants under the CEWS and CERS programs, respectively, during the year ended January 31, 2022. Grants to the Company under both programs ended in the second quarter of 2021. The proceeds from CEWS and CERS are recognized in other income, net in the consolidated statements of operations.
Accounts receivable
In 2013, the Company started a project in the Middle East as a sub-contractor, with billings in the aggregate amount of approximately $41.9 million. The Company completed all its deliverables in 2015 under the related contract, but the system has not yet been commissioned by the customer. Nevertheless, the Company has collected approximately $38.3 million as of January 31, 2022, with a remaining balance due in the amount of $3.6 million. Included in this balance is an amount of $3.4 million, which pertains to retention clauses within the agreements of the Company's customer, and which become payable by the customer when this project is fully tested and commissioned. In the absence of a firm date for the final commissioning of the project, and due to the long-term nature of this receivable, $2.0 million of this retention amount was reclassified to a long-term receivable account.
The Company has been engaged in ongoing active efforts to collect the outstanding amount. During the first quarter of 2021, the Company received approximately $0.1 million from the customer. The Company continues to engage with the customer to ensure full payment of open balances, and during April 2022 received an updated acknowledgment of the outstanding balances and assurances of payment from the customer. Further, the Company has been engaged by the customer to perform additional work in 2022 under customary trade credit terms that supports the continued cooperation between the Company and the customer. As a result, the Company did not reserve any allowance against this amount as of January 31, 2022. However, if the Company’s efforts to collect on this account are not successful, the Company may recognize an allowance for all, or substantially all, of any such then uncollected amounts.
Stock repurchase plan
On October 4, 2021, the Company's Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program, which authorizes the Company to purchase up to $3.0 million of its outstanding shares of common stock. Stock repurchases are permitted to be executed through open market or privately negotiated transactions over the course of 12 months, depending upon current market conditions and other factors. As of January 31, 2022, the Company had repurchased its stock with a total value of $2.0 million, leaving $1.0 million remaining authorized for potential repurchase under the program.
Critical accounting estimates and policies
The Company's significant accounting policies are discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The application of certain of these policies requires significant judgments or a historical based estimation process that can affect the results of operations and financial position of the Company, as well as the related footnote disclosures. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that it believes are reasonable. If actual amounts ultimately differ from previous estimates, the revisions are included in the Company's results of operations for the period in which the actual amounts become known.
Revenue recognition. In accordance with Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-19, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”), the Company recognizes revenue when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. See Note 4 - Revenue recognition, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, for more detail.
Over time revenue recognition. Certain domestic divisions have contracts that recognize revenues using periodic recognition of income. For these contracts, the Company uses the over time accounting method. Under this approach, income is recognized in each reporting period based on the status of the uncompleted contracts and the current estimates of costs to complete. The amount of revenue recognized is determined by the relationship of costs incurred to the total estimated costs of the contract. Provisions are made for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts in the period in which such losses are determined. Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to costs and income. Such revisions are recognized in the period in which they are determined. Claims for additional compensation due to the Company are recognized in contract revenues when realization is probable, the amount can be reliably estimated and the amount is not subject to reversal.
Income taxes. Deferred income taxes have been provided for temporary differences arising from differences in the basis of assets and liabilities for tax and financial reporting purposes. Deferred income taxes on temporary differences have been recorded at the current tax rate. The Company assesses its deferred tax assets for realizability at each reporting period. The Company has not recognized any tax benefits on losses in the United States due to a full valuation allowance applied against its deferred tax assets.
The Company recognizes a tax position in its consolidated financial statements only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authority. For further information, See Note 7 - Income taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
New accounting pronouncements. See Recent accounting pronouncements in Note 2 - Significant accounting policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.