Item 7. Combined Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
(All Registrants)
This "Item 7. Combined Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" is separately filed by PPL, PPL Electric, LG&E and KU. Information contained herein relating to any individual Registrant is filed by such Registrant solely on its own behalf, and no Registrant makes any representation as to information relating to any other Registrant. The specific Registrant to which disclosures are applicable is identified in parenthetical headings in italics above the applicable disclosure or within the applicable disclosure for each Registrant's related activities and disclosures. Within combined disclosures, amounts are disclosed for individual Registrants when significant.
The following should be read in conjunction with the Registrants' Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes. Capitalized terms and abbreviations are defined in the glossary. Dollars are in millions, except per share data, unless otherwise noted.
"Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" includes the following information:
•"Overview" provides a description of each Registrant's business strategy and a discussion of important financial and operational developments.
•"Results of Operations" for all Registrants includes a "Statement of Income Analysis," which discusses significant changes in principal line items on the Statements of Income, comparing 2021 with 2020. For PPL, "Results of Operations" also includes "Segment Earnings" and "Adjusted Gross Margins," which provide a detailed analysis of earnings by reportable segment. These discussions include non-GAAP financial measures, including "Earnings from Ongoing Operations" and "Adjusted Gross Margins" and provide explanations of the non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable GAAP measure.
•"Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources" provides an analysis of the Registrants' liquidity positions and credit profiles. This section also includes a discussion of forecasted sources and uses of cash and rating agency actions.
•"Financial Condition - Risk Management" provides an explanation of the Registrants' risk management programs relating to market and credit risk.
•"Application of Critical Accounting Policies" provides an overview of the accounting policies that are particularly important to the results of operations and financial condition of the Registrants and that require their management to make significant estimates, assumptions and other judgments of inherently uncertain matters.
For comparison of the Registrants’ results of operations and cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2019, refer to “Item 7. Combined Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the 2020 Form 10-K, filed with the SEC on February 18, 2021.
Overview
For a description of the Registrants and their businesses, see "Item 1. Business."
Business Strategy
(All Registrants)
PPL operates three fully regulated high-performing utilities. These utilities are located in Pennsylvania and Kentucky, constructive regulatory jurisdictions with distinct regulatory structures and customer classes.
PPL's strategy, which is supported by the other Registrants, is to achieve industry-leading performance in safety, reliability,
customer satisfaction and operational efficiency; to advance a clean energy transition while maintaining affordability and
reliability; to maintain a strong financial foundation and create long-term value for our shareowners; to foster a diverse and
exceptional workplace; and to build strong communities in areas that we serve.
Central to PPL's and the other Registrants' strategy is recovering capital project costs efficiently through various rate-making mechanisms, including periodic base rate case proceedings using forward test years, annual FERC formula rate mechanisms
and other regulatory agency-approved recovery mechanisms designed to limit regulatory lag. In Kentucky, the KPSC has adopted a series of regulatory mechanisms (ECR, DSM, GLT, fuel adjustment clause, and gas supply clause) and recovery on construction work-in-progress that reduce regulatory lag and provide timely recovery of and return on, as appropriate, prudently incurred costs. In Pennsylvania, the FERC transmission formula rate, DSIC mechanism, Smart Meter Rider and other recovery mechanisms operate to reduce regulatory lag and provide for timely recovery of and a return on, as appropriate, prudently incurred costs.
In March 2021, PPL entered into definitive agreements that strategically reposition the company as a U.S.-based energy
company focused on building the utilities of the future. These transactions are intended to strengthen PPL’s credit metrics,
enhance long-term earnings growth and predictability, and provide the company with greater financial flexibility to invest in
sustainable energy solutions. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements, and the "Sale of the U.K. Utility Business" and "Share Purchase Agreement to Acquire Narragansett Electric" discussions in "Financial and Operational Developments" below for additional information.
Financial and Operational Developments
(PPL)
Sale of the U.K. Utility Business
On March 17, 2021, PPL WPD Limited (WPD Limited) entered into a share purchase agreement (WPD SPA) to sell PPL's U.K. utility business to National Grid Holdings One plc (National Grid U.K.), a subsidiary of National Grid plc. Pursuant to the WPD SPA, National Grid U.K. would acquire 100% of the issued share capital of PPL WPD Investments Limited (WPD Investments) for £7.8 billion in cash. WPD Limited would also receive an additional amount of £548,000 for each day during the period from January 1, 2021 to the closing date if the dividends usually declared by WPD Investments to WPD Limited were not paid for that period.
On June 14, 2021, the sale of the U.K. utility business was completed. The transaction resulted in cash proceeds of $10.7 billion inclusive of foreign currency hedges executed by PPL. PPL received net proceeds, after taxes and fees, of $10.4 billion, resulting in a pre-tax loss on sale of $1.6 billion. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the sale of the U.K. utility business.
WPD Limited and National Grid U.K. each made customary representations and warranties in the WPD SPA. National Grid
U.K., at its expense, purchased warranty and indemnity insurance. WPD Limited agreed to indemnify National Grid U.K. for
certain tax related matters. See Note 11 to the Financial Statements for additional information. PPL has not had and will not
have any significant involvement with the U.K. utility business after completion of the sale.
Share Purchase Agreement to Acquire Narragansett Electric
On March 17, 2021, PPL and its subsidiary, PPL Energy Holdings, entered into a share purchase agreement (Narragansett SPA) with National Grid USA (National Grid U.S.), a subsidiary of National Grid plc, to acquire 100% of the outstanding shares of common stock of Narragansett Electric for approximately $3.8 billion in cash. On May 3, 2021, an Assignment and Assumption Agreement was entered into by PPL, PPL Energy Holdings, PPL Rhode Island Holdings and National Grid U.S. whereby certain interests of PPL Energy Holdings in the Narragansett SPA were assigned to and assumed by PPL Rhode Island Holdings. Pursuant to that Assignment and Assumption Agreement, PPL Rhode Island Holdings became the purchasing entity under the Narragansett SPA. The acquisition is expected to be funded with proceeds from the sale of the U.K. utility business. PPL has agreed to guarantee all obligations of PPL Energy Holdings and PPL Rhode Island Holdings under the Narragansett SPA and the related Assignment and Assumption Agreement.
The closing of the acquisition is subject to the receipt of certain U.S. regulatory approvals or waivers, and other customary conditions to closing. To date, several required regulatory approvals or waivers have been received, though the order granting the waiver by the Massachusetts Department of Public Utilities is subject to a pending appeal. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information regarding the current status of this appeal. PPL anticipates receiving a final order from the Rhode Island Division of Public Utilities and Carriers with respect to the acquisition by March 2022. The regulatory approvals remain subject to any applicable appeal periods. The consummation of the transaction is not subject to a financing condition.
See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the Narragansett SPA.
Debt Redemption
PPL Capital Funding paid $3.883 billion to tender and/or redeem an aggregate total of $3.484 billion of outstanding debt during 2021, resulting in a loss on extinguishment of $395 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. See "Long Term Debt" in Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
Share Repurchases
PPL's Board of Directors authorized share repurchases of up to $3 billion of PPL common shares. During 2021, PPL repurchased 34.8 million shares at a cost of $1.0 billion. See "Equity Securities" in Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
LKE Debt Redemption
On July 1, 2021, LKE redeemed, at par, its $250 million 4.375% Senior Notes due 2021 and on July 9, 2021, LKE filed a Form 15 with the SEC to suspend its duty to file reports under sections 13 and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. As a result, beginning with the June 30, 2021 Form 10-Q, LKE was no longer reported as a Registrant.
U.K. Corporation Tax Rate Change
In 2021, the U.K. Finance Act 2021 increased the U.K. corporation tax rate from 19% to 25%, effective April 1, 2023. The primary impact of the corporation tax rate increase was an increase in deferred tax liabilities of the U.K. utility business, which was sold on June 14, 2021, and a corresponding deferred tax expense of $383 million, which was recognized in continuing operations in the second quarter of 2021.
Regulatory Requirements
(All Registrants)
The Registrants cannot predict the impact that future regulatory requirements may have on their financial condition or results of operations.
Environmental Considerations for Coal-Fired Generation (PPL, LG&E and KU)
The businesses of LG&E and KU are subject to extensive federal, state and local environmental laws, rules and regulations, including those pertaining to CCRs, GHG, and ELGs. See Notes 7, 14 and 20 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of these significant environmental matters. These and other environmental requirements led PPL, LG&E and KU to retire approximately 1,200 MW of coal-fired generating plants in Kentucky since 2010. As part of the long-term generation planning process, LG&E and KU evaluate a range of factors including the impact of potential stricter environmental regulations, fuel price scenarios, the cost of replacement generation, continued operations and major maintenance costs and the risk of major equipment failures in determining when to retire generation assets. As a result of environmental requirements and aging infrastructure, LG&E anticipates retiring two older coal-fired units at the Mill Creek Plant and KU anticipates retiring one coal-fired unit at the E.W. Brown plant. Mill Creek Unit 1 has 300 MW of capacity and is expected to be retired in 2024. Mill Creek Unit 2 and E.W. Brown Unit 3 have capacities of 297 MW and 412 MW and are expected to be retired in 2028. LG&E and KU anticipate earning recovery of and return on any remaining net book value of these assets through the Retired Asset Recovery (RAR) rider. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information related to the RAR rider.
PPL Electric Transmission Formula Rate Return on Equity (PPL and PPL Electric)
On May 21, 2020, PP&L Industrial Customer Alliance (PPLICA) filed a complaint with the FERC alleging that PPL Electric's base return on equity (ROE) of 11.18% used to determine PPL Electric's formula transmission rate was unjust and unreasonable.
On August 20, 2021, PPL Electric entered into a settlement agreement (the Settlement) with PPLICA and all other parties, including intervenors, with respect to the complaint filed by PPLICA on May 21, 2020.
The key aspects of the Settlement include:
•changes to PPL Electric’s base ROE:
◦beginning as of May 21, 2020 and continuing through May 31, 2022, the ROE shall be 9.90%;
◦beginning on June 1, 2022 and continuing through May 31, 2023, the ROE shall be 9.95%;
◦beginning on June 1, 2023, the ROE shall be 10.00%, which shall continue in effect unless and until changed as permitted by the terms of the Settlement;
•changes the equity component of PPL Electric’s capital structure to be the lower of (i) PPL Electric’s actual equity component, calculated in accordance with the formula rate template, or (ii) 56.00%;
•allows modification of the current rate year of June 1 to May 31 to a calendar year of January 1 to December 31; and
•allows modification of the current formula rate based on a historic test year to a projected test year.
In 2021, PPL Electric recorded a revenue reduction of $78 million ($55 million after-tax), of which $73 million ($52 million after-tax) represents revenue subject to refund for the period May 21, 2020 through November 30, 2021. The reduction recorded includes $28 million ($20 million after-tax) related to the period from May 21, 2020 to December 31, 2020. The $73 million of revenue to be refunded will be returned to customers from January 1, 2022 through May 31, 2022 and is based on the difference between charges that were calculated using the ROE in effect at the time and charges calculated using the revised ROE provided for the Settlement, plus interest at the FERC interest rate.
The FERC approved the Settlement on November 5, 2021. Interim rates reflecting the agreed-to-base ROE in the Settlement were effective December 1, 2021.
FERC Transmission Rate Filing (PPL, LG&E and KU)
In 2018, LG&E and KU applied to the FERC requesting elimination of certain on-going credits to a sub-set of transmission customers relating to the 1998 merger of LG&E's and KU's parent entities and the 2006 withdrawal of LG&E and KU from the Midcontinent Independent System Operator, Inc. (MISO), a regional transmission operator and energy market. The application sought termination of LG&E's and KU's commitment to provide certain Kentucky municipalities mitigation for certain horizontal market power concerns arising out of the 1998 LG&E and KU merger and 2006 MISO withdrawal. The amounts at issue are generally waivers or credits granted to a limited number of Kentucky municipalities for either certain LG&E and KU or MISO transmission charges incurred for transmission service received. In 2019, the FERC granted LG&E's and KU's request to remove the ongoing credits, conditioned upon the implementation by LG&E and KU of a transition mechanism for certain existing power supply arrangements, which was subsequently filed, modified, and approved by the FERC in 2020 and 2021. In 2020, LG&E and KU and other parties filed appeals with the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals regarding FERC's orders on the elimination of the mitigation and required transition mechanism. Oral arguments in the appellate proceeding occurred on February 14, 2022. LG&E and KU cannot predict the outcome of the respective appellate and FERC proceedings. LG&E and KU currently receive recovery of the waivers and credits provided through other rate mechanisms and such rate recovery would be anticipated to be adjusted consistent with potential changes or terminations of the waivers and credits, as such become effective.
Rate Case Proceedings
(PPL, LG&E and KU)
On November 25, 2020, LG&E and KU filed requests with the KPSC for an increase in annual electricity and gas revenues of approximately $331 million ($131 million and $170 million in electricity revenues at LG&E and KU and $30 million in gas revenues at LG&E). The revenue increases represented an increase of 11.6% and 10.4% in electricity revenues at LG&E and KU, and an increase of 8.3% in gas revenues at LG&E. In recognition of the economic impact of COVID-19, LG&E and KU requested approval of a one-year billing credit which will credit customers approximately $53 million ($41 million at LG&E and $12 million at KU). The billing credit represents the return to customers of certain regulatory liabilities on LG&E’s and KU’s Balance Sheets and serves to partially mitigate the rate increases during the first year in which the new rates are in effect.
LG&E’s and KU’s applications also included a request for a CPCN to deploy Advanced Metering Infrastructure across LG&E’s and KU’s service territories in Kentucky.
The applications were based on a forecasted test year of July 1, 2021 through June 30, 2022 and requested an authorized return on equity of 10.0%.
On April 19, 2021, LG&E and KU entered into an agreement with all intervening parties to the proceedings resolving all matters in their applications, with the explicit exception of LG&E's and KU's net metering proposals.
On June 30, 2021 and December 6, 2021, the KPSC issued orders approving the proposed agreement filed in April 2021, with certain modifications. The orders provided for increases in annual revenues of $207 million ($74 million and $110 million in electricity revenues at LG&E and KU and $23 million in gas revenues at LG&E) based on an authorized return on equity of
9.425%. The orders grant an authorized 9.35% return on equity for the ECR and GLT mechanisms and do not modify the requested one-year billing credit. The orders approved the CPCN to deploy Advanced Metering Infrastructure and provide regulatory asset treatment for the remaining net book value of legacy meters upon full implementation of the Advanced Metering Infrastructure program. The orders also approved the establishment of a Retired Asset Recovery (RAR) rider to provide for recovery of and return on the remaining investment in certain electric generating units upon their retirement over a ten-year period following retirement. In respect of the RAR rider, LG&E and KU continue to use currently approved depreciation rates for Mill Creek Units 1 and 2 and Brown Unit 3. The orders also approved a four-year "stay out" commitment from LG&E and KU to refrain from effective base rate increases before July 1, 2025, subject to certain exceptions. On September 24, 2021, the KPSC issued orders providing adjustments to previous net metering proposals. These adjustments did not impact the annual revenue increases.
(KU)
On August 31, 2021, KU filed a request with the VSCC for an annual increase in Virginia base electricity rates of approximately $12 million. KU's request is based on an authorized 10.4% return on equity. A hearing on the matter is scheduled for March 17, 2022. Subject to regulatory review and approval, new rates would become effective June 1, 2022.
Results of Operations
(PPL)
The "Statement of Income Analysis" discussion below describes significant changes in principal line items on PPL's Statements of Income, comparing 2021 with 2020. The "Segment Earnings" and "Adjusted Gross Margins" discussions for PPL provide a review of results by reportable segment. These discussions include non-GAAP financial measures, including "Earnings from Ongoing Operations" and "Adjusted Gross Margins," and provide explanations of the non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation of those measures to the most comparable GAAP measure.
(PPL Electric, LG&E and KU)
A "Statement of Income Analysis" is presented separately for PPL Electric, LG&E and KU. The "Statement of Income Analysis" discussion below describes significant changes in principal line items on the Statements of Income, comparing 2021 with 2020. The results of operations section for PPL Electric, LG&E and KU is presented in a reduced disclosure format in accordance with General Instructions (I)(2)(a) of Form 10-K.
PPL: Statement of Income Analysis, Segment Earnings and Adjusted Gross Margins
Statement of Income Analysis
Net income for the years ended December 31 includes the following results:
Operating Revenues
The increase (decrease) in operating revenues was due to:
(a) The increase was primarily the result of higher energy prices and higher customer usage, partially offset by higher volumes of shopping customers.
(b) The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the transmission formula rate return on equity and a lower PPL zonal peak load billing factor, partially offset by returns on additional transmission capital investments and return of related depreciation expense. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the transmission formula rate return on equity reduction.
(c) The increases were primarily due to higher recoveries of fuel and energy purchases due to higher commodity costs.
(d) The increases were primarily due to favorable weather.
(e) The increases were due to new base rates approved by the KPSC effective July 1, 2021.
Fuel
Fuel increased $78 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $59 million increase at KU due to a $39 million increase in commodity costs and a $19 million increase in volumes driven by weather as well a $19 million increase at LG&E due to a $10 million increase in volumes driven by weather and an $8 million increase in commodity costs.
Energy Purchases
Energy purchases increased $118 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $75 million increase at PPL Electric due to higher PLR prices of $40 million and higher PLR volumes of $28 million, and a $42 million increase at LG&E primarily due to a $35 million increase in commodity costs and a $6 million increase in gas volumes driven by weather.
Other Operation and Maintenance
The increase (decrease) in other operation and maintenance was due to:
Depreciation
The increase (decrease) in depreciation was due to:
Taxes, Other Than Income
The increase (decrease) in taxes, other than income was due to:
(a)The increase was primarily due to a favorable settlement of 2008 - 2010 gross receipts tax assessments in 2020.
Other Income (Expense) - net
The increase (decrease) in other income (expense) - net was due to:
Interest Expense
The increase (decrease) in interest expense was due to:
Income Taxes
The increase (decrease) in income taxes was due to:
(a)In 2021, PPL recorded a $31 million state deferred tax benefit on a net operating loss and an offsetting valuation allowance in connection with the loss on extinguishment associated with a tender offer to purchase and retire PPL Capital Funding's outstanding Senior Notes. See Note 8 for additional information on the tender offer.
(b)The U.K. corporation tax rate was scheduled to be reduced from 19% to 17%, effective April 1, 2020. In 2020, the U.K. Finance Act 2020 cancelled the tax rate reduction to 17%, thereby maintaining the corporation tax rate at 19% for financial years 2020 and 2021. The primary impact of the cancellation of the corporation tax rate reduction was an increase in deferred tax liabilities and a corresponding deferred tax expense of $106 million. In 2021, the U.K. Finance Act 2021 increased the U.K. corporation tax rate from 19% to 25%, effective April 1, 2023. The primary impact of the corporation tax rate increase was an increase in deferred tax liabilities of the U.K. utility business, which was sold on June 14, 2021, and a corresponding deferred tax expense of $383 million.
See Note 6 to the Financial Statements for additional information on income taxes.
Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations (net of income taxes)
Income (loss) from discontinued operations (net of income taxes) decreased $2,327 million in 2021 compared with 2020. The decrease was attributable primarily to the 2021 loss on sale of the U.K. utility business of $1,609 million and an increase in income tax expense of $571 million. See "Discontinued Operations" in Note 9 to the Financial Statements for summarized results of the operations of the U.K. utility business.
Segment Earnings
PPL's Net Income by reportable segments was as follows:
(a)Primarily represents financing and certain other costs incurred at the corporate level that have not been allocated or assigned to the segments, which are presented to reconcile segment information to PPL's consolidated results.
(b)The amount for 2020 has been adjusted for certain costs that were previously included in the U.K. Regulated segment.
(c)See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
Earnings from Ongoing Operations
Management utilizes "Earnings from Ongoing Operations" as a non-GAAP financial measure that should not be considered as an alternative to net income, an indicator of operating performance determined in accordance with GAAP. PPL believes that Earnings from Ongoing Operations is useful and meaningful to investors because it provides management's view of PPL's earnings performance as another criterion in making investment decisions. In addition, PPL's management uses Earnings from Ongoing Operations in measuring achievement of certain corporate performance goals, including targets for certain executive incentive compensation. Other companies may use different measures to present financial performance.
Earnings from Ongoing Operations is adjusted for the impact of special items. Special items are presented in the financial tables on an after-tax basis with the related income taxes on special items separately disclosed. Income taxes on special items, when applicable, are calculated based on the statutory tax rate of the entity where the activity is recorded. Special items may include items such as:
• Gains and losses on sales of assets not in the ordinary course of business.
• Impairment charges.
• Significant workforce reduction and other restructuring effects.
• Acquisition and divestiture-related adjustments.
• Significant losses on early extinguishment of debt.
• Other charges or credits that are, in management's view, non-recurring or otherwise not reflective of the company's ongoing operations.
PPL's Earnings from Ongoing Operations by reportable segment were as follows:
(a)The amount for 2020 has been adjusted for certain costs that were previously included in the U.K. Regulated segment.
See "Reconciliation of Earnings from Ongoing Operations" below for a reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to Net Income.
Kentucky Regulated Segment
The Kentucky Regulated segment consists primarily of LG&E's and KU's regulated electricity generation, transmission and distribution operations, as well as LG&E's regulated distribution and sale of natural gas.
Net Income and Earnings from Ongoing Operations include the following results:
(a)Borrowings between LKE and PPL were $2,166 million and $1,451 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following after-tax gains (losses), which management considers special items, impacted the Kentucky Regulated segment's results and are excluded from Earnings from Ongoing Operations:
(a)Adjustment of valuation allowances related to certain tax credits recorded in 2017 as a result of the TCJA.
(b)Costs incurred related to PPL's strategic repositioning.
(c)Incremental costs for outside services, customer payment processing, personal protective equipment and other safety related actions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
The changes in the components of the Kentucky Regulated segment's results between these periods were due to the factors set forth below, which reflect amounts classified as Kentucky Adjusted Gross Margins and the items that management considers special on separate lines and not in their respective Statement of Income line item.
•See "Adjusted Gross Margins - Changes in Adjusted Gross Margins" for an explanation of Kentucky Adjusted Gross Margins.
•Higher other operation and maintenance expense in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $24 million increase in administrative and general expenses, an $18 million increase in plant operations and maintenance, an $8 million increase in electric distribution operations and maintenance, a $7 million increase in plant outage expenses, a $6 million increase in electric transmission operations and maintenance, a $6 million increase due to certain ECR and GLT expenses transferred
to base rates as a result of the 2020 Kentucky rate case and various support costs and other items that were not individually significant.
•Higher depreciation expense in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a $60 million increase related to certain ECR and GLT depreciation expenses transferred to base rates as a result of the 2020 Kentucky rate case, a $21 million increase due to additional assets placed into service, net of retirements and a $9 million increase due to higher depreciation rates, effective July 1, 2021.
•Lower interest expense, inclusive of affiliate interest, in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to $40 million of interest costs allocated to the Kentucky regulated segment in 2020 that were not allocated in 2021 and a $7 million decrease due to lower interest rates.
Pennsylvania Regulated Segment
The Pennsylvania Regulated segment includes the regulated electricity transmission and distribution operations of PPL Electric.
Net Income and Earnings from Ongoing Operations include the following results:
The following after-tax gains (losses), which management considers special items, impacted the Pennsylvania Regulated segment's results and are excluded from Earnings from Ongoing Operations:
(a)Represents the portion of the revenue reduction recognized in the December 31, 2021, Statement of Income related to the period from May 21, 2020 through December 31, 2020. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(b)Incremental costs for outside services, personal protective equipment and other safety related actions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
The changes in the components of the Pennsylvania Regulated segment's results between these periods were due to the factors set forth below, which reflect amounts classified as Pennsylvania Adjusted Gross Margins and the items that management considers special on separate lines and not in their respective Statement of Income line items.
•See "Adjusted Gross Margins - Changes in Adjusted Gross Margins" for an explanation of Pennsylvania Adjusted Gross Margins.
•Higher other operation and maintenance expense in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to an increase in Corporate support costs.
Reconciliation of Earnings from Ongoing Operations
The following tables contain after-tax gains (losses), in total, which management considers special items, that are excluded from Earnings from Ongoing Operations, and a reconciliation to PPL's "Net Income" for the years ended December 31:
(a)See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(b)PPL incurred legal expenses related to litigation with its former affiliate, Talen Montana. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(c)Costs incurred for 2021 are related to the sale of the U.K. utility business and PPL’s strategic repositioning. Costs incurred for 2020 are related to the process to sell the U.K. utility business.
(d)Adjustment of valuation allowances related to certain tax credits recorded in 2017 as a result of the TCJA.
(e)Costs related to the integration of Narragansett Electric. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(f)Impact of the U.K. Finance Acts on deferred tax balances. See Note 6 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(g)See Note 1 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(h)See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(i)Settlement charge from the remeasurement of the projected benefit obligation for the PPL Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan related to a lump-sum payment made to a former PPL executive.
(j)The amounts for 2020 have been adjusted for certain costs that were previously included in the U.K. Regulated segment.
Adjusted Gross Margins
Management also utilizes the following non-GAAP financial measures as indicators of performance for its businesses.
•"Kentucky Adjusted Gross Margins" is a single financial performance measure of the electricity generation, transmission and distribution operations of the Kentucky Regulated segment, as well as the Kentucky Regulated segment's distribution and sale of natural gas. In calculating this measure, fuel, energy purchases and certain variable costs of production (recorded in "Other operation and maintenance" on the Statements of Income) are deducted from operating revenues. In addition, certain other expenses, recorded in "Other operation and maintenance", "Depreciation" and "Taxes, other than income" on the Statements of Income, associated with approved cost recovery mechanisms are offset against the recovery of those expenses, which are included in revenues. These mechanisms allow for direct recovery of these expenses and, in some cases, returns on capital investments and performance incentives. As a result, this measure represents the net revenues from electricity and gas operations.
•"Pennsylvania Adjusted Gross Margins" is a single financial performance measure of the electricity transmission and distribution operations of the Pennsylvania Regulated segment. In calculating this measure, utility revenues and expenses associated with approved recovery mechanisms, including energy provided as a PLR, are offset with minimal impact on earnings. Costs associated with these mechanisms are recorded in "Energy purchases," "Other operation and maintenance," (which are primarily Act 129, Storm Damage and Universal Service program costs), "Depreciation" (which is primarily related to the Act 129 Smart Meter program) and "Taxes, other than income," (which is primarily gross receipts tax) on the Statements of Income. This measure represents the net revenues from the Pennsylvania Regulated segment's electricity delivery operations.
These measures are not intended to replace "Operating Income," which is determined in accordance with GAAP, as an indicator of overall operating performance. Other companies may use different measures to analyze and report their results of operations. Management believes these measures provide additional useful criteria to make investment decisions. These performance measures are used, in conjunction with other information, by senior management and PPL's Board of Directors to manage operations and analyze actual results compared with budget.
Changes in Adjusted Gross Margins
The following table shows Adjusted Gross Margins by PPL's reportable segment and by component, as applicable, for the year ended December 31 as well as the changes between periods. The factors that gave rise to the changes are described following the table.
Kentucky Adjusted Gross Margins
Kentucky Adjusted Gross Margins increased in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to higher base rates of $99 million, environmental and gas cost recoveries added to base rates of $66 million, $15 million of higher sales volumes primarily due to weather, and $9 million of higher commercial and industrial demand primarily due to the impacts of COVID-19 in 2020, partially offset by $17 million of lower adjusted gross margins as a result of the economic relief billing credit, net of amortization.
The increase in base rates was the result of new rates approved by the KPSC effective July 1, 2021. The environmental and gas cost recoveries added to base rates were the result of the transfer of certain ECR and GLT expenses into base rates as a result of the 2020 Kentucky rate case. This transfer results in depreciation and other operation and maintenance expenses associated with the ECR and GLT programs being excluded from margins in the second half of 2021, while the recovery of such costs remain in Kentucky Gross Margins through base rates.
Pennsylvania Adjusted Gross Margins
Distribution
Distribution Adjusted Gross Margins increased in 2021 compared with 2020. Higher sales volumes of $13 million were partially offset by $8 million of lower returns on distribution system improvement capital investments.
Transmission
Transmission Adjusted Gross Margins decreased in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $28 million decrease as a result of a lower PPL zonal peak load billing factor and a $50 million decrease due to a reduction in the transmission formula rate return on equity. Partially offsetting these unfavorable items was $48 million of returns on additional transmission capital investments focused on replacing aging infrastructure and improving reliability and $20 million return of related depreciation expense. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the transmission formula rate return on equity reduction.
Reconciliation of Adjusted Gross Margins
The following tables contain the components from the Statement of Income that are included in the non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation to PPL's "Operating Income" for the years ended December 31:
(a)Represents amounts excluded from Adjusted Gross Margins.
(b)As reported on the Statements of Income.
PPL Electric: Statement of Income Analysis
Net income for the years ended December 31 includes the following results:
Operating Revenues
The increase (decrease) in operating revenues was due to:
(a) Distribution price variance was primarily due to reconcilable cost recovery mechanisms approved by the PUC.
(b) The increase was primarily the result of higher energy prices and higher customer usage, partially offset by higher volumes of shopping customers.
(c) The decrease was primarily due to a reduction in the transmission formula rate return on equity and a lower PPL zonal peak load billing factor, partially offset by returns on additional transmission capital investments and return of related depreciation expense. See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the transmission formula rate return on equity reduction.
Energy Purchases
Energy purchases increased $75 million in 2021 compared with 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher PLR prices of $40 million and higher PLR volumes of $28 million.
Other Operation and Maintenance
The increase (decrease) in other operation and maintenance was due to:
LG&E: Statement of Income Analysis
Net income for the years ended December 31 includes the following results:
Operating Revenues
The increase (decrease) in operating revenues was due to:
(a)The increases were primarily due to higher recoveries of fuel and energy purchases due to higher commodity costs.
(b)The increases were due to new base rates approved by the KPSC effective July 1, 2021.
(c)The increases were primarily due to favorable weather.
Fuel
Fuel increased $19 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $10 million increase in volumes driven by weather and an $8 million increase in commodity costs.
Energy Purchases
Energy purchases increased $42 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $35 million increase in commodity costs and a $6 million increase in gas volumes driven by weather.
Other Operation and Maintenance
The increase (decrease) in other operation and maintenance was due to:
Depreciation
Depreciation increased $20 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $13 million increase related to additional assets placed into service, net of retirements and a $7 million increase related to higher depreciation rates effective July 1, 2021.
KU: Statement of Income Analysis
Net income for the years ended December 31 includes the following results:
Operating Revenue
The increase (decrease) in operating revenue was due to:
(a)The increases were due to new base rates approved by the KPSC effective July 1, 2021.
(b)The increases were primarily due to higher recoveries of fuel and energy purchases due to higher commodity costs.
(c)The increases were primarily due to favorable weather.
Fuel
Fuel increased $59 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $39 million increase in commodity costs and a $19 million increase in volumes driven by weather.
Other Operation and Maintenance
The increase in other operation and maintenance was due to:
Depreciation
Depreciation increased $20 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to a $14 million increase related to additional assets placed into service, net of retirements and a $4 million increase related to higher depreciation rates effective July 1, 2021.
Financial Condition
The remainder of this Item 7 in this Form 10-K is presented on a combined basis, providing information, as applicable, for all Registrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
(All Registrants)
The Registrants' cash flows from operations and access to cost effective bank and capital markets are subject to risks and uncertainties. See "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of risks and uncertainties that could affect the Registrants' cash flows.
The Registrants had the following at:
(All Registrants)
Net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31 and the changes between periods were as follows:
Operating Activities
The components of the change in cash provided by (used in) operating activities were as follows:
(PPL)
PPL cash provided by operating activities in 2020 decreased $328 million compared with 2019.
•Net income decreased $622 million between periods and included an increase in net non-cash charges of $344 million. The increase in non-cash charges was primarily due to the loss on extinguishment of debt and the impairment of solar panels, partially offset by a decrease in deferred income taxes and investment tax credits.
•The $93 million decrease in cash from changes in working capital was primarily due to a decrease in taxes payable and a decrease in other current assets and liabilities, partially offset by an increase in regulatory liabilities (primarily due to PPL Electric’s transmission formula rate return on equity reduction and the timing of rate recovery mechanisms).
•The $23 million decrease in cash provided by other operating activities was driven by a decrease in other non-current assets (primarily related to a decrease in pension plan assets, partially offset by an increase in non-current regulatory assets) and an increase in non-current liabilities (primarily related to an increase in ARO expenditures and accrued pension obligations, partially offset by a decrease in non-current regulatory liabilities).
(PPL Electric)
PPL Electric's cash provided by operating activities in 2021 increased $85 million compared with 2020.
•Net income decreased $52 million between the periods and included a decrease in non-cash components of $13 million. The decrease in non-cash components was primarily due to a decrease in other expenses (primarily due to a decrease in canceled projects).
•The $160 million increase in cash from changes in working capital was primarily due to an increase in regulatory liabilities (primarily due to a transmission formula rate return on equity reduction and the timing of rate recovery mechanisms).
•The $10 million decrease in cash provided by other operating activities was driven primarily by a decrease in accrued pension obligations.
(LG&E)
LG&E's cash provided by operating activities in 2021 decreased $25 million compared with 2020.
•Net income increased $5 million between the periods and included an increase in non-cash components of $16 million. The increase in non-cash components was primarily driven by an increase in depreciation expense (primarily due to additional assets placed into service, net of retirements and higher depreciation rates effective July 1, 2021), partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense (primarily due to amortization of the economic relief billing credit regulatory liability).
•Cash from changes in working capital decreased by $28 million. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in regulatory assets and liabilities, net (primarily due to the timing of rate recovery mechanisms), an increase in fuel, materials and supplies (primarily due to higher commodity costs), an increase in accounts receivable from affiliates (primarily due to timing of payments) and a decrease in other current liabilities (primarily due to timing of payments), partially offset by an increase in accounts payable (primarily due to timing of payments).
•The decrease in cash provided by other operating activities was driven primarily by a decrease in other liabilities (primarily related to noncurrent regulatory liabilities).
(KU)
KU's cash provided by operating activities in 2021 increased $65 million compared with 2020.
•Net income increased $16 million between the periods and included no change in non-cash components. Non-cash components were primarily driven by a decrease in deferred income tax expense (primarily due to book versus tax plant timing differences), offset by an increase in depreciation expense (primarily due to additional assets placed into service, net of retirements and higher depreciation rates effective July 1, 2021).
•Cash from changes in working capital increased $20 million. The increase was primarily due to an increase in accounts payable to affiliates (primarily due to timing of payments), a decrease in accounts receivable (primarily due to weather and the impacts of COVID-19) and a decrease in unbilled revenues (primarily due to weather), partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable (primarily due to timing of payments), a decrease in other current liabilities (primarily due to timing of payments) and decrease in taxes payable (primarily due to timing of payments).
•The increase in cash provided by other operating activities was driven primarily by a decrease in ARO expenditures.
Investing Activities
(All Registrants)
The components of the change in cash provided by (used in) investing activities were as follows:
For PPL, in 2021 compared with 2020, the decrease in expenditures was due to lower project expenditures at and PPL Electric and Safari Energy, partially offset by an increase in expenditures at LG&E and KU. The decrease in expenditures for PPL Electric was primarily due to a planned reduction in capital spending projects related to ongoing efforts to improve reliability and replace aging infrastructure. The increase in expenditures at LG&E and KU was primarily due to higher spending on ELG projects and other projects that are not individually significant.
See "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for detail regarding projected capital expenditures for the years 2022 through 2024.
For PPL Electric, the changes in "Notes receivable from affiliate" activity resulted from the funding of $499 million to an affiliate for general corporate purposes. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of intercompany borrowings.
Financing Activities
(All Registrants)
The components of the change in cash provided by (used in) financing activities were as follows:
(All Registrants)
See Note 8 to the Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for information on 2021 activity.
See "Long-term Debt and Equity Securities" below for additional information on current year activity. See "Forecasted Sources of Cash" for a discussion of the Registrants' plans to issue debt and equity securities, as well as a discussion of credit facility capacity available to the Registrants. Also see "Forecasted Uses of Cash" for a discussion of PPL's plans to pay dividends on common securities in the future, as well as the Registrants' maturities of long-term debt.
Long-term Debt and Equity Securities
Long-term debt and equity securities activity for 2021 included:
(a)Issuances are net of pricing discounts, where applicable, and exclude the impact of debt issuance costs. Includes debt issuances with affiliates.
See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional long-term debt information.
(PPL)
Equity Securities Activities
Share Repurchase
In August 2021, PPL's Board of Directors authorized share repurchases of up to $3 billion of PPL common shares. The actual amount repurchased will depend on various factors, including PPL’s share price, market conditions, and the determination of other uses for the proceeds from the sale of the U.K. utility business, including for incremental capital expenditures. PPL may purchase shares on each trading day subject to market conditions and principles of best execution.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, PPL repurchased 34.8 million shares at a cost of $1.0 billion. Commission fees incurred, which have been included in the cost of repurchases above, were insignificant through December 31, 2021.
See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
ATM Program
In February 2018, PPL entered into an equity distribution agreement, pursuant to which PPL may sell, from time to time, up to an aggregate of $1.0 billion of its common stock through an at-the-market offering program, including a forward sales component. The compensation paid to the selling agents by PPL may be up to 2% of the gross offering proceeds of the shares. There were no issuances under the ATM program for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The ATM program expired in February 2021.
Forecasted Sources of Cash
(All Registrants)
The Registrants expect to continue to have adequate liquidity available from operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents, credit facilities and commercial paper issuances to meet their requirements with respect to their contractual obligations and anticipated capital expenditures. Additionally, subject to market conditions, the Registrants and their subsidiaries may access the capital markets, and PPL Electric, LG&E and KU anticipate receiving equity contributions from their parent or member in 2022.
Credit Facilities
The Registrants maintain credit facilities to enhance liquidity, provide credit support and provide a backstop to commercial paper programs. Amounts borrowed under these credit facilities are reflected in "Short-term debt" on the Balance Sheets. At December 31, 2021, the total committed borrowing capacity under credit facilities and the borrowings under these facilities were:
External
(a)The syndicated credit facilities and PPL Capital Funding's bilateral facility, each contain a financial covenant requiring debt to total capitalization not to exceed 70% for PPL Capital Funding, PPL Electric, LG&E and KU, as calculated in accordance with the facility, and other customary covenants.
The commitments under the credit facilities are provided by a diverse bank group, with no one bank and its affiliates providing an aggregate commitment of more than the following percentages of the total committed capacity: PPL - 7%, PPL Electric - 7%, LG&E - 7% and KU - 7%.
(b)Each company pays customary fees under its respective syndicated credit facility. Borrowings generally bear interest at LIBOR-based rates plus an applicable margin.
In addition to the financial covenants noted in the table above, the credit agreements governing the above credit facilities contain various other covenants. Failure to comply with the covenants after applicable grace periods could result in acceleration of repayment of borrowings and/or termination of the agreements. The Registrants monitor compliance with the covenants on a regular basis. At December 31, 2021, the Registrants were in compliance with these covenants. At this time, the Registrants believe that these covenants and other borrowing conditions will not limit access to these funding sources.
See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of the Registrants' credit facilities.
Intercompany (LG&E and KU)
(a)LG&E and KU participate in an intercompany money pool agreement whereby LKE and/or KU make available to LG&E, and LKE and/or LG&E make available to KU funds up to the difference between LG&E's and KU's FERC borrowing limit and LG&E's and KU's commercial paper capacity limit, at an interest rate based on the lower of a market index of commercial paper issues and two additional rate options based on LIBOR.
See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of intercompany credit facilities.
Commercial Paper (All Registrants)
The Registrants maintain commercial paper programs to provide an additional financing source to fund short-term liquidity needs, as necessary. Commercial paper issuances, included in "Short-term debt" on the Balance Sheets, are supported by the respective Registrant's credit facilities. The following commercial paper programs were in place at:
(a)In March 2021, the capacity for the LG&E commercial paper program was increased from $350 million to $425 million.
Long-term Debt and Equity Securities
(PPL)
PPL and its subsidiaries are authorized to issue, at the discretion of management and subject to market conditions, up to $2.45 billion of long-term debt and equity securities, the proceeds of which would be used to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes.
(PPL Electric)
PPL Electric is authorized to issue, at the discretion of management and subject to market conditions and regulatory approvals, up to $650 million of long-term debt securities, the proceeds of which would be used to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes.
(LG&E and KU)
LG&E is authorized to issue, at the discretion of management and subject to market conditions and regulatory approvals, up to $400 million of long-term debt securities, the proceeds of which would be used to repay short-term debt incurred to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes.
KU is authorized to issue, at the discretion of management and subject to market conditions and regulatory approvals, up to $300 million of long-term debt securities, the proceeds of which would be used to repay short-term debt incurred to fund capital expenditures and for general corporate purposes.
Contributions from Parent (PPL Electric, LG&E and KU)
From time to time, the parents of PPL Electric, LG&E and KU make capital contributions to subsidiaries. The proceeds from these contributions are used to fund capital expenditures and for other general corporate purposes.
Forecasted Uses of Cash
(All Registrants)
In addition to expenditures required for normal operating activities, such as purchased power, payroll, fuel and taxes, the Registrants currently expect to incur future cash outflows for capital expenditures, various contractual obligations, payment of dividends on its common stock, and possibly the purchase or redemption of a portion of debt securities.
Capital Expenditures
PPL currently expects that capital expenditures for 2022 for its current businesses will be approximately $2.0 billion, including approximately $1.0 billion at PPL Electric, approximately $0.4 billion each at KU and LG&E (including approximately $95 million at KU and $47 million at LG&E expected to be covered by ECR plans), and the remainder in corporate and other, including investments in renewables, subject to market conditions. For the period 2023 through 2024, PPL currently anticipates capital expenditures of approximately $3.7 to $4.2 billion, with approximately $1.7 to $1.9 billion at PPL Electric Utilities, approximately $0.85 to $0.95 billion each at KU and LG&E (including approximately $73 million at KU and $46 million at LG&E expected to be covered by ECR plans), and the remainder in corporate and other, including investments in renewables,
subject to market conditions. These later investments are anticipated to be spread approximately evenly over the two years in the period.
Capital expenditure plans are revised periodically to reflect changes in operational, market and regulatory conditions. The capital expenditure plans discussed in this section do not include anticipated capital expenditures with respect to Narragansett Electric. PPL expects to update its capital expenditure plans to include Narragansett Electric upon completion of the acquisition. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the pending Narragansett Electric acquisition.
Contractual Obligations
The Registrants have assumed various financial obligations and commitments in the ordinary course of conducting business. At December 31, 2021, estimated contractual cash obligations were as follows:
(a)Reflects principal maturities based on stated maturity or earlier put dates. See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of variable-rate remarketable bonds issued on behalf of LG&E and KU. The Registrants do not have any significant finance lease obligations.
(b)Assumes interest payments through stated maturity or earlier put dates. The payments herein are subject to change, as payments for debt that is or becomes variable-rate debt have been estimated.
(c)See Note 10 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(d)The amounts include agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and specify all significant terms, including: fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Primarily includes, as applicable, the purchase obligations of electricity, coal, natural gas and limestone, as well as certain construction expenditures, which are also included in the Capital Expenditures discussion above.
(e)Represents contracts to purchase coal, natural gas and natural gas transportation. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(f)Represents future minimum payments under OVEC power purchase agreements through June 2040. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(g)Represents construction commitments, which are also reflected in the Capital Expenditures table presented above.
Dividends/Distributions
(PPL)
PPL views dividends as an integral component of shareowner return and expects to continue to pay dividends in amounts intended to maintain a capitalization structure that supports investment grade credit ratings. In November 2021, PPL declared its quarterly common stock dividend, payable January 3, 2022, at 41.50 cents per share (equivalent to $1.66 per annum). On February 18, 2022, PPL announced a quarterly common stock dividend of 20.00 cents per share, payable April 1, 2022, to shareowners of record as of March 10, 2022. Future dividends will be declared at the discretion of the Board of Directors and will depend upon future earnings, cash flows, financial and legal requirements and other factors.
Subject to certain exceptions, PPL may not declare or pay any cash dividend or distribution on its capital stock during any period in which PPL Capital Funding defers interest payments on its 2007 Series A Junior Subordinated Notes due 2067. At December 31, 2021, no interest payments were deferred.
(PPL Electric, LG&E and KU)
From time to time, as determined by their respective Board of Directors, the Registrants pay dividends, distributions or return capital, as applicable, to their respective shareholders or members. Certain of the credit facilities of PPL Electric, LG&E and KU include minimum debt covenant ratios that could effectively restrict the payment of dividends or distributions.
(All Registrants)
See Note 8 to the Financial Statements for these and other restrictions related to distributions on capital interests for the Registrants and their subsidiaries.
Purchase or Redemption of Debt Securities
The Registrants will continue to evaluate outstanding debt securities and may decide to purchase or redeem these securities in open market or privately negotiated transactions, in exchange transactions or otherwise, depending upon prevailing market conditions, available cash and other factors, and may be commenced or suspended at any time. The amounts involved may be material.
Rating Agency Actions
Moody's and S&P periodically review the credit ratings of the debt of the Registrants and their subsidiaries. Based on their respective independent reviews, the rating agencies may make certain ratings revisions or ratings affirmations.
A credit rating reflects an assessment by the rating agency of the creditworthiness associated with an issuer and particular securities that it issues. The credit ratings of the Registrants and their subsidiaries are based on information provided by the Registrants and other sources. The ratings of Moody's and S&P are not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold any securities of the Registrants or their subsidiaries. Such ratings may be subject to revisions or withdrawal by the agencies at any time and should be evaluated independently of each other and any other rating that may be assigned to the securities.
The credit ratings of the Registrants and their subsidiaries affect their liquidity, access to capital markets and cost of borrowing under their credit facilities. A downgrade in the Registrants' or their subsidiaries' credit ratings could result in higher borrowing costs and reduced access to capital markets. The Registrants and their subsidiaries have no credit rating triggers that would result in the reduction of access to capital markets or the acceleration of maturity dates of outstanding debt.
The following table sets forth the Registrants' and their subsidiaries' credit ratings for outstanding debt securities or commercial paper programs as of December 31, 2021.
The rating agencies have taken the following actions related to the Registrants and their subsidiaries.
(PPL)
In March 2021, Moody's revised its outlook to positive for PPL and PPL Capital Funding.
(PPL and PPL Electric)
In March 2021, S&P revised its outlook to positive for PPL Electric.
In June 2021, Moody’s and S&P assigned ratings of A1 and A to PPL Electric’s $650 million First Mortgage Bonds, Floating Rate Series, due 2024. The bonds were issued on June 24, 2021.
(PPL and LG&E)
In March 2021, Moody’s and S&P assigned ratings of A1 and A to the Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, Kentucky’s $128 million 2.00% Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, 2003 Series A, due 2033, previously issued on behalf of LG&E. The bonds were remarketed April 1, 2021.
In March 2021, Moody’s assigned a rating of A1 and in April 2021, S&P assigned a rating of A to the Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, Kentucky’s $35 million 1.35% Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, 2001 Series B, due 2027, previously issued on behalf of LG&E. The bonds were remarketed May 3, 2021.
In March 2021, Moody’s assigned a rating of A1 and in April 2021, S&P assigned a rating of A to the County of Trimble, Kentucky’s $35 million 1.35% Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, 2001 Series B, due 2027, previously issued on behalf of LG&E. The bonds were remarketed May 3, 2021.
In May 2021, Moody’s and S&P assigned ratings of A1/P-2 and A/A-2 to the Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, Kentucky’s $31 million Environmental Facilities Revenue Refunding Bonds, 2007 Series A, due 2033, previously issued on behalf of LG&E. The bonds were remarketed June 1, 2021.
In May 2021, Moody’s and S&P assigned ratings of A1/P-2 and A/A-2 to the Louisville/Jefferson County Metro Government, Kentucky’s $35 million Environmental Facilities Revenue Refunding Bonds, 2007 Series B, due 2033, previously issued on behalf of LG&E. The bonds were remarketed June 1, 2021.
In August 2021, Moody's and S&P assigned ratings of A1 and A to the County of Trimble, Kentucky's $28 million 0.625% Pollution Control Revenue Bonds, 2001 Series A, due 2026, previously issued on behalf of LG&E. The bonds were remarketed September 1, 2021.
(PPL and KU)
In May 2021, Moody's and S&P assigned ratings of A1 and A to the County of Carroll, Kentucky's $78 million 2.00% Environmental Facilities Revenue Bonds, 2008 Series A, due 2032, previously issued on behalf of KU. The bonds were remarketed June 1, 2021.
In May 2021, Moody's and S&P assigned ratings of A1 and A to the County of Carroll, Kentucky's $54 million 2.125% Environmental Facilities Revenue Bonds, 2006 Series B, due 2034, previously issued on behalf of KU. The bonds were remarketed June 1, 2021.
Ratings Triggers (PPL, LG&E and KU)
Various derivative and non-derivative contracts, including contracts for the sale and purchase of electricity and fuel, commodity transportation and storage, and interest rate instruments, contain provisions that require the posting of additional collateral or permit the counterparty to terminate the contract, if PPL's, LG&E's or KU's or their subsidiaries' credit rating, as applicable, were to fall below investment grade. See Note 18 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of "Credit Risk-Related Contingent Features," including a discussion of the potential additional collateral requirements for PPL and LG&E for derivative contracts in a net liability position at December 31, 2021.
Guarantees for Subsidiaries (PPL)
PPL guarantees certain consolidated affiliate financing arrangements. Some of the guarantees contain financial and other covenants that, if not met, would limit or restrict the consolidated affiliates' access to funds under these financing arrangements, accelerate maturity of such arrangements or limit the consolidated affiliates' ability to enter into certain transactions. At this time, PPL believes that these covenants will not limit access to relevant funding sources. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for additional information about guarantees.
Other Contingent Obligations (All Registrants)
The Registrants have entered into certain agreements that may contingently require payment to a guaranteed or indemnified party. See Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of these agreements.
Risk Management
Market Risk
(All Registrants)
See Notes 1, 17 and 18 to the Financial Statements for information about the Registrants' risk management objectives, valuation techniques and accounting designations.
The forward-looking information presented below provides estimates of what may occur in the future, assuming certain adverse market conditions and model assumptions. Actual future results may differ materially from those presented. These are not precise indicators of expected future losses, but are rather only indicators of possible losses under normal market conditions at a given confidence level.
Interest Rate Risk
PPL and its subsidiaries issue debt to finance their operations, which exposes them to interest rate risk. A variety of financial derivative instruments are utilized to adjust the mix of fixed and floating interest rates in their debt portfolios, adjust the duration of the debt portfolios and lock in benchmark interest rates in anticipation of future financing, when appropriate. Risk limits under PPL's risk management program are designed to balance risk exposure to volatility in interest expense and changes in the fair value of the debt portfolio due to changes in benchmark interest rates. In addition, the interest rate risk of certain subsidiaries is potentially mitigated as a result of the existing regulatory framework or the timing of rate cases.
The following interest rate hedges were outstanding at December 31:
(a)Includes accrued interest, if applicable.
(b)Effects of adverse movements decrease assets or increase liabilities, as applicable, which could result in an asset becoming a liability. Sensitivities represent a 10% adverse movement in interest rates.
(c)Realized changes in the fair value of such economic hedges are recoverable through regulated rates and any subsequent changes in the fair value of these derivatives are included in regulatory assets or regulatory liabilities.
The Registrants are exposed to a potential increase in interest expense and to changes in the fair value of their debt portfolios. The estimated impact of a 10% adverse movement in interest rates on interest expense at December 31, 2021 and 2020 was insignificant for PPL, PPL Electric, LG&E and KU. The estimated impact of a 10% adverse movement in interest rates on the fair value of debt at December 31 is shown below.
(All Registrants)
Commodity Price Risk
PPL is exposed to commodity price risk through its domestic subsidiaries as described below.
•PPL Electric is required to purchase electricity to fulfill its obligation as a PLR. Potential commodity price risk is insignificant and mitigated through its PUC-approved cost recovery mechanism and full-requirement supply agreements to serve its PLR customers which transfer the risk to energy suppliers.
•LG&E's and KU's rates include certain mechanisms for fuel, fuel-related expenses and energy purchases. In addition, LG&E's rates include a mechanism for natural gas supply expenses. These mechanisms generally provide for timely recovery of market price fluctuations associated with these expenses.
Volumetric Risk
Volumetric risk is the risk related to the changes in volume of retail sales due to weather, economic conditions or other factors. PPL is exposed to volumetric risk through its subsidiaries as described below.
•PPL Electric, LG&E and KU are exposed to volumetric risk on retail sales, mainly due to weather and other economic conditions for which there is limited mitigation between rate cases.
Defined Benefit Plans - Equity Securities Price Risk
See "Application of Critical Accounting Policies - Defined Benefits" for additional information regarding the effect of equity securities price risk on plan assets.
Credit Risk
(All Registrants)
Credit risk is the risk that the Registrants would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. The Registrants maintain credit policies and procedures with respect to counterparty credit (including requirements that counterparties maintain specified credit ratings) and require other assurances in the form of credit support or collateral in certain circumstances in order to limit counterparty credit risk. However, the Registrants, as applicable, have concentrations of suppliers and customers among electric utilities, financial institutions and energy marketing and trading companies. These concentrations may impact the Registrants' overall exposure to credit risk, positively or negatively, as counterparties may be similarly affected by changes in economic, regulatory or other conditions.
(PPL and PPL Electric)
In January 2017, the PUC issued a Final Order approving PPL Electric’s default service plan for the period June 2017 through May 2021, which included a total of eight semi-annual solicitations for electricity supply. Additionally, on December 17, 2020, the PUC approved PPL Electric’s default service plan for the period of June 2021 through May 2025, which includes a total of eight solicitations for electricity supply held semiannually in April and October. The new plan also includes eight solicitations for alternative energy credits held semiannually in January and July with the first solicitation being in July 2021 and the final solicitation being in January 2025.
Under the standard Supply Master Agreement (the Agreement) for the competitive solicitation process, PPL Electric requires all suppliers to post collateral if their credit exposure exceeds an established credit limit. In the event a supplier defaults on its obligation, PPL Electric would be required to seek replacement power in the market. All incremental costs incurred by PPL Electric would be recoverable from customers in future rates. At December 31, 2021, most of the successful bidders under all of the solicitations had an investment grade credit rating from S&P and were not required to post collateral under the Agreement. A small portion of bidders were required to post an insignificant amount of collateral under the Agreement. There is no instance under the Agreement in which PPL Electric is required to post collateral to its suppliers.
See Note 18 to the Financial Statements for additional information on credit risk.
Foreign Currency Translation (PPL)
The value of the British pound sterling fluctuates in relation to the U.S. dollar. In 2021, changes in this exchange rate resulted in a foreign currency translation gain of $495 million, which primarily reflected an $856 million increase to PP&E, a $151 million increase to goodwill and a $36 million increase to other net assets, partially offset by a $467 million increase to long-term debt, a $61 million increase to deferred income taxes and a $20 million increase to long-term debt due within one year. In 2020, changes in this exchange rate resulted in a foreign currency translation gain of $267 million, which reflected a $433 million increase to PP&E and a $76 million increase to goodwill partially offset by a $214 million increase to long-term debt and a $28 million increase to other net liabilities. In 2019, changes in this exchange rate resulted in a foreign currency translation gain of $106 million, which reflected a $181 million increase to PP&E, $34 million increase to goodwill and $12 million decrease to other net liabilities partially offset by a $121 million increase to long-term debt.
As a result of the sale of the U.K. utility business on June 14, 2021, accumulated foreign currency translation losses of $786 million were removed from PPL’s Balance Sheets and realized as a component of “Income (Loss) from Discontinued Operations (net of income taxes)” on PPL’s Statements of Income (Loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
(All Registrants)
Related Party Transactions
The Registrants are not aware of any material ownership interests or operating responsibility by senior management in outside partnerships, including leasing transactions with variable interest entities, or other entities doing business with the Registrants. See Note 15 to the Financial Statements for additional information on related party transactions for PPL Electric, LG&E and KU.
Acquisitions, Development and Divestitures
The Registrants from time to time evaluate opportunities for potential acquisitions, divestitures, and development projects. Development projects are reexamined based on market conditions and other factors to determine whether to proceed with, modify or terminate the projects. Any resulting transactions may impact future financial results. See Note 9 to the Financial Statements for additional information on the sale of the U.K. utility business and the share purchase agreement to acquire Narragansett Electric.
(All Registrants)
Environmental Matters
Extensive federal, state and local environmental laws and regulations are applicable to the Registrants' air emissions, water discharges and the management of hazardous and solid waste, as well as other aspects of the Registrants' businesses. The costs of compliance or alleged non-compliance cannot be predicted with certainty but could be significant. In addition, costs may increase significantly if the requirements or scope of environmental laws or regulations, or similar rules, are expanded or changed. Costs may take the form of increased capital expenditures or operating and maintenance expenses, monetary fines, penalties or other restrictions. Many of these environmental law considerations are also applicable to the operations of key suppliers, or customers, such as coal producers and industrial power users, and may impact the costs for their products or their demand for the Registrants' services. Increased capital and operating costs are expected to be subject to rate recovery. The Registrants can provide no assurances as to the ultimate outcome of future environmental or rate proceedings before regulatory authorities.
See "Legal Matters" in Note 14 to the Financial Statements for a discussion of the more significant environmental claims. See "Financial Condition - Liquidity and Capital Resources - Forecasted Uses of Cash - Capital Expenditures" in "Item 7. Combined Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" for information on projected environmental capital expenditures for 2022 through 2024. See Note 20 to the Financial Statements for information related to the impacts of CCRs on AROs. See "Item 1. Business - Environmental Matters" for additional information.
Sustainability
Increasing attention has been focused on a broad range of corporate activities under the heading of “sustainability”, which has resulted in a significant increase in the number of requests from interested parties for information on sustainability topics. These parties range from investor groups focused on environmental, social, governance and other matters to non-investors concerned with a variety of public policy matters. Often the scope of the information sought is very broad and not necessarily relevant to an issuer’s business or industry. As a result, a number of private groups have proposed to standardize the subject matter constituting sustainability, either generally or by industry. Those efforts remain ongoing. In addition, certain of these private groups have advocated that the SEC promulgate regulations requiring specific sustainability reporting under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the ’34 Act), or that issuers voluntarily include certain sustainability disclosure in their ’34 Act reports. To date, no new reporting requirements have been adopted or proposed by the SEC.
As has been PPL’s practice, to the extent sustainability issues have or may have a material impact on the Registrants’ financial condition or results of operation, PPL discloses such matters in accordance with applicable securities law and SEC regulations. With respect to other sustainability topics that PPL deems relevant to investors but that are not required to be reported under applicable securities law and SEC regulation, PPL will continue each spring to publish its annual sustainability report including tracking reductions related to the company's goal to reduce carbon emissions and post that report on its corporate website at www.pplweb.com and on www.pplsustainability.com. Neither the information in such annual sustainability report nor the information at such websites is incorporated in this Form 10-K by reference, and it should not be considered a part of this Form 10-K. In preparing its sustainability report, PPL is guided by the framework established by the Global Reporting Initiative, which identifies environmental, social, governance and other subject matter categories. PPL also participates in efforts by the Edison Electric Institute to provide the appropriate subset of sustainability information that can be applied consistently across the electric utility industry. Additionally, PPL publicly discloses its corporate political contributions and responds to the CDP climate survey.
Cybersecurity
See “Cybersecurity Management” in “Item 1. Business” and “Item 1A. Risk factors” for a discussion of cybersecurity risks affecting the Registrants and the related strategies for managing these risks.
Competition
See "Competition" under each of PPL's reportable segments in "Item 1. Business - General - Segment Information" and "Item 1A. Risk Factors" for a discussion of competitive factors affecting the Registrants.
New Accounting Guidance
There has been no new accounting guidance adopted in 2021 and there is no new significant accounting guidance pending adoption as of December 31, 2021.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Financial condition and results of operations are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. The following accounting policies are particularly important to an understanding of the reported financial condition or results of operations and require management to make estimates or other judgments of matters that are inherently uncertain. Changes in the estimates or other judgments included within these accounting policies could result in a significant change to the information presented in the Financial Statements (these accounting policies are also discussed in Note 1 to the Financial Statements). Senior management has reviewed with PPL's Audit Committee these critical accounting policies, the following disclosures regarding their application, and the estimates and assumptions regarding them.
Defined Benefits
(All Registrants)
Certain of the Registrants and/or their subsidiaries sponsor or participate in certain qualified funded and non-qualified unfunded defined benefit pension plans and both funded and unfunded other postretirement benefit plans. See Notes 1, 7 and 12 to the Financial Statements for additional information about the plans and the accounting for defined benefits.
A summary of plan sponsors by Registrant and whether a Registrant or its subsidiaries sponsor (S) or participate in and receives allocations (P) from those plans is shown in the table below.
Management makes certain assumptions regarding the valuation of benefit obligations and the performance of plan assets. As such, annual net periodic defined benefit costs are recorded in current earnings or regulatory assets and liabilities based on estimated results. Any differences between actual and estimated results are recorded in AOCI or, in the case of PPL Electric, LG&E and KU, regulatory assets and liabilities for amounts that are expected to be recovered through regulated customer rates. These amounts in AOCI or regulatory assets and liabilities are amortized to income over future periods. The significant assumptions are:
•Discount Rate - In selecting the discount rates for defined benefit plans, the plan sponsors start with a cash flow analysis of the expected benefit payment stream for their plans. The plan-specific cash flows are matched against the coupons and expected maturity values of Aa-rated non-callable (or callable with make-whole provisions) bonds that could be purchased for a hypothetical settlement portfolio. The plan sponsors then use the single discount rate derived from matching the discounted benefit payment stream to the market value of the selected bond portfolio.
•Expected Return on Plan Assets - The expected long-term rates of return for pension and other postretirement benefits are based on management's projections using a best-estimate of expected returns, volatilities and correlations for each asset class. Each plan's specific current and expected asset allocations are also considered in developing a reasonable return assumption.
•Rate of Compensation Increase - Management projects employees' annual pay increases, which are used to project employees' pension benefits at retirement. In selecting a rate of compensation increase, plan sponsors consider past experience, the potential impact of movements in inflation rates and expectations of ongoing compensation practices.
See Note 12 to the Financial Statements for details of the assumptions selected for pension and other postretirement benefits. A variance in the assumptions could significantly impact accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and AOCI or regulatory assets and liabilities.
The following tables reflect changes in certain assumptions based on the Registrants' primary defined benefit plans. The inverse of this change would have the opposite impact on accrued defined benefit liabilities or assets, reported annual net periodic defined benefit costs and AOCI or regulatory assets and liabilities. The sensitivities below reflect an evaluation of the change based solely on a change in that assumption.
Income Taxes (All Registrants)
Significant management judgment is required in developing the Registrants' provision for income taxes, primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken or expected to be taken on tax returns and valuation allowances on deferred tax assets.
Additionally, significant management judgment is required to determine the amount of benefit recognized related to an uncertain tax position. On a quarterly basis, uncertain tax positions are reassessed by considering information known as of the reporting date. Based on management's assessment of new information, a tax benefit may subsequently be recognized for a previously unrecognized tax position, a previously recognized tax position may be derecognized, or the benefit of a previously recognized tax position may be remeasured. The amounts ultimately paid upon resolution of issues raised by taxing authorities may differ materially from the amounts accrued and may materially impact the financial statements in the future.
The need for valuation allowances to reduce deferred tax assets also requires significant management judgment. Valuation allowances are initially recorded and reevaluated each reporting period by assessing the likelihood of the ultimate realization of a deferred tax asset. Management considers several factors in assessing the expected realization of a deferred tax asset, including the reversal of temporary differences, future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies. Any tax planning strategy utilized in this assessment must meet the recognition and measurement criteria utilized to account for an uncertain tax position. When evaluating the need for valuation allowances, the uncertainty posed by political risk on such
factors is also considered by management. The amount of deferred tax assets ultimately realized may differ materially from the estimates utilized in the computation of valuation allowances and may materially impact the financial statements in the future.
The TCJA included new provisions requiring that certain income, referred to as global intangible low-taxed income (GILTI), earned by certain foreign subsidiaries be included in the gross income of their U.S. shareholder. The FASB allows an accounting policy election regarding the timing of inclusion of GILTI in an entity’s financial statements. The election may be either to record deferred taxes for expected GILTI in future periods or record such taxes as a current-period expense when incurred. PPL has elected to record the tax effect of expected GILTI inclusions and thus, records deferred taxes relating to such inclusions. PPL does not expect to generate GILTI income following the disposition of U.K. utilities business.
See Note 6 to the Financial Statements for income tax disclosures.
Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
(All Registrants)
PPL Electric, LG&E and KU are subject to cost-based rate regulation. As a result, the effects of regulatory actions are required to be reflected in the financial statements. Assets and liabilities are recorded that result from the regulated ratemaking process that may not be recorded under GAAP for non-regulated entities. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred because such costs are probable of future recovery in regulated customer rates. Regulatory liabilities are recognized for amounts expected to be returned through future regulated customer rates. In certain cases, regulatory liabilities are recorded based on an understanding or agreement with the regulator that rates have been set to recover costs that are expected to be incurred in the future, and the regulated entity is accountable for any amounts charged pursuant to such rates and not yet expended for the intended purpose.
Management continually assesses whether the regulatory assets are probable of future recovery by considering factors such as changes in the applicable regulatory and political environments, the ability to recover costs through regulated rates, recent rate orders to the Registrants and other regulated entities, and the status of any pending or potential deregulation legislation. Based on this continual assessment, management believes the existing regulatory assets are probable of recovery. This assessment reflects the current political and regulatory climate at the state and federal levels and is subject to change in the future. If future recovery of costs ceases to be probable, the regulatory asset would be written-off. Additionally, the regulatory agencies can provide flexibility in the manner and timing of recovery of regulatory assets.
See Note 7 to the Financial Statements for regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities recorded at December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as additional information on those regulatory assets and liabilities. All regulatory assets are either currently being recovered under specific rate orders, represent amounts that are expected to be recovered in future rates or benefit future periods based upon established regulatory practices.
Goodwill Impairment
(PPL, LG&E and KU)
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level. The reporting units of PPL include the Kentucky Regulated segment reporting unit and the LKE reporting unit. LG&E and KU are individually single operating and reportable segments and each are single reporting units. A goodwill impairment test is performed annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the reporting unit may be greater than the reporting unit's fair value. Additionally, goodwill is tested for impairment after a portion of goodwill has been allocated to a business to be disposed of.
The fair value of a reporting unit is compared with the carrying value and an impairment charge is recognized if the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit.
PPL, for its Kentucky Regulated segment and LKE reporting units, and individually LG&E and KU may elect either to initially make a qualitative evaluation about the likelihood of an impairment of goodwill or to bypass the qualitative evaluation and test goodwill for impairment using a quantitative test. See "Long-Lived and Intangible Assets - Asset Impairment (Excluding Investments)" in Note 1 to the Financial Statements for further discussion of goodwill impairment tests. See Note 19 to the Financial Statements for information on goodwill balances at December 31, 2021.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, PPL, for its Kentucky Regulated segment and LKE reporting units, and individually, LG&E and KU, elected to perform qualitative step zero evaluations for their annual goodwill impairment tests, as of October 1, 2021.
Based on these evaluations, management concluded it was not "more likely than not" that the fair value of these reporting units was less than their carrying values. As such, quantitative impairment tests were not performed.
(PPL)
In the fourth quarter of 2021, PPL elected to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test in conjunction with the annual goodwill impairment assessment for the Distributed Energy Resources reporting unit, which has a goodwill balance of $53 million at December 31, 2021. The test did not indicate impairment of the reporting unit. See Note 1 to the Financial Statements for additional information.
Management used both discounted cash flows and market multiples, which required significant assumptions, to estimate the fair value of the reporting unit. Significant assumptions used in the discounted cash flows include discount and growth rates and projected operating and capital cash flows. Projected operating and capital cash flows are based on internal business plans, which assume the occurrence of certain future events. Significant assumptions used in the market multiples include sector market performance and comparable transactions. A high degree of judgment is required to develop estimates related to fair value conclusions. A decrease in the forecasted cash flows of 10%, an increase in the discount rate of 10%, or a 10% decrease in the market multiples would not have resulted in an impairment of goodwill for the Distributed Energy Resources reporting unit as of October 1, 2021, however, it is possible that an impairment charge could occur in future periods if any of the assumptions used in determining fair value of the reporting unit are negatively impacted.
Asset Retirement Obligations (LG&E and KU)
ARO liabilities are required to be recognized for legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets. Initial obligations are measured at estimated fair value. An ARO must be recognized when incurred if the fair value of the ARO can be reasonably estimated. An equivalent amount is recorded as an increase in the value of the capitalized asset and amortized to expense over the asset's useful life.
In determining AROs, management must make significant judgments and estimates to calculate fair value. Fair value is developed using an expected present value technique based on assumptions of market participants that consider estimated retirement costs in current period dollars, inflated to the anticipated retirement date and discounted back to the date the ARO was incurred. Changes in assumptions and estimates included within the calculations of the fair value of AROs could result in significantly different results than those identified and recorded in the financial statements. Estimated ARO costs and settlement dates, which affect the carrying value of the ARO and the related capitalized asset, are reviewed periodically to ensure that any material changes are incorporated into the ARO estimate. Any change to the capitalized asset is generally amortized over the remaining life of the associated long-lived asset.
See “Long-Lived and Intangible Assets - Asset Retirement Obligations” in Note 1, Note 7 and Note 20 to the Financial Statements for additional information on AROs.
At December 31, 2021, the total recorded balances and information on the most significant recorded AROs were as follows.
The most significant assumptions surrounding AROs are the forecasted retirement costs (including settlement dates and the timing of cash flows), discount and inflation rates. At December 31, 2021, a 10% increase to retirement cost would increase these ARO liabilities by $13 million at LG&E and $23 million at KU. A 0.25% decrease in the discount rate would increase these ARO liabilities by $4 million at LG&E and $1 million at KU and a 0.25% increase in the inflation rate would increase these ARO liabilities by $4 million at LG&E. There would be no significant change to the annual depreciation expense of the ARO asset or the annual accretion expense of the ARO liability as a result of these changes in assumptions.
Revenue Recognition - Unbilled Revenues (LG&E and KU)
Revenues related to the sale of energy are recorded when service is rendered or when energy is delivered to customers. Because customers are billed on cycles which vary based on the timing of actual meter reads taken throughout the month, estimates are recorded for unbilled revenues at the end of each reporting period. For LG&E and KU, such unbilled revenue amounts reflect
estimates of deliveries to customers since the date of the last reading of their meters. The unbilled revenue estimates reflect consideration of factors including daily load models, estimated usage for each customer class, the effect of current and different rate schedules, the meter read schedule, the billing schedule, actual weather data, and, where applicable, the impact of weather normalization or other regulatory provisions of rate structures. See "Unbilled revenues" on the Registrants' Balance Sheets for balances at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Other Information (All Registrants)
PPL's Audit Committee has approved the independent auditor to provide audit and audit-related services, tax services and other services permitted by Sarbanes-Oxley and SEC rules. The audit and audit-related services include services in connection with statutory and regulatory filings, reviews of offering documents and registration statements, and internal control reviews.