Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for the fiscal years then ended together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information appearing in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, operations, and product candidates, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the sections of this Annual Report captioned “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Perpetua Resources (formerly Midas Gold Corp.) was incorporated on February 22, 2011 under the BCBCA. The Corporation was organized to hold shares in wholly owned subsidiaries that locate, acquire, develop and restore mineral properties located principally in the Stibnite - Yellow Pine mining district in Valley County, Idaho, USA. The Corporation’s principal asset is 100% ownership in subsidiaries that control the Stibnite Gold Project. The Corporation currently operates in one segment, mineral exploration in the United States. The registered office of the Perpetua Resources is 400-725 Granville St, Vancouver, BC, V7Y 1G5, Canada and the corporate head office is located at 201-405 S 8th St, Boise, ID 83702, USA.
COVID-19 Response
The Company has implemented policies at its offices in Boise and Donnelly designed to ensure the safety and well-being of all employees and the people associated with them. In that regard, to reduce risk, our employees have been encouraged to get fully vaccinated against COVID-19, have been asked to work remotely, avoid all non-essential business travel, when possible, adhere to good hygiene practices, and engage in social distancing. Continuation of COVID-19 in 2022 and beyond could impact employee health, workforce productivity, insurance premiums, ability to travel, the availability of industry experts, personnel and equipment, restrictions or delays to field work, studies, and assay results, and other factors that will depend on future developments that may be beyond our control.
2021 Key Highlights
● Zero lost time incidents or reportable environmental spills
● Signed ASAOC agreement to begin legacy waste cleanup
● Agreed to stay of Clean Water Act litigation with the Nez Perce Tribe and began mediation
● Published 8th Annual Sustainability Report
● Began trading on the NASDAQ stock exchange
● Signed independent community water quality monitoring program
● Entered into collaboration agreement with U.S. Antimony Corporation
● Signed antimony supply agreement for Ambri battery production
● Completed $57.5 million equity financing
● Responded to more than 850 comments and numerous requests for additional information in support of the USFS’s preparation of the Supplemental DEIS, which the Company expects the USFS to publish in the early third quarter of 2022
● Significantly advanced several ancillary permits related to the Stibnite Gold Project
2022 Outlook and Goals
Perpetua Resources’ vision is to provide the United States with a domestic source of the critical mineral antimony, operate one of the largest and highest-grade open pit gold mines in the country and restore and develop an abandoned brownfield site. In 2022, Perpetua Resources continues to focus on advancing the permitting process for the Stibnite Gold Project through NEPA. The NEPA process is intended to ensure that federal agencies and the public are informed of a proposed action’s potential environmental impacts before a final decision is made by the agency regarding the action.
In response to public comments received on the Draft Environmental Impact Statement (“DEIS”), Perpetua Resources submitted a refined proposed action to the USFS in December 2020. To ensure a full analysis of the improved Project, the USFS will issue a Supplemental Draft Environmental Impact Statement (“SDEIS”) followed by an opportunity for public comment. On February 22, 2022, Perpetua Resources announced that it expects a preliminary SDEIS to be circulated for cooperating agency review in the second quarter of 2022. The publication of the SDEIS for public review and comment is expected in early third quarter 2022. The USFS is expected to provide a formal schedule later this year regarding the remaining steps in the NEPA review process.
The forward-looking information contained in this section is subject to the risk factors and assumptions contained in the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risks Factors” sections.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $36.0 million compared with a net loss of $220.6 million for 2020. This $184.6 million decrease for the year was primarily attributable to a $184.8 million decrease in non-cash losses related to the change in fair value of the convertible note derivative, a $7.0 million decrease in foreign exchange loss, a $3.7 million decrease in exploration costs, a $3.0 million decrease in finance costs, and a $1.4 million decrease in non-cash losses related to the change in fair value of the warrant derivative. These reductions were partially offset by a $12.2 million increase in environmental costs, a $1.1 million increase in office and administrative, a $0.6 million increase in corporate salaries and benefits, a $0.4 million increase in directors’ fees, a $0.4 million increase in professional fees, a $0.2 million increase in shareholder and regulatory expenses, a $0.2 million decrease in interest income, and a $0.1 million increase in consulting. As noted above, for the year ended December 31, 2021, the Corporation’s main focus was the continued evaluation and advancement of the Stibnite Gold Project.
Consulting
This expense relates to consulting services provided to the Corporation that do not relate to the exploration and evaluation of the Stibnite Gold Project. Consulting fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 are 77% higher than the previous year due to consulting work to support various corporate activities advanced in the first quarter of 2021, including the share consolidation and listing on the NASDAQ.
Corporate Salaries and Benefits
This expense results from salaries and benefits of the employees that are not directly related to the exploration and evaluation of the Stibnite Gold Project, primarily corporate employees. Salaries and benefits for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $0.6 million, or 45%, higher than the previous year due to severance payments made to corporate employees in 2021.
Directors’ Fees
Each of the Corporation’s non-executive directors is entitled to annual base fees paid in quarterly installments, with the independent Lead Director, Chairs of Board Committees and Members of Board Committees receiving additional fees commensurate with each role. Directors’ fees are inclusive of cash fees and share-based compensation (deferred share units and stock options). This expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, is $433,524, or 130%, higher than the previous year primarily due to the increase in the number of stock options vesting in 2021 compared to 2020.
Exploration
This expense relates to all exploration and evaluation expenditures related to the Stibnite Gold Project, including labor, drilling, field office costs, engineering, permitting, environmental and legal and sustainability costs. The Corporation’s exploration expenses of $22.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 are $3.7 million, or 14%, lower than the previous year primarily due to a $3.9 million decrease in permitting, a $0.7 million decrease in legal and sustainability and a $0.5 million decrease in engineering partially offset by a $1.5 million increase in consulting and labor cost. Additional details of expenditures incurred are as follows:
Environmental Liability Expense
This expense relates to the ASAOC signed in January 2021 to voluntarily address environmental conditions at the abandoned mine site. Upon signing of the ASAOC, the Company recorded an immediate expense of $7,473,805 and a corresponding environmental reclamation liability. Cost estimates were developed with the use of engineering consultants, independent contractor quotes and the Company’s internal development team, and is recognized at the present value of such costs. In 2021, the total cost estimate to voluntarily address environmental conditions increased to $12,198,651. As of December 31, 2021, the cost estimate for the environmental liability was $9,888,200.
Office and Administrative
This expense is predominantly insurance policies for the U.S. offices and is $1.1 million, or 271%, higher for the year ended December 31, 2021, than the previous year primarily due to insurance related to the NASDAQ listing which commenced in February 2021.
Professional Fees
This expense relates to the legal and accounting costs of the Corporation. The costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $447,575, or 55%, higher than the previous year primarily due to legal work on various organizational changes implemented in 2021, including the share consolidation and NASDAQ listing which commenced in February 2021, and the ASAOC.
Shareholder and Regulatory
This expense relates to marketing, licenses and fees, and shareholder communications. The expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 is $167,885, or 43%, higher than the previous year primarily due to fees related to the NASDAQ listing which commenced in February 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Derivative
The Corporation issued 200,000 warrants in a financing transaction in May 2013, with an exercise price denominated in Canadian dollars. The Corporation determined that warrants with an exercise price denominated in a currency that is different from the entity’s functional currency should be classified as a derivative and carried at their fair value. Any changes in their fair value from period to period have been recorded as a gain or loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. There are no circumstances under which Perpetua Resources will be required to pay cash upon exercise or expiry of the warrants or finder’s options (see Note 6 in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Note Derivative
The Corporation issued unsecured Convertible Notes with an interest rate of 0.05% per annum in March 2016 and March 2020 (together, the “Convertible Notes”) with an exercise price denominated in Canadian dollars. The Corporation determined that the Convertible Notes with an exercise price denominated in a currency that is different from the entity’s functional currency should be classified as a derivative and carried at their fair value. Any changes in their fair value from inception to balance sheet date have been recorded as a gain or loss in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The convertible note derivative is valued at fair value. The decrease in fair value is due to the conversion of Convertible Notes during the year. During the year, the remaining Convertible Notes in the aggregate principal amount of C$15,409,901 were converted for 4,351,850 common shares of Perpetua Resources at a conversion rate of C$3.541 per common share (see Note 7 in the Consolidated Financial Statements).
Finance Costs
Finance costs for the Corporation include accretion and interest expense related to the Convertible Notes described above, transaction costs related to the Convertible Notes issued in March 2020 and interest expense on lease liabilities. These costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, are $2,990,816, or 89%, lower than the prior year due to notes converted in August 2020, the remainder of the Convertible Notes converted in 2021 and transaction costs on Convertible Notes upon issuance in 2020.
Foreign Exchange Loss
Changes in foreign exchange are driven by the change in value of the Canadian Dollar compared to the U.S. Dollar. The $842,573 loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, is a result of the translation of the Corporation’s Canadian dollar denominated balances primarily on the Convertible Notes and the convertible note derivatives before their conversion in 2021. In 2020 large increases in the value of the Convertible Note Derivatives during the year, as a result of a much higher stock price, drove a significant increase in foreign exchange losses as the value was converted from CAD to USD. In 2021, large decreases in the value of the Convertible Note Derivatives, due to both the conversion of Convertible Notes during 2020 and 2021 and a much lower stock price, drove a significant decrease in foreign exchange losses as the value was converted from CAD to USD.
Interest Income
This income results from interest received on the Corporation’s cash balances. Interest income decreased $219,510 in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the previous year as a result of lower interest rates throughout the year and lower average cash balances in the first half of 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital resources of Perpetua Resources consist primarily of cash and liquid short-term investments. As of December 31, 2021, Perpetua Resources had cash and cash equivalents totaling approximately $47.9 million, approximately $1.2 million in other current assets and $5.7 million in trade and other payables.
In August 2021, the Corporation completed a public offering for total gross proceeds of $57.5 million to be used to continue permitting, early restoration and field operations, engineering and design and general corporate purposes.
With its current capital resources, Perpetua Resources believes that it has sufficient funds to continue to advance the regulatory process related to permitting for mine development beyond 2022. Perpetua Resources plans to:
● Continue engaging with Project stakeholders to provide those stakeholders with the opportunity for a better understanding of the Project concepts and to provide a forum for such stakeholders to provide further input into the Project;
● Continue to collect environmental baseline data in support of the ongoing regulatory processes related to permitting for site restoration and redevelopment of the Project;
● Continue to advance the regulatory process for the restoration and redevelopment of the Project; and
● Continue to advance the voluntary early cleanup actions under the ASAOC.
It is management’s opinion, based on the Corporation’s current capital resources and liquidity that the Corporation will have sufficient assets to discharge its liabilities as they become due, to continue to advance the Stibnite Gold Project beyond 2022, and to meet its administrative and overhead requirements for more than a year. Future financings to fund construction are anticipated through debt, equity, project specific debt, and/or other means. Our continued operations are dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing or to generate future cash flows. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in our efforts to raise additional capital on terms favorable to us, or at all.
Our anticipated expenditures in fiscal year 2022 are approximately $27.5 million, which are expected to be funded from cash on hand. These expenditures include an estimated $12.2 million to fund permitting of the Stibnite Gold Project, $10.5 million for general corporate purposes and administrative costs, $0.7 million for engineering and design work and $4.1 million to advance early restoration and continue field operations. These costs are subject to change due to cost over-runs, delays or other unbudgeted events. See section Item 1A, Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We believe the following accounting policies are critical to our consolidated financial statements due to the degree of uncertainty regarding the judgements or assumptions involved and/or the magnitude of the asset, liability, or expense being reported.
Mineral Property Acquisition and Exploration Costs
Mineral property acquisition costs are capitalized when incurred. Acquisition costs include cash consideration and the fair market value of shares issued on the acquisition of mineral property claims.
Costs related to the development of our mineral reserves are capitalized when it has been determined an ore body can be economically developed. The development stage begins when an ore body is determined to be economically recoverable based on Proven and Probable Mineral Reserves and ends when the production stage or exploitation of reserves begins. Major mine development expenditures are capitalized, including primary development costs such as costs of building access ways, tailings impoundment, development of water supply and infrastructure developments.
Exploration costs include those relating to activities carried out (a) in search of previously unidentified mineral deposits, or (b) at undeveloped concessions. Pre-development activities involve costs incurred in the exploration stage that may ultimately benefit production that are expensed due to the lack of evidence of economic development, which is necessary to demonstrate future recoverability of these expenses. Secondary development costs are incurred for preparation of an ore body for production in a specific ore block or work area, providing a relatively short-lived benefit only to the mine area they relate to, and not to the ore body as a whole.
Once production has commenced, capitalized costs will be depleted using the units-of-production method over the estimated life of the Proven and Probable Mineral Reserves. If mineral properties are subsequently abandoned or impaired, any capitalized costs will be charged to the Consolidated Statements of Operations in that period.
We assess the carrying cost of our mineral properties for impairment whenever information or circumstances indicate the potential for impairment. Such evaluations compare estimated future net cash flows with our carrying costs and future obligations on an undiscounted basis. If it is determined that the future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value of the property, a write down to the estimated fair value is charged to the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the period. Where estimates of future net cash flows are not available and where other conditions suggest impairment, management assesses if the carrying value can be recovered.
For significant exploration and development projects, interest is capitalized as part of the historical cost of developing and constructing assets in accordance with ASC 835-20. Interest is capitalized until the asset is ready for service. Capitalized interest is determined by multiplying the Company’s weighted-average borrowing cost on general debt by the average amount of qualifying costs incurred. Once an asset subject to interest capitalization is completed and placed in service, the associated capitalized interest is expensed through depletion or impairment.
Derivative Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments and other contracts to determine if those contracts or embedded components of those contracts qualify as derivatives to be separately accounted for in accordance with ASC 815. The result of this accounting treatment is that the fair value of the embedded derivative is marked-to-market at each balance sheet date and recorded as a liability and the change in fair value is recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Upon conversion or exercise of a derivative instrument, the instrument is marked to fair value at the conversion date and then that fair value is reclassified to equity.
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative instruments that become subject to reclassification are reclassified at the fair value of the instrument on the reclassification date. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current as settlement of the derivative instruments are at the option of the holder.
We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to value derivative liabilities. This model uses Level 3 inputs in the fair value hierarchy established by ASC 820 Fair Value Measurement.
Share Based Compensation
We account for all share-based payments and awards under the fair value-based method. Share-based payments to non-employees are measured at the fair value of the consideration received, or the fair value of the equity instruments issued, or liabilities incurred, whichever is more reliably measurable.
The fair value of share-based payments to non-employees is periodically re-measured until the counterparty performance is complete, and any change therein is recognized over the vesting period of the award and in the same manner as if we had paid cash instead of paying with or using equity-based instruments. The cost of the share-based payments to non-employees that are fully vested and non-forfeitable as at the grant date is measured and recognized at that date, unless there is a contractual term for services in which case such compensation would be amortized over the contractual term.
We account for the granting of stock options to employees using the fair value method whereby all awards to employees will be recorded at fair value on the date of the grant. The fair value of all stock options is expensed over their vesting period with a corresponding increase to additional paid-in capital.
Compensation costs for share-based payments that do not include performance conditions are recognized on a straight-line basis. Compensation cost associated with a share-based award having a performance condition is recognized on the probable outcome of that performance condition during the requisite service period. Share-based awards with a performance condition are accrued on an award by award basis.
We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to calculate the fair value of stock options at the date of the grant. Option pricing models require the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected price volatility. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimates.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Under the asset and liability method, the effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recognized if it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be recognized.