ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on February 5, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sales of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare and close the Initial Public Offering and activities necessary to identify a potential target for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generated and will continue to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held until we effect a business combination. We incurred and will continue to incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a business combination.
For the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $2,816,216, which included $3,854,638 of other income related to the change in the fair value of the warrant liability and $13,523 of dividend and interest income earned in the trust account, offset by $610,322 in the issuance costs related to Public Warrants and $441,623 in formation and operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,105,214, and net working capital of $1,003,485. Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On September 30, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 12,500,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $125,000,000. On October 15, 2021, the underwriter exercised in full its over-allotment option to purchase additional 1,875,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriter, we consummated the sale of 6,600,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant generating gross proceeds of $6,600,000.
An aggregate of nine Anchor Investors were allocated and purchased a total of 11,137,500 Units or 77.5% of the outstanding Units following the Initial Public Offering and exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriter, for gross proceeds of approximately $111.4 million.
In addition, subject to each Anchor Investor purchasing 100% of the Units allocated to it, in connection with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor sold a portion of Founder Shares to each Anchor Investor, or an aggregate of 495,000 Founders Shares to all Anchor Investors. The Company estimated the aggregate fair value of these Founder Shares attributable to Anchor Investors to be approximately $2.93 million, or $5.93 per share. Simultaneously with the exercise of the over-allotment option by the
underwriter, the Company sold the additional total of 112,500 Founder Shares to the Anchor Investors. The Company estimated the aggregate fair value of these Founder Shares to be approximately $667,125, or $5.93 per share.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on September 30, 2021 and the exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriter on October 15, 2021, an amount of $145,187,500 ($10.10 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed the Trust Account.
As of the IPO Date, transaction costs amounted to $10,343,978, consisting of $2,500,000 of underwriting fees, $4,375,000 of deferred underwriting fees, $2,930,399 representing the aggregate fair value of Founder Shares sold to Anchor Investors and $538,579 of other offering costs. The Company’s remaining cash after payment of the Initial Public Offering costs is held outside the Trust Account for working capital purposes. Of the total transaction costs of $10,343,978 as of the IPO date, $9,809,375 was allocated to the Class A common stock and $534,603 was allocated to the Public Warrants.
As of October 15, 2021, transaction costs related to the exercise of the over-allotment option amounted to $1,941,520, consisting of $375,000 of underwriting fees, $656,250 of deferred underwriting fees, $680,802 representing the aggregate fair value of Founder Shares sold to Anchor Investors, and $229,468 of other offering costs. Of the total transaction costs of $1,941,520 related to the exercise of the over-allotment option, $1,865,801 was allocated to the Class A common stock and $75,719 was allocated to the Public Warrants.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
As described more fully in Note 1 to the Financial Statements if the Company is unable to obtain approval for an extension of the deadline or complete a Business Combination by March 30, 2023, then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The Company has until March 30, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by the specified period. If a Business Combination is not consummated by March 30, 2023, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. The date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern one year from the date that these financial
statements are issued. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities, and administrative support services, if and when such services are utilized. Since we have not been using the Sponsor’s services, no expenses were incurred in relation to this agreement through December 31, 2021.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $5,031,250 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.