Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes are included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. Please also see the section titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a surgical robotics company focused on advancing patient care by developing transformative solutions in urology. We develop, manufacture and sell the AquaBeam Robotic System, an advanced, image-guided, surgical robotic system for use in minimally invasive urologic surgery, with an initial focus on treating benign prostatic hyperplasia, or BPH. BPH is the most common prostate disease and impacts approximately 40 million men in the United States. The AquaBeam Robotic System employs a single-use disposable handpiece to deliver our proprietary Aquablation therapy, which combines real-time, multi-dimensional imaging, personalized treatment planning, automated robotics and heat-free waterjet ablation for targeted and rapid removal of prostate tissue. We designed our AquaBeam Robotic System to enable consistent and reproducible BPH surgery outcomes. We believe that Aquablation therapy represents a paradigm shift in the surgical treatment of BPH by addressing compromises associated with alternative surgical interventions. We designed Aquablation therapy to deliver effective, safe and durable outcomes for males suffering from lower urinary tract symptoms, or LUTS, due to BPH that are independent of prostate size and shape or surgeon experience. We have developed a significant and growing body of clinical evidence, which includes nine clinical studies and over 100 peer-reviewed publications, supporting the benefits and clinical advantages of Aquablation therapy. As of December 31, 2021, we had an install base of 130 AquaBeam Robotic Systems globally, including 78 in the United States.
Our U.S. pivotal trial, the WATER study, is the only FDA pivotal study randomized against transurethral resection of prostate, or TURP, which is the historical standard of care for the surgical treatment of BPH. In this study, Aquablation therapy demonstrated superior safety and non-inferior efficacy compared to TURP across prostate sizes between 30 ml and 80 ml, and superior efficacy in a subset of patients with prostates larger than 50 ml. We have established strong relationships with key opinion leaders, or KOLs, within the urology community and collaborated with key urological societies in global markets. This support has been instrumental in facilitating broader acceptance and adoption of Aquablation therapy. As a result of our strong KOL network and our compelling clinical evidence, Aquablation therapy has been added to clinical guidelines of various professional associations, including the American Urological Association.
In the United States, we sell our products to hospitals. We are initially targeting 860 high-volume hospitals that perform, on average, more than 200 resective procedures annually and account for approximately 70% of all hospital-based resective procedures. Over time, we will gradually expand our focus to also include mid- and low-volume hospitals. These customers in turn bill various third-party payors, such as commercial payors and government agencies, for treatment payment of each patient. Effective in 2021, all local Medicare Administrative Contractors, or MACs, which represent 100% of eligible Medicare patients, issued final positive local coverage determinations to provide Medicare beneficiaries with access to Aquablation therapy in all 50 states. We also have favorable coverage decisions from several large commercial payors, including Anthem, Cigna, Humana, Health Care Service Corporation, BlueCross - Massachusetts, Emblem Health, and CareFirst. We plan to leverage these recent successes in our active discussions with all commercial payors to establish additional positive national and regional coverage policies. Outside of the United States, we have ongoing efforts in key markets to expand established coverage and improve payment which we believe will expand patient access to Aquablation therapy.
We manufacture the AquaBeam Robotic System, the handpiece, integrated scope and other accessories at our facility in Redwood City, California. This includes supporting the supply chain distribution and logistics of the various components. Components, sub-assemblies and services required to manufacture our products are purchased from numerous global suppliers. Each AquaBeam Robotic System is shipped to our customers with a third-party manufactured ultrasound system and probe. We utilize a well-known third-party logistics provider located in the United States and the Netherlands to ship our products to our customers globally.
We generated revenue of $34.5 million and $7.7 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and incurred a net loss of $59.9 million and $53.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $261.5 million.
We completed our IPO in September 2021, which raised $172.4 million, net of issuance costs. Previously, our primary sources of capital have been from private placements of redeemable convertible preferred securities and debt financing agreements. As of December 31, 2021, we have raised $337.1 million from private placements of redeemable convertible preferred securities from our investors. We expect our expenses will increase for the foreseeable future, in particular as we continue to make substantial investments in sales and marketing, operations and research and development. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of any stock exchange on which our securities are traded, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services expenses. Based on our operating plan, we currently believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, anticipated revenue and available debt financing arrangements will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations through at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of the financial statements. If these sources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional public equity or debt securities or obtain an additional credit facility. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and, in the case of preferred equity securities or convertible debt, those securities could provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our common stock. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Additional financing may not be available at all, or in amounts or on terms unacceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our products.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe there are several important factors that have impacted and that we expect will impact our operating performance and results of operations for the foreseeable future. While these factors may present significant opportunities for us, they also pose significant risks and challenges that we must address. See the section titled “Risk Factors” for more information. These factors include:
•Grow our install base of AquaBeam Robotic Systems: As of December 31, 2021, we had an install base of 130 AquaBeam Robotic Systems globally, including 78 in the United States. In the United States, we are initially focused on driving adoption of Aquablation therapy among urologists that perform hospital-based resective BPH surgery. We are initially targeting 860 high-volume hospitals that we estimate perform, on average, more than 200 resective procedures annually and account for approximately 70% of all hospital-based resective procedures. To penetrate these hospitals, we will continue to increase our direct team of capital sales representatives, who are focused on driving system placement within hospitals by engaging with key surgeons and decision makers to educate them about the compelling value proposition of Aquablation therapy. As we increase our install base of AquaBeam Robotic systems our revenue will increase as a result of the system sale and resulting utilization.
•Increase system utilization: Our revenue is significantly impacted by the utilization of our AquaBeam robotic system. Once we place a system within a hospital our objective is to establish Aquablation therapy as the surgical treatment of choice for BPH. Within each hospital we are initially focused on targeting urologists who perform medium-to-high volumes of resective procedures and converting their resective cases to Aquablation therapy. To accomplish this, we will continue expanding our team of highly trained Aquablation representatives and clinical specialists who are focused on driving system utilization within the hospital, providing education and training support and ensuring excellent user experiences. As urologists gain experience with Aquablation therapy we will leverage their experiences to capture more surgical volumes and establish Aquablation therapy as the surgical standard of care.
•Reimbursement and coverage decisions by third-party payors. Healthcare providers in the United States generally rely on third-party payors, principally federal Medicare, state Medicaid and private health insurance plans, to cover all or part of the cost of procedures using our AquaBeam Robotic System. The revenue we are able to generate from sales of our products depends in large part on the availability of sufficient reimbursement from such payors. Effective in 2021, all local MACs, representing 100% of eligible Medicare patients, issued final positive local coverage determinations to provide Medicare beneficiaries with access to Aquablation therapy in all 50 states. We believe that these favorable coverage decisions have been a catalyst for hospital adoption of our AquaBeam Robotic System. We believe our strong body of clinical evidence and support from key societies, supplemented by the momentum from Medicare coverage, have led to favorable coverage decisions from several large commercial payors, including Anthem, Cigna, Humana, Health Care Service Corporation, BlueCross - Massachusetts, Emblem Health, and CareFirst. We plan to leverage these recent successes in our active discussions with commercial payors to establish additional positive national and regional coverage policies. We believe that additional commercial payor coverage will contribute to increasing utilization of our system over
time. Outside of the United States, we have ongoing efforts in key markets to expand established coverage and further improve patient access to Aquablation therapy.
•Cost of sales. The results of our operations will depend, in part, on our ability to increase our gross margins by more effectively managing our costs to produce our AquaBeam Robotic System and single-use disposable handpieces, and to scale our manufacturing operations efficiently. We anticipate that as we expand our sales and marketing efforts and drive further sales growth, our purchasing costs on a per unit basis may decrease, and in turn improve our gross margin. As our commercial operations continue to grow, we expect to continue to realize operating leverage through increased scale efficiencies.
•Investment in research and development to drive continuous improvements and innovation. We are currently developing additional and next generation technologies to support and improve Aquablation therapy to further satisfy the evolving needs of surgeons and their patients as well as to further enhance the usability and scalability of the AquaBeam Robotic System. We also plan to leverage our treatment data and software development capabilities to integrate artificial intelligence and machine learning to enable computer-assisted anatomy recognition and improved treatment planning and personalization. Our future growth is dependent on these continuous improvements which require significant resources and investment.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 outbreak and the consequential economic disruptions have negatively impacted and may continue to negatively impact our operations, revenue and overall financial condition. In response to the pandemic, numerous state and local jurisdictions imposed, and others in the future may impose, “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines, executive orders, and similar government orders and restrictions for their residents to control the spread of COVID-19. Starting in mid-March 2020, the governor of California, where our headquarters are located, issued “shelter-in-place” or “stay at home” orders restricting non-essential activities, travel, and business operations, subject to certain exceptions for necessary activities. Such orders or restrictions have resulted in our headquarters closing, slowdowns and delays, travel restrictions, and cancellation of training and other events, among other effects, thereby negatively impacting our operations. Additionally, in the United States, governmental authorities have recommended, and in certain cases required, that elective, specialty and other procedures and appointments be suspended or canceled to avoid non-essential patient exposure to medical environments and potential infection with COVID-19 and to focus limited resources and personnel capacity toward the treatment of COVID-19.
These measures and challenges have decreased the number of BPH procedures generally, and consequently could have slowed adoption of our AquaBeam therapy and may have impacted our ability to sell our AquaBeam Robotic System. We believe the number of our systems sold has been impacted as health care organizations globally have prioritized the treatment of patients with COVID-19, and as health care organizations continue to experience consequential economic disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic such as budget shortfalls and staffing shortages. Numerous procedures have been and in certain jurisdictions in which we operate are continuing to be cancelled or delayed as a result of local public health measures and hospital policies. We have also experienced disruptions, and may experience future disruptions, including: delays in sales personnel becoming fully trained and productive; difficulties and delays in physician outreach and training physicians to use our AquaBeam Robotic System; restrictions on personnel to travel; delays in follow-ups of our clinical studies; challenges with maintaining adequate supply from third-party manufacturers of components and finished goods and distribution providers; and access to physicians for training and case support.
While many restrictions associated with COVID-19 have more recently been relaxed, the longevity and extent of the various COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain, including due to the emergence and impact of the COVID-19 variants and continued economic disruptions. These measures and challenges may continue for the duration of the pandemic and may negatively impact our revenue growth while the pandemic continues.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate our revenue primarily from the capital portion of our business, which includes sales and rentals of our AquaBeam Robotic System, and from the recurring revenue associated with sales of our single-use disposable handpieces that are used during each surgery performed with our system. Other revenue is derived primarily from service and repair and extended service contracts with our existing customers. We expect our revenue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to focus on driving adoption of Aquablation therapy, and increased system utilization, though it may fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
The following table presents revenue by significant geographical locations for the periods indicated:
* Less than 10% of total net revenues for the period indicated.
We expect that both our U.S. and international revenue will increase in the near term as we continue to expand the install base of AquaBeam Robotic Systems and increase the related customer utilization. We expect our increase in revenues in absolute dollars to be larger in the United States.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
Cost of sales consists primarily of manufacturing overhead costs, material costs, warranty and service costs, direct labor and other direct costs such as shipping costs. A significant portion of our cost of sales currently consists of manufacturing overhead costs. These overhead costs include compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, facilities, equipment and operations supervision, quality assurance and material procurement. We expect our cost of sales to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future primarily as, and to the extent, our revenue grows, or we make additional investments in our manufacturing capabilities, though it may fluctuate from period to period.
We calculate gross margin percentage as gross profit divided by revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily, product and geographic mix and the resulting average selling prices, production volumes, manufacturing costs and product yields, and to a lesser extent the implementation of cost reduction strategies. We expect our gross margin to increase over the long term as our production volume increases and as we spread the fixed portion of our manufacturing overhead costs over a larger number of units produced, thereby significantly reducing our per unit manufacturing costs, though it may fluctuate from quarter to quarter. Our gross margins can fluctuate due to geographic mix. To the extent we sell more systems and handpieces in the United States, we expect our margins will increase due to the higher average selling prices as compared to sales outside of the United States.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, regulatory affairs, consulting services, materials, depreciation and other costs associated with products and technologies being developed. These expenses include employee and non-employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, supplies, materials, quality assurance expenses, consulting, related travel expenses and facilities expenses. We expect our R&D expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop, enhance and commercialize new products and technologies, though it may fluctuate from quarter to quarter. However, we expect our R&D expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of initiating new product development efforts.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, related to selling, marketing, clinical affairs, professional education, finance, information technology, and human resource functions. SG&A expenses also include commissions, training, travel expenses, promotional activities, conferences, trade shows, professional services fees, audit fees, legal fees, insurance costs and general corporate expenses including allocated facilities-related expenses. Clinical expenses include clinical trial design, clinical site reimbursement, data management and travel expenses. We expect our SG&A expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we expand our commercial infrastructure and incur additional fees associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of any stock exchange on which our securities are traded, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services expenses, though it may fluctuate from quarter to quarter. However, over time, we expect our SG&A expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense from our loan payable.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest and other income (expense), net, consists primarily of interest income from our cash and cash equivalents balances, and fair value adjustments from our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liabilities and our loan facility derivative liability.
In connection with our sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock, we issued warrants to purchase shares of our Series B, Series D and Series E redeemable convertible preferred stock. We classify these warrants as a liability on our balance sheets that we remeasure to fair value at each reporting date with the corresponding change in fair value being recognized in our statements of operations. Upon completion of our IPO in September 2021, the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability was reclassified to additional paid-in capital in stockholders’ equity (deficit) for warrants exercised and statement of operations for warrants expired.
Additionally, in connection with the loan facility, we are obligated to pay a fee upon the earlier occurrence of a defined liquidity event, including but not limited to, a merger or sale of our assets or voting stock, or our achieving a $200 million trailing twelve months revenue target, in each case, by September 2029. The fee is calculated at the time of the liquidity event occurrence to be $1.0 million if only the first installment has been drawn, $2.0 million if the first two installments have been drawn, $2.4 million if the first three installments have been drawn, or $3.0 million if all four installments have been drawn, in each case, upon the occurrence of the liquidity event. We adjust the carrying values of the loan facility derivative liability for changes in fair value and recognize those changes in interest and other income (expense), net.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
Revenue increased $26.8 million, or 347%, to $34.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth in revenue was primarily attributable to an increase of $24.2 million in the sales volumes of both our AquaBeam Robotic System and our single-use disposable handpieces in the United States, resulting from the expansion of insurance coverage and the increase in personnel in our sales and marketing organizations. In addition, sales of both our AquaBeam Robotic System and our single-use disposable handpieces outside of the United States increased by $1.6 million in sales volume.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
Cost of sales increased $9.6 million, or 107%, to $18.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of sales was primarily attributable to the growth in the number of units sold.
Gross margin increased to 46% during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a negative 16% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross margin was primarily attributable to the growth in unit sales, which allowed us to spread the fixed portion of our manufacturing overhead costs over more production units, and a higher percentage of sales in the United States at higher average selling prices.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses increased $2.7 million, or 17%, to $19.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $16.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in R&D expenses was primarily due to employee-related expenses of our R&D organization. These expenses support ongoing product improvements and the development of additional and next generation technologies.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses increased $20.8 million, or 69%, to $51.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $30.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in SG&A expenses was primarily due to employee-related expenses of our sales and marketing organization and reimbursement and administrative organizations as we expanded our infrastructure to drive and support our growth in revenue.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $0.5 million to $5.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest expense was due to higher borrowings during the year ended December 31, 2021 because we increased our borrowings during the year ended December 31, 2020 under our debt financing arrangements.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest and other income (expense), net, was consistent during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We completed our IPO in September 2021, which raised $172.4 million, net of issuance costs. Previously, our primary sources of capital have been from private placements of redeemable convertible preferred securities and debt financing agreements.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $304.3 million, an accumulated deficit of $261.5 million, and $50.0 million outstanding on our loan facility. We expect our expenses will increase for the foreseeable future, in particular as we continue to make substantial investments in sales and marketing, operations and research and development. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and those of any stock exchange on which our securities are traded, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services expenses. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the degree and rate of market acceptance of our products and Aquablation therapy;
•the scope and timing of investment in our sales force and expansion of our commercial organization;
•the impact on our business from the ongoing and global COVID-19 pandemic and the end of the COVID-19 pandemic, or any other pandemic, epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease;
•the scope, rate of progress and cost of our current or future clinical trials and registries;
•the cost of our research and development activities;
•the cost and timing of additional regulatory clearances or approvals;
•the costs associated with any product recall that may occur;
•the costs associated with the manufacturing of our products at increased production levels;
•the costs of attaining, defending and enforcing our intellectual property rights;
•whether we acquire third-party companies, products or technologies;
•the terms and timing of any other collaborative, licensing and other arrangements that we may establish;
•the emergence of competing technologies or other adverse market developments; and
•the rate at which we expand internationally.
Based on our operating plan, we currently believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, anticipated revenue and available debt financing arrangements will be sufficient to meet our capital requirements and fund our operations through at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of the financial statements. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may need to utilize additional available capital resources. If these sources are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements, we may seek to sell additional public equity or debt securities or obtain an additional credit facility. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and, in the case of preferred equity securities or convertible debt, those securities could provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our common stock. Debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. Additional financing may not be available at all, or in amounts or on terms unacceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to delay the development, commercialization and marketing of our products.
Indebtedness
In September 2019, we entered into a loan facility for up to $75.0 million available in four installments. We borrowed $25.0 million in September 2019 and an additional $25.0 million in March 2020. The third installment is for $10.0 million and was originally available for draw through March 31, 2021 contingent upon our achieving $20.0 million trailing six months revenue in any month before March 31, 2021.
The remaining $15.0 million was originally available for draw through June 30, 2021 contingent upon achieving $25.0 million in trailing six months revenue. In January 2021, the third installment was amended to be available for draw through March 31, 2022 contingent upon our achieving $6.4 million trailing six months revenue prior to June 30, 2021, and the fourth installment was amended to be available for draw though June 30, 2022. The facility bears an interest rate of the greater of (i) 9.37% and (ii) 7.17% plus 30-day LIBOR. The facility includes customary negative covenants that, among other things, restrict our ability to incur indebtedness or enter into certain change of control transactions. It also contains customary events of default that would result in the termination of the commitments under the facility and permit the lender to accelerate payment on outstanding borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the facility. The initial term of the facility is 60 months with interest-only payments, with the repayment of principal being amortized over a period of: 36 months, if we fail to achieve the revenue target for the third installment, 24 months if we achieve the revenue target for the third installment but have not raised at least $50.0 million in an initial public offering, or 12 months if we achieve the revenue target for the third installment and raise at least $50.0 million in an initial public offering. Upon completion of raising over $50.0 million in our IPO in September 2021, interest-only payments was extended an additional 12 months followed by 12 months amortization of principal and interest. We pledged substantially all of our assets as collateral for the loan. Commencing with the quarter ended June 30, 2021, we are required to achieve revenue for the previous six months ended equal to 70% of the forecast for the commensurate quarterly period. Additionally, in connection with the loan facility, we are obligated to pay a fee upon the earlier occurrence of a defined liquidity event, including but not limited to, a merger or sale of our assets or voting stock, or our achieving a $200.0 million trailing twelve months revenue target, in each case, by September 2029. The fee is calculated at the time of the liquidity event occurrence to be $1.0 million if only the first installment has been drawn, $2.0 million if the first two installments have been drawn, $2.4 million if the first three installments have been drawn, or $3.0 million if all four installments have been drawn, in each case, upon the occurrence of the liquidity event. As of December 31, 2021, we had $50.0 million outstanding under the loan facility.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $57.3 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $59.9 million and an increase in net operating assets of $4.7 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $7.2 million. The cash used in operations was primarily due to our net loss due to the increase in operating expenses to support our commercialization and development activities. The expansion of our commercialization resulted in an increase in inventory, accounts receivable and prepaid expenses and other current assets, partially offset by an increase in other current liabilities, accrued compensation and accrued interest expense. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of stock-based compensation and depreciation.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $48.3 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $53.0 million and an increase in net operating assets of $0.5 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $5.2 million. The cash used in operations was primarily due to the increase in net loss primarily due to the increase in operating expenses and interest expense to service the loan payable all of which support the commercialization and development. The expansion of our commercialization and development activities resulted in an increase in inventory, partially offset by an increase in accrued compensation and interest. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of depreciation and stock-based compensation.
Net Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $0.6 million, consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0.2 million, consisting of purchases of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $262.1 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from our IPO of $172.4 million and the issuance of shares of our Series G redeemable convertible preferred stock of $84.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $106.8 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our Series F redeemable convertible preferred stock of $76.5 million and notes payable of $24.7 million.
Contractual Commitments and Contingencies
The information included in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements, such as structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is derived primarily from the sales of the AquaBeam Robotic Systems, and handpieces that are for one-time use during each surgery using the AquaBeam Robotic System. The AquaBeam Robotic System contains both software and non-software components that are delivered together as a single product and generally contain a one-year warranty.
To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers,” or ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when, or as, we satisfy the performance obligations. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determines those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct based on the contract.
The contracts are typically in the form of an agreement and a purchase order from the customer. Our AquaBeam Robotic System sales generally contain multiple products and services and can include a combination of the following performance obligations: robotic system, handpieces and consumables, and service.
The Company determines the transaction price it expects to be entitled to in exchange for transferring the promised product to the customer, which is based on the invoiced price for the products. All prices are at fixed amounts per the sales agreement with the customer and there are generally no discounts, rebates or other price concessions or a right of return, once the agreement is signed.
For multiple-element arrangements, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which we separately sell the products or services. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, then we estimate the standalone selling price considering market conditions and entity-specific factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the products and services, geographies, and type of customer. We regularly review standalone selling prices and updates these estimates as necessary.
We recognize revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to a customer. We generally recognize revenue for the performance obligations at the following points in time:
AquaBeam Robotic Systems - For systems (including system components and system accessories) sold directly to end customers, revenue is recognized when we transfer control to the customer, which is generally at the time of delivery. Systems rented for a fixed monthly fee during an evaluation period, typically three to 12 months, are recognized as revenue straight-line during the lease term, in accordance with ASC 842, and are not material. For systems sold following an evaluation period, revenue is recognized generally once sales terms are mutually agreed (as the system is already installed at the customer site). For systems sold through distributors, revenue is recognized generally at the time of delivery. Our system arrangements generally do not provide a right of return. The systems are generally covered by a one-year service agreement. The service agreements have a stand alone selling price and are typically recognized as deferred revenue and amortized over the one-year service period.
Hand pieces and other consumables - Revenue from sales of handpieces and other consumables is recognized when control is transferred to the customers, which generally occurs at the time of shipment but also occurs at the time of delivery.
Service - Service revenue, inclusive of the amounts associated with the AquaBeam Robotic System warranties, is recognized over the term of the service period, as the customer benefits from the services throughout the service period.
We determined that certain promises in the multiple-element arrangements, such as installation, training and certain ancillary products, are immaterial, and/or do not represent separate performance obligations for which transaction price is allocated.
The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of invoicing to customers. We record deferred revenue when revenue is recognized subsequent to invoicing, such as service contracts, which are recognized ratably as revenue over the performance period, which is not material.
Our typical payment terms are between approximately 30 to 90 days. We expense shipping and handling costs as incurred and include them in the cost of sales. In those cases where shipping and handling costs are billed to customers, we classify the amounts billed as a component of revenue. Taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenue. We expense any incremental costs of obtaining a contract, including but not limited to, sales commissions, as and when incurred as the expected amortization period of the incremental costs would have been less than one year and are reported in selling, general and administrative expense in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We must make significant assumptions regarding the future collectability of amounts receivable from customers to determine whether revenue recognition criteria have been met. If collectability is not assured at the time of shipment, we defer revenue until such criteria have been met. Our standard terms and conditions of sale do not allow for product returns, and we generally do not allow product returns, except in the case of damaged goods, and we have not experienced any significant returns of our products.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain a payment equity incentive plan to provide long-term incentives for employees, consultants and members of the board of directors. The plan allows for the issuance of non-statutory and incentive stock options to employees and non-statutory stock options to consultants and non-employee directors.
We are required to determine the fair value of equity incentive awards and recognize compensation expense for all equity incentive awards made to employees and directors, including employee stock options. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service period in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We use the straight-line method for expense attribution. We amortize all stock-based compensation over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the same as the vesting period of the awards. We amortize the grant date fair value on a straight-line basis over the expected service periods. For performance-based grants, we estimate when and if they will be earned. If we consider such award to be probable, we recognize expense over the estimated service period, which would be the estimated period of performance. If we do not consider such awards probable of achievement, we recognize no amount of stock-based compensation. Additionally, we have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur.
The valuation model used for calculating the fair value of awards for stock-based compensation expense is the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculation, including the following:
Fair Value of Common Stock. As discussed in the subsection titled “-Common Stock Valuations” below, the fair value of the shares of our common stock underlying the stock options has historically been determined by our board of directors. Because there has been no public market for our common stock prior to the IPO, our board of directors had determined the fair value of our common stock at the time of grant of the option by considering a number of objective and subjective factors. Following the completion of our IPO in September 2021, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the closing price of our common stock on The Nasdaq Global Market.
Expected Term. The expected term of stock options represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to remain outstanding. We estimated the expected term based on the simplified method, which is the average of the weighted-average vesting period and contractual term of the option.
Expected Volatility. Since there has been no public market for our common stock and limited company specific historical volatility, we have determined the share price volatility for options granted based on an analysis of the volatility of a peer group of publicly traded companies. In evaluating similarity, we consider factors such as industry, stage of life cycle and size.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of the grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the options.
Expected Dividend Rate. We assumed the expected dividend rate to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to do so.
See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus for information concerning certain of the specific assumption we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. If factors change and we employ different assumptions, stock-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. If there
are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested securities, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense.
Common Stock Valuations
Our intent has been to grant all options with an exercise price not less than the fair value of our common stock underlying those options on the date of grant. We have determined the estimated fair value of our common stock at each valuation date in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, or the Practice Aid. Our board of directors, with the assistance of management, developed these valuations using significant judgment and taking into account numerous factors, including:
•valuations of our common stock with the assistance of independent third-party valuation specialists;
•our stage of development and business strategy, including the status of research and development efforts, of our products and product candidates, and the material risks related to our business and industry;
•our results of operations and financial position, including our levels of available capital resources;
•the valuation of publicly traded companies in the life sciences and medical device sectors, as well as recently completed mergers and acquisitions of peer companies;
•the prices of our redeemable convertible preferred stock sold to investors in arm’s length transactions and the rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our common stock, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company given prevailing market conditions;
•the inability of our stockholders to freely trade our common stock in the public markets, resulting in a discount to reflect the lack of marketability of our common stock based on the weighted-average expected time to liquidity;
•trends and developments in our industry; and
•external market conditions affecting the life sciences and medical device industry sectors.
Our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by first determining the aggregate enterprise value of our business using the market approach, income approach or from the value implied by the latest round of equity financing, and then allocating the value among the various classes of our equity securities to derive a per share value of our common stock. The Practice Aid identifies various available methods for allocating enterprise value across classes and series of capital stock to determine the estimated fair value of common stock at each valuation date. In accordance with the Practice Aid, we considered the option pricing method, or OPM, under which shares are valued by creating a series of call options with exercise prices based on the liquidation preferences and conversion terms of each equity class. The estimated fair values of the preferred and common stock are inferred by analyzing these options.
For all options granted prior to our IPO in September 2021, our board allocated the enterprise value based on the OPM, which was determined to be the most appropriate method based on our stage of development and other relevant factors. OPM treats the rights of the holders of preferred and common stock as equivalent to call options on any value of the enterprise above certain break points of value based upon the liquidation preferences of the holders of preferred stock, as well as their rights to participation and conversion. Thus, the estimated value of the common stock can be determined by estimating the value of its portion of each of these call option rights. When valuing options granted around the time of an equity financing that is considered arms-length, OPM derives our equity value from the price of our securities issued in the equity financing. Following the completion of our IPO in September 2021, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the closing price of our common stock on The Nasdaq Global Market.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Warrant Liability
We have issued freestanding warrants to purchase shares of convertible preferred stock to investors in connection with sales of certain of our redeemable convertible preferred stock. We classified these warrants as a derivative liability because they contained liquidation features that were not solely within our control. We recorded the fair value of the warrant on the balance sheet at the inception of such classification and adjusted to fair value at each financial reporting date. The changes in the fair value of the warrants were recorded in the statement of operations as a component of interest and other income
or expense as appropriate. We continued to adjust the carrying value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability for changes in the fair value of the warrants until the earlier of: the exercise of the warrants, at which time the liability was reclassified to temporary equity or the expiration of the warrant, at which time the entire amount was reversed and reflected in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Our assumptions with regard to the warrant valuation were based on estimates of the valuation of the underlying preferred stock, volatility, interest rate and such estimates could have varied significantly. Upon the completion of the Company’s IPO in September 2021, warrants exercised for redeemable convertible preferred stock were automatically converted into 62,454 shares of common stock and the remaining unexercised warrants expired.
Loan Facility Derivative Liability
We have determined that our obligation to pay success fees to a lender upon a successful liquidation event or achieving a revenue target represents freestanding financial instruments. The instrument is classified as a long-term liability in the consolidated balance sheets and is subject to remeasurement at each consolidated balance sheet date. Any change in fair value is recognized through other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We adjust the carrying values of the loan facility derivative liability for changes in fair value and will continue to do so until the earlier of cash payment or expiration. The assumptions used in determining the fair value of the obligation require significant judgment.
JOBS Act Accounting Election and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information included in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K is incorporated herein by reference.