Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following summary together with the more detailed business information and consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and in the documents that we incorporate by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K may contain certain “forward-looking” information within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. This information involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Risk Factors.”
Overview
Perficient is a global digital consultancy transforming how the world’s biggest brands connect with customers and grow their businesses. We help clients, primarily focused in North America, gain competitive advantage by using digital technology to: make their businesses more responsive to market opportunities; strengthen relationships with customers, suppliers, and partners; improve productivity; and reduce information technology costs. With unparalleled strategy, creative and technology capabilities, across industries, our end-to-end digital consulting services help our clients drive faster speed-to-market capabilities and stronger, more compelling experiences for consumers. We go to market with six primary service categories - strategy and consulting, customer experience and design, innovation and product development, platforms and technology, data and intelligence, and optimized global delivery. Within each service category, and collectively, we deliver a deep and broad portfolio of solutions that enable our clients to operate a real-time enterprise that dynamically adapts business processes and the systems that support them to meet the changing demands of a global and competitive marketplace.
COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization recognized a novel strain of coronavirus (COVID-19) as a pandemic. In response to the pandemic, the United States and various foreign, state and local governments have, among other actions, imposed travel and business restrictions and required or advised communities in which we do business to adopt stay-at-home orders and social distancing guidelines, causing some businesses to adjust, reduce or suspend operating activities. While certain of these restrictions and guidelines have been lifted or relaxed, they may be reinstituted in response to continuing effects of the pandemic, including emerging variants. The pandemic and the various governments’ response have caused, and continue to cause, significant and widespread uncertainty, volatility and disruptions in the U.S. and global economies, including in the regions in which we operate.
Through December 31, 2021, we have not experienced a material impact to our business, operations or financial results as a result of the pandemic. However, in the current and future periods, we may experience weaker customer demand, requests for discounts or extended payment terms, customer bankruptcies, supply chain disruption, employee staffing constraints and difficulties, government restrictions or other factors that could negatively impact the Company and its business, operations and financial results. As we cannot predict the duration or scope of the pandemic or its impact on economic and financial markets, any negative impact to our results cannot be reasonably estimated, but it could be material.
We continue to monitor closely the Company’s financial health and liquidity and the impact of the pandemic on the Company, including emerging variants. We have been able to serve the needs of our customers while taking steps to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners, and communities. Among these steps, we have transitioned to primarily working remotely and minimizing travel, which has not resulted in a material disruption to the Company’s operations. We are proactively planning to reopen our offices in a manner that protects the safety and well-being of our Perficient colleagues, while complying with federal, state and local government and health regulations. See “Part I - Item 1A - Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the potential impact of COVID-19 on the Company.
Services Revenues
Services revenues are derived from professional services that include developing, implementing, integrating, automating and extending business processes, technology infrastructure, and software applications. Professional services revenues are recognized over time as services are rendered. Most of our projects are performed on a time and materials basis, while a portion of our revenues is derived from projects performed on a fixed fee or fixed fee percent complete basis. For time and material projects, revenues are recognized and billed by multiplying the number of hours our professionals expend in the performance of the project by the hourly rates. For fixed fee contracts, revenues are recognized and billed by multiplying the established fixed rate per time period by the number of time periods elapsed. For fixed fee percent complete projects, revenues are generally recognized using an input method based on the ratio of hours expended to total estimated hours. Fixed fee percent complete engagements represented 6% of our services revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 8% and 7% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. On most projects, we are reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses
including travel and other project-related expenses. These reimbursements are included as a component of the transaction price of the respective professional services contract. The aggregate amount of reimbursed expenses will fluctuate depending on the location of our clients, the total number of our projects that require travel, the impact of travel restrictions imposed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, and whether our arrangements with our clients provide for the reimbursement of such expenses. In conjunction with services provided, we occasionally receive referral fees under partner programs. These referral fees are recognized at a point in time when earned and recorded within services revenues.
Software and Hardware Revenues
Software and hardware revenues are derived from sales of third-party software and hardware resales, in which we are considered the agent, and sales of internally developed software, in which we are considered the principal. Revenues from sales of third-party software and hardware are recorded on a net basis, while revenues from internally developed software sales are recorded on a gross basis. Software and hardware revenues are expected to fluctuate depending on our clients’ demand for these products, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
There are no significant cancellation or termination-type provisions for our software and hardware sales. Contracts for our professional services provide for a general right, to the client or us, to cancel or terminate the contract within a given period of time (generally 10 to 30 days’ notice is required). The client is responsible for any time and expenses incurred up to the date of cancellation or termination of the contract.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists of cost of services, primarily related to cash and non-cash compensation and benefits (including bonuses and non-cash compensation related to equity awards), costs associated with subcontractors, reimbursable expenses and other project-related expenses. Cost of revenues does not include depreciation of assets used in the production of revenues which are primarily personal computers, servers, and other information technology related equipment. In accordance with ASC Topic 606, sales of third-party software and hardware are presented on a net basis, and as such, third-party software and hardware costs are not presented within cost of revenues.
Our cost of services as a percentage of services revenues is affected by the utilization rates of our professionals (defined as the percentage of our professionals’ time billed to clients divided by the total available hours in the respective period), the salaries we pay our professionals, and the average billing rate we receive from our clients. If a project ends earlier than scheduled, we retain professionals in advance of receiving project assignments, or demand for our services declines, our utilization rate will decline and adversely affect our cost of services as a percentage of services revenues.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses are primarily composed of sales-related costs, general and administrative salaries, stock compensation expense, office costs, recruiting expense, variable compensation costs, marketing costs and other miscellaneous expenses. We have access to sales leads generated by our software vendors whose products we use to design and implement solutions for our clients. These relationships enable us to optimize our selling costs and sales cycle times and increase win rates through leveraging our partners’ marketing efforts and endorsements.
Plans for Growth and Acquisitions
Our goal is to continue to build one of the leading information technology consulting firms by expanding our relationships with existing and new clients and through the continuation of our disciplined acquisition strategy. Our future growth plan includes expanding our business with a primary focus on customers in the United States, both organically and through acquisitions. We also intend to further leverage our existing offshore and nearshore capabilities to support our future growth and provide our clients flexible options for project delivery. Our ability to continue to implement our growth plan may be negatively affected by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations, and our ability to evaluate potential acquisitions.
When analyzing revenue growth by base business compared to acquired companies in the Results of Operations section below, revenue attributable to base business includes revenue from an acquired company that has been owned for a full four quarters after the date of acquisition.
Acquisition of Overactive
On October 15, 2021, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company acquired Overactive pursuant to the terms of a Stock Purchase Agreement. Overactive is based in Montevideo, Uruguay with nearshore delivery centers in Colombia, Argentina, Uruguay, Chile and Puerto Rico. Overactive specializes in digital modernization solutions driven by cloud-based custom software. Overactive added nearly 700 skilled professionals to the Company and brings strategic client relationships with customers across several industries. Refer to Note 9, Business Combinations, for additional information on the acquisition.
Acquisition of PSL
On June 17, 2020, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company acquired Productora de Software S.A.S. (“PSL”) pursuant to the terms of a Stock Purchase Agreement. PSL is based in Medellin, Colombia, with additional locations in Bogota and Cali, Colombia. The acquisition of PSL strengthens the Company’s global delivery capabilities, enhancing its nearshore systems and custom software application development, testing, and ongoing support for customers. PSL added more than 600 skilled professionals to the Company and brings strategic client relationships with customers across several industries. Refer to Note 9, Business Combinations, for additional information on the acquisition.
Adoption of ASU No. 2016-13
As further detailed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments using the modified retrospective method. ASU No. 2016-13 requires the immediate recognition of estimated credit losses expected to occur over the remaining life of many financial assets, including trade receivables. The Company adopted this ASU on January 1, 2020 using a modified retrospective approach, which allows the impact of adoption to be recorded through a cumulative effect adjustment to retained earnings without restating comparative periods. The cumulative effect adjustment for adoption of ASU No. 2016-13 resulted in a decrease of $0.4 million in Accounts receivable, net, and a decrease of $0.3 million in Retained earnings, net of tax, as of January 1, 2020. Refer to Note 8, Allowance for Credit Losses, for additional disclosures resulting from the adoption of ASU No. 2016-13.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations as a percentage of total revenues:
A discussion of changes in our financial condition and results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K, but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and on our investor relations website at www.perficient.com.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues. Total revenues increased 24% to $761.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $612.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Services revenues increased 24% to $758.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $609.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Services revenues delivered by base business resources increased $112.2 million, primarily driven by increased demand for our services and due to the 2020 acquisitions becoming part of the base business in the second half of 2021. Services revenues delivered by resources of acquired companies was $36.9 million, resulting in a total increase of $149.1 million.
Software and hardware revenues decreased 10% to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Total Cost of Revenues (cost of services, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, discussed separately below). Total cost of revenues increased 23% to $468.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $380.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher headcount in response to higher services revenues and acquisitions. Services costs as a percentage of services revenues decreased to 61.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 62.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to continued shift to higher margin offshore and nearshore delivery.
Selling, General and Administrative. SG&A expenses increased to $152.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $134.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increased sales-related costs and other SG&A expenses (primarily related to acquisitions, recruiting and immigration costs). SG&A expenses, as a percentage of revenues, were 20% and 22% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation. Depreciation expense increased 18% to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Depreciation expense as a percentage of revenues was 0.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 0.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
Amortization. Amortization expense increased 3% to $23.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $22.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Amortization expense as a percentage of total revenues was 3.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 3.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in amortization expense was primarily due to the addition of intangibles from our two acquisitions in 2021.
Acquisition Costs. Acquisition-related costs of $3.8 million were incurred during 2021 related to the acquisitions of Talos and Overactive compared to $3.7 million during 2020 related to the acquisitions of MedTouch, Brainjocks, and PSL. Costs were incurred for legal, accounting, tax, investment bank and advisor fees, and valuation services performed by third parties in connection with merger and acquisition-related activities.
Adjustment to Fair Value of Contingent Consideration. An adjustment of $0.2 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 which represents the net impact of the fair market value adjustments to the MedTouch LLC (“Medtouch”), Catalyst Networks, Inc. (“Brainjocks”), and PSL revenue and earnings-based contingent consideration liabilities, as well as accretion. An adjustment of $9.5 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 which represents the net impact of the fair market value adjustments to the Sundog Interactive, Inc. (“Sundog”), MedTouch, Brainjocks, and PSL revenue and earnings-based contingent consideration liabilities, as well as accretion. Our 2020 acquisitions benefited from cost reductions resulting from travel and other restrictions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and quicker than anticipated revenues and market demand for nearshore work delivered by PSL.
Net Interest Expense. Net interest expense increased to $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net interest expense was primarily due to non-cash amortization of debt discount and issuance costs.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased the remaining portion of the outstanding 2023 Notes and a portion of the outstanding 2025 Notes, resulting in a loss of $29.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repurchased a portion of the outstanding 2023 Notes, resulting in a loss of $4.5 million.
Provision for Income Taxes. We provide for federal, state, and foreign income taxes at the applicable statutory rates adjusted for non-deductible expenses. The effective income tax rate decreased to 16.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 25.2% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the effective rate is primarily due to an increase in stock compensation deductions and a decrease in non-deductible transaction costs compared to the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Selected measures of liquidity and capital resources are as follows (in millions):
(1)The balance at December 31, 2021 includes $6.1 million held by certain foreign subsidiaries which is not available to fund domestic operations unless deemed repatriated. We currently do not plan or foresee a need to repatriate such funds. The balance also includes $5.2 million in cash held by certain other foreign subsidiaries which is available to fund domestic operations. The balance at December 31, 2020 includes $5.1 million held by certain foreign subsidiaries which is not available to fund domestic operations unless deemed repatriated. The balance also includes $7.9 million in cash held by certain other foreign subsidiaries which is available to fund domestic operations. The balance at December 31, 2019 includes $5.5 million held by certain foreign subsidiaries which is not available to fund domestic operations unless deemed repatriated. The balance also includes $1.1 million in cash held by certain other foreign subsidiaries which is available to fund domestic operations.
(2)Working capital is total current assets less total current liabilities.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $84.9 million compared to $118.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the components of operating cash flows were net income of $52.1 million plus net non-cash charges of $79.0 million and additions in net operating assets of $46.2
million. The primary components of operating cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 were net income of $30.2 million plus net non-cash charges of $66.8 million and reduction in net operating assets of $21.0 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $108.8 million for acquisitions and $10.2 million to purchase property and equipment and to develop software. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we used $91.9 million for acquisitions and $6.7 million to purchase property and equipment and to develop software.
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $369.5 million of proceeds from the issuances of the 2026 Notes, net of issuance costs, received $23.4 million of proceeds from the sales of net-share-settled warrants and paid $66.1 million for privately negotiated convertible note hedge transactions. We also used $368.7 million to repurchase the remaining 2023 Notes and a portion of the 2025 Notes, received $381.3 million related to the sale of privately negotiated convertible hedge transactions for the 2023 Notes and 2025 Notes, and paid $303.9 million for the repurchase of net-share-settled warrants related to the 2023 Notes and 2025 Notes. We drew down $74.0 million from our line of credit, repaid $74.0 million on our line of credit, used $21.7 million to repurchase shares of our common stock through the stock repurchase program, $13.5 million to remit taxes withheld as part of a net share settlement of restricted stock vesting, $24.1 million to settle contingent consideration for the purchase of MedTouch, Brainjocks, and PSL, and paid $0.6 million for credit facility financing fees. We also received proceeds from sales of stock through the Employee Stock Purchase Plan of $0.6 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $222.7 million of proceeds from the issuances of the 2025 Notes, net of issuance costs, received $22.2 million of proceeds from the sales of net-share-settled warrants and paid $48.9 million for privately negotiated convertible note hedge transactions. We also used $180.4 million to repurchase a portion of the 2023 Notes, received $50.1 million related to the sale of privately negotiated convertible hedge transactions for the 2023 Notes, and paid $43.0 million for the repurchase of net-share-settled warrants related to the 2023 Notes. We drew down $28.0 million from our line of credit, repaid $28.0 million on our line of credit, used $19.6 million to repurchase shares of our common stock through the stock repurchase program, $8.0 million to remit taxes withheld as part of a net share settlement of restricted stock vesting, and $2.8 million to settle contingent consideration for the purchase of Elixiter and Sundog. We also received proceeds from sales of stock through the Employee Stock Purchase Plan of $0.3 million.
Availability of Funds from Credit Facility
On May 7, 2021, the Company entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2021 Credit Agreement”) with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and the other lenders parties thereto. The 2021 Credit Agreement provides for revolving credit borrowings up to a maximum principal amount of $200.0 million, subject to a commitment increase of $75.0 million. All outstanding amounts owed under the 2021 Credit Agreement become due and payable no later than the final maturity date of May 7, 2026. As of December 31, 2021, there was no outstanding balance under the 2021 Credit Agreement. The Company incurred $0.6 million of deferred finance fees as a result of the 2021 Credit Agreement during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
The 2021 Credit Agreement also allows for the issuance of letters of credit in the aggregate amount of up to $10.0 million at any one time; outstanding letters of credit reduce the credit available for revolving credit borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had two outstanding letters of credit for $0.2 million. Substantially all of the Company’s assets are pledged to secure the credit facility.
Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement bear interest at the Company’s option of the prime rate (3.25% on December 31, 2021) plus a margin ranging from 0.00% to 1.00% or one-month LIBOR (0.10% on December 31, 2021) plus a margin ranging from 1.00% to 2.00%. The Company incurs an annual commitment fee of 0.15% to 0.20% on the unused portion of the line of credit. The additional margin amount and annual commitment fee are dependent on the level of outstanding borrowings. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $199.8 million of unused borrowing capacity.
At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the 2021 Credit Agreement.
Stock Repurchase Program
The Company’s Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $315.0 million of Company common stock through a stock repurchase program expiring December 31, 2022. The program could be suspended or discontinued at any time, based on market, economic, or business conditions. The timing and amount of repurchase transactions will be determined by
management based on its evaluation of market conditions, share price, and other factors. Since the program’s inception on August 11, 2008, the Company has repurchased approximately $261.3 million (16.1 million shares) of outstanding common stock through December 31, 2021.
From time to time, we establish a written trading plan in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 of the Exchange Act, pursuant to which we make a portion of our stock repurchases. Additional repurchases will be at times and in amounts as the Company deems appropriate and will be made through open market transactions in compliance with Rule 10b-18 of the Exchange Act, subject to market conditions, applicable legal requirements, and other factors.
Cash Requirements from Contractual Obligations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, there were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business in lease obligations or other contractual obligations. See Note 16, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further description of our contractual obligations.
There were no balances outstanding under the Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, there were in aggregate $326.1 million of outstanding Notes, net of unamortized debt discount and issuance costs, compared to $183.6 million as of December 31, 2020. The amounts are classified as “Long-term debt” within the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The 2026 Notes will become due and payable no later than the final maturity date of November 15, 2026. The 2025 Notes will become due and payable no later than the final maturity date of August 1, 2025.
We have incurred commitments to make future payments under contracts such as leases, the 2021 Credit Agreement and the Notes, as well as noncancellable purchase obligations, which primarily relate to multi-year third-party software sales. Maturities under these contracts are set forth in the following table as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(1)Debt obligations include the principal amount of the Notes, but exclude interest payments to be made under the Notes.
Conclusion
If our capital is insufficient to fund our activities in either the short- or long-term, we may need to raise additional funds. In the ordinary course of business, we may engage in discussions with various persons in connection with additional financing. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity securities, our existing stockholders’ percentage ownership will be diluted. These equity securities may also have rights superior to our common stock. Additional debt or equity financing may not be available when needed or on satisfactory terms. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms, we may be unable to expand our services, respond to competition, pursue acquisition opportunities, or continue our operations.
Of the total cash and cash equivalents reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021 of $24.4 million, approximately $6.1 million was held by certain foreign subsidiaries where the Company has considered the earnings to be indefinitely reinvested in those operations. The Company is able to fund its liquidity needs outside of these subsidiaries, primarily through cash flows generated by domestic operations and our credit facility, as well as the proceeds from the 2026 Notes issuances in the fourth quarter of 2021. Therefore, the Company has no current plans to repatriate cash from these foreign subsidiaries in the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate unremitted earnings of the Company’s foreign subsidiaries for which a deferred income tax liability has not been recorded was approximately $19.5 million, and the unrecognized deferred tax liability on unremitted earnings was approximately $1.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, $5.2 million of the total cash and cash equivalents was held by certain other foreign subsidiaries where the Company has determined that the earnings from these subsidiaries are not permanently reinvested and may repatriate available earnings from these subsidiaries from time to time.
We believe that the currently available funds, access to capital from our credit facility, and cash flows generated from operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements and other capital needs for the next 12 months. However, while the Company did not experience a material impact on the business, operations or financial results from the COVID-19 pandemic during the year ended December 31, 2021, the pandemic may materially and adversely affect our business, operations and financial results, including our cash flows, in the future as a result of, among other things, weaker customer demand, requests for discounts or extended payment terms, customer bankruptcies, supply chain disruption, employee staffing constraints and difficulties, government restrictions or other factors. For example, since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic we have experienced certain of our customers requesting discounts or extended payment terms, pausing or slowing services, or declaring bankruptcy. Additionally, we have experienced some delays in obtaining new commitments from customers. Given the uncertain duration and scope of the pandemic and its impact on economic and financial markets, we cannot reliably predict or estimate the impact of the pandemic on our business, operations or financial results. See “Part I - Item 1A - Risk Factors” of this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the potential impact of COVID-19 on the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our accounting policies are fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. We believe our most critical accounting policies include revenue recognition, purchase accounting and related fair value measurements, convertible debt, and income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenues consist of services and software and hardware sales. In accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, revenues are recognized when control of services or goods are transferred to clients, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those services or goods.
Services revenues are primarily comprised of professional services that include developing, implementing, automating and extending business processes, technology infrastructure, and software applications. The Company’s professional services span multiple industries, platforms and solutions; however, the Company has remained relatively diversified and does not believe that it has significant revenue concentration within any single industry, platform or solution.
Professional services revenues are recognized over time as services are rendered. Most projects are performed on a time and materials basis, while a portion of revenues is derived from projects performed on a fixed fee or fixed fee percent complete basis. For time and material contracts, revenues are generally recognized and invoiced by multiplying the number of hours expended in the performance of the contract by the hourly rates. For fixed fee contracts, revenues are generally recognized and invoiced by multiplying the fixed rate per time period established in the contract by the number of time periods elapsed. For fixed fee percent complete contracts, revenues are generally recognized using an input method based on the ratio of hours expended to total estimated hours, and the client is invoiced according to the agreed-upon schedule detailing the amount and timing of payments in the contract.
Clients are typically billed monthly for services provided during that month, but can be billed on a more or less frequent basis as determined by the contract. If the time is worked and approved at the end of a fiscal period and the invoice has not yet been sent to the client, the amount is recorded as revenue once the Company verifies all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, and the amount is classified as a receivable as the right to consideration is unconditional at that point. Amounts invoiced in excess of revenues recognized are contract liabilities, which are classified as deferred revenues in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The term between invoicing and payment due date is not significant. Contracts for professional services provide for a general right, to the client or the Company, to cancel or terminate the contract within a given period of time (generally 10 to 30 days’ notice is required). The client is responsible for any time and expenses incurred up to the date of cancellation or termination of the contract. Certain contracts may include volume discounts or holdbacks, which are accounted for as variable consideration, but are not typically significant. The Company estimates variable consideration based on historical experience and forecasted sales and includes the variable consideration in the transaction price.
Other services revenues are comprised of hosting fees, partner referral fees, maintenance agreements, training and internally developed software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) sales. Revenues from hosting fees, maintenance agreements, training and internally developed SaaS sales are generally recognized over time using a time-based measure of progress as services are rendered. Partner referral fees are recorded at a point in time upon meeting specified requirements to earn the respective fee.
On many professional service projects, the Company is also reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses including travel and other project-related expenses. These reimbursements are included as a component of the transaction price of the respective
professional services contract and are invoiced as the expenses are incurred. The Company structures its professional services arrangements to recover the cost of reimbursable expenses without a markup.
Software and hardware revenues are comprised of third-party software and hardware resales, in which the Company is considered the agent, and sales of internally developed software, in which the Company is considered the principal. Third-party software and hardware revenues are recognized and invoiced when the Company fulfills its obligation to arrange the sale, which occurs when the purchase order with the vendor is executed and the customer has access to the software or the hardware has been shipped to the customer. Internally developed software revenues are recognized and invoiced when control is transferred to the customer, which occurs when the software has been made available to the customer and the license term has commenced. Revenues from third-party software and hardware sales are recorded on a net basis, while revenues from internally developed software sales are recorded on a gross basis. There are no significant cancellation or termination-type provisions for the Company’s software and hardware sales, and the term between invoicing and payment due date is not significant.
Arrangements with clients may contain multiple promises such as delivery of software, hardware, professional services or post-contract support services. These promises are accounted for as separate performance obligations if they are distinct. For arrangements with clients that contain multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations based on estimated relative standalone selling price, which is estimated by the expected cost plus a margin approach, taking into consideration market conditions and competitive factors. Because contracts that contain multiple performance obligations are typically short term due to the contract cancellation provisions, the allocation of the transaction price to the separate performance obligations is not considered a significant estimate.
Revenues are presented net of taxes assessed by governmental authorities. Sales taxes are generally collected and subsequently remitted on all software and hardware sales and certain services transactions as appropriate.
Purchase Accounting and Related Fair Value Measurements
The Company allocates the purchase price, including contingent consideration, of our acquisitions to the assets and liabilities acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, based on their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. Such fair market value assessments are primarily based on third-party valuations using assumptions developed by management that require significant judgments and estimates that can change materially as additional information becomes available. The purchase price allocated to intangibles is based on unobservable factors, including but not limited to, projected revenues, expenses, customer attrition rates, royalty rates, a weighted average cost of capital, among others. The weighted average cost of capital uses a market participant’s cost of equity and after-tax cost of debt and reflects the risks inherent in the cash flows. The approach to valuing the initial contingent consideration associated with the purchase price also uses similar unobservable factors such as projected revenues and expenses over the term of the contingent earn-out period, discounted for the period over which the contingent consideration is measured, and volatility rates. Based upon these assumptions, the initial contingent consideration is then valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. The Company finalizes the purchase price allocation once certain initial accounting valuation estimates are finalized, and no later than 12 months following the acquisition date.
Convertible Debt
In accordance with accounting for debt with conversion and other options, the Company bifurcated the principal amount of the Notes into liability and equity components. The initial liability component of the Notes was valued based on the contractual cash flows discounted at an appropriate comparable market non-convertible debt borrowing rate at the date of issuance. The equity component representing the conversion option and calculated as the residual amount of the proceeds was recorded as an increase in additional paid-in capital within stockholders’ equity, partially offset by the associated deferred tax effect. The amount recorded within additional paid-in capital is not to be remeasured as long as it continues to meet the conditions for equity classification. The resulting debt discount is being amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the period from the issuance date through the contractual maturity date. The Company utilizes the treasury stock method to calculate the effects of the Notes on diluted earnings per share.
In connection with the issuance of the Notes, the Company entered into the Notes Hedges with the Option Counterparties. The Notes Hedges provide the Company with the option to acquire, on a net settlement basis, shares of common stock equal to the number of shares of common stock that notionally underlie the Notes and corresponds to the conversion price of the Notes. If the Company elects cash settlement and exercises the Notes Hedges, the aggregate amount of cash received from the Option Counterparties will cover the aggregate amount of cash that the Company would be required to pay to the holders of the Notes, less the principal amount thereof. The Notes Hedges do not meet the criteria for separate accounting as a derivative as they are indexed to the Company’s stock and are accounted for as freestanding financial instruments. The Notes
Hedges were recorded as a reduction in additional paid-in capital within stockholders’ equity, partially offset by the associated deferred tax effect.
Additionally, in connection with the issuance of the Notes, the Company sold the Notes Warrants in privately negotiated transactions with the Option Counterparties. The strike price of the Notes Warrants is subject to certain adjustments under the terms of the Notes Warrants. As a result of the Notes Warrants and related transactions, the Company is required to recognize incremental dilution of earnings per share to the extent the average share price is over the strike price of the Notes Warrants for any fiscal quarter. The Notes Warrants may be settled in net shares of common stock or net cash at the Company’s election. The Notes Warrants were recorded as an increase in additional paid-in capital within stockholders’ equity.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased the remaining portion of the outstanding 2023 Notes, which met the criteria to be accounted for as a debt extinguishment, and repurchased a portion of the outstanding 2025 Notes, which met the criteria to be accounted for as a debt extinguishment with an inducement charge. The consideration paid for the repurchases was allocated to the liability and equity components of the 2023 Notes and 2025 Notes based on the fair value of the liability component, which was determined utilizing an estimated discount rate for a similar liability with the same maturity, but without the conversion option. The consideration allocated to the equity component was calculated by deducting the fair value of the liability component from the aggregate consideration, excluding interest. The Company subsequently compared the allocated consideration with the carrying value of the liability component to record a loss on extinguishment, which includes the proportionate amounts of unamortized debt discount and the remaining unamortized debt issuance costs. An inducement charge representing the difference between the fair value of the consideration delivered to the holders of the repurchased 2025 Notes and the fair value of the consideration issuable under the original conversion terms is included in “Loss on extinguishment of debt” in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Income Taxes
The Company calculates and provides for income taxes in each jurisdiction in which it operates. Deferred tax assets and liabilities, measured using enacted tax rates, are recognized for the future tax consequences of temporary differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. A valuation allowance reduces the deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The Company has established liabilities or reduced assets for uncertain tax positions when it believes those tax positions are not more likely than not of being sustained if challenged. The Company evaluates these uncertain tax positions and adjusts the related tax assets and liabilities in light of changing facts and circumstances each quarter.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.