Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Executive Overview
We are in the business of innovating fundamental wireless technologies and products. We have designed and developed proprietary RF technologies and integrated circuits based on those technologies, and we license our technologies to others for use in wireless communication products. We have expended significant financial and other resources to research and develop our RF technologies and to obtain patent protection for those technologies in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions. We believe certain patents protecting our proprietary technologies have been broadly infringed by others and therefore our business plan primarily consists of enforcement of our intellectual property rights through patent infringement litigation and licensing efforts. We currently have patent enforcement actions ongoing in various U.S. district courts against providers of mobile handsets, smart televisions and other WiFi products and, in certain cases, their chip suppliers for the infringement of a number of our RF patents. We have made significant investments in developing and protecting our technologies, the returns on which are dependent upon the generation of future revenues for realization.
We continue to aggressively pursue licensing opportunities with wireless communications companies that make, use or sell chipsets and/or products that incorporate RF. We believe there are a number of wireless communications companies that can benefit from the use of the RF technologies we have developed, whether through a license or, in certain cases, a joint product venture that may include licensing rights. Our licensing efforts to date have required litigation in order to enforce and/or defend our intellectual property rights. Since 2011, we have been involved in patent infringement litigation against Qualcomm and others for the unauthorized use of our technology. Refer to Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a complete discussion of our legal proceedings. We have expended significant resources since 2011 and incurred significant debt for the enforcement and defense of our intellectual property rights.
Recent Developments
On March 22, 2022, the United States District Court in the Middle District of Florida (Orlando Division) issued an order granting Qualcomm’s motion for summary judgment ruling that Qualcomm does not infringe the three patents that are the subject of our infringement case against them. This ruling, which is a final determination of the district court, follows a March 9, 2022 order granting a Qualcomm motion to strike and exclude the opinions of our experts regarding the alleged infringement and validity issues. We intend to appeal both of these decisions. Refer to ParkerVision v. Qualcomm (Middle District of Florida) included in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a complete discussion of these legal proceedings.
In February 2022, our two patent infringement cases against Intel in the Western District of Texas were reconfigured whereby the first case would assert an aggregate of six patents against Intel cellular products and the second case would assert the same six patents along with a seventh patent against Intel WiFi and Bluetooth products. As a result of the restructuring of the cases, the trial date for the first Intel case was moved from June 2022 to October 24, 2022. In March 2022, as a result of discovery delays, the trial date was moved to a start date of December 5, 2022. The second case against Intel is currently scheduled for trial commencing in May 2023, however that date may change in lieu of the revised schedule in the first Intel case. Refer to ParkerVision v. Intel (Western District of Texas) and ParkerVision v. Intel II (Western District of Texas) included in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a complete discussion of these legal proceedings.
In January 2022, the Patent Trial and Appeal Board (“PTAB”) issued its final decisions on two Inter Partes Reviews (“IPRs”) filed by Intel against two of the patents asserted in the ParkerVision v. Intel infringement cases. The PTAB ruled in our favor with respect to the seven challenged claims of one of the two patents and ruled in Intel’s favor with respect to the one challenged claim of the second patent. We have one additional IPR filed by Intel against a patent asserted in our second case, and the PTAB is expected to issue its final decision in July 2022. Refer to Intel v. ParkerVision (PTAB) included in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a complete discussion of these IPR proceedings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred significant losses from operations and negative cash flows in every year since inception, largely as a result of our significant investments in developing and protecting our intellectual property, and have utilized the proceeds from sales of debt and equity securities and contingent funding arrangements with third-parties to fund our operations, including the cost of litigation.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of approximately $12.3 million and negative cash flows from operations of approximately $7.7 million. At December 31, 2021, we had cash
and cash equivalents of approximately $1.0 million and an accumulated deficit of approximately $433.4 million. Additionally, a significant amount of future proceeds that we may receive from our patent enforcement and licensing programs will first be utilized to repay borrowings, legal fees and litigation expenses under our contingent funding arrangements. Our independent registered public accounting firm has included in their audit report an explanatory paragraph expressing substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a discussion of our liquidity and our ability to continue as a going concern.
We used cash for operations of approximately $7.7 million and $4.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used for operations from 2020 to 2021 is primarily due to the use of approximately $3.9 million in cash for the reduction of accounts payable and accrued expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a $1.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020. Our accounts payable decreased $3.6 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily as result of a $3.0 million payment to a law firm in settlement of our outstanding fees and expenses and in exchange for an agreed-upon reduction in potential success fees payable to the firm from future patent-related proceeds. This increase in use of cash from 2020 to 2021 was somewhat offset by a reduction in cash-based operating costs from 2020 to 2021, largely as a result of decreased litigation fees and expenses. As a result of the decrease in our current liabilities from 2020 to 2021, our working capital improved by approximately $3.7 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received aggregate net proceeds from the sale of debt and equity securities, including the exercise of outstanding options and warrants, of approximately $7.2 million compared to approximately $7.6 million in proceeds received for the year ended December 31, 2020. We repaid approximately $0.1 million and $1.3 million, respectively in debt obligations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our ability to meet our short-term liquidity needs, including our debt repayment obligations, is dependent upon one or more of (i) our ability to successfully negotiate licensing agreements and/or settlements relating to the use of our technologies by others in excess of our contingent payment obligations to Brickell and legal counsel; and/or (ii) our ability to raise additional capital from the sale of debt or equity securities or other financing arrangements.
Significant portions of our litigation costs to date have been funded by contingent payment arrangements with legal counsel. Fee discounts offered by legal counsel in exchange for contingent payments upon successful outcome in our litigation are not recognized in expense until such time that the related proceeds on which the contingent fees are payable are considered probable. Contingent fees vary based on each firm’s specific fee agreement. We currently have contingent fee arrangements in place for all of our active cases. In addition to our contingent fee agreements with legal counsel, we have secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations to litigation funders that have priority payments due from patent-related proceeds as discussed more fully under “Financial Condition-Contingent Payment Obligations” below.
Although current working capital will not be used to repay our contingent arrangements, based on our current outstanding legal proceedings, funding arrangements and contingent payment arrangements, we estimate that up to 100% of our initial future proceeds will be used to repay contingent payment arrangements until the minimum return under our secured contingent payment obligation has been met. After repayment of minimum returns on litigation financing, we estimate that 45% to 68% of remaining future proceeds from current actions could be payable to others, depending on the proceeding and the nature, amount and timing of proceeds, among other factors.
Patent enforcement litigation is costly and time-consuming and the outcome is difficult to predict. We expect to continue to invest in the support of our patent enforcement and licensing programs. We expect that revenue generated from patent enforcement actions and/or technology licenses in 2022, if any, after deduction of contingent payment obligations, may not be sufficient to cover our operating expenses. In the event we do not generate revenues, or other patent-related proceeds, sufficient to cover our operational costs and contingent repayment obligations, we will be required to raise additional working capital through the sale of debt or equity securities or other financing arrangements.
The long-term continuation of our business plan is dependent upon our ability to secure sufficient financing to support our business, and our ability to generate revenues and/or patent-related proceeds sufficient to offset expenses and meet our contingent payment obligations and other long-term debt repayment obligations. Failure to generate sufficient revenues, raise additional capital through debt or equity financings, and/or reduce operating costs could have a material adverse effect on our ability to meet our short and long-term liquidity needs and achieve our intended long-term business objectives.
Financial Condition
Intangible Assets
We consider our intellectual property, including patents, patent applications, trademarks, copyrights and trade secrets to be significant to our business. Our intangible assets are pledged as security for our secured contingent payment obligation with Brickell. The net book value of our intangible assets was approximately $1.8 million and $2.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These assets are amortized using the straight-line method over their estimated period of benefit, generally fifteen to twenty years. The decrease in the carrying value of our intangible assets is primarily the result of $0.4 million in patent amortization expense recognized in 2021. Management evaluates the recoverability of intangible assets periodically and takes into account events or circumstances that may warrant revised estimates of useful lives or that may indicate impairment exists. As part of our ongoing patent maintenance program, we may, from time to time, abandon a particular patent if we determine fees to maintain the patent exceed its expected recoverability. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred losses of approximately $0.03 million and $0.3 million, respectively, for the write-off of specific patent assets. These losses are included in operating expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Contingent Payment Obligations
We have secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations recorded at an aggregate estimated fair value of $43.1 million and $38.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These repayment obligations are contingent upon receipt of proceeds from patent enforcement and other patent monetization actions. As a result, we have elected to account for these contingent payment obligations at their estimated fair values which are subject to significant estimates and assumptions as discussed in “Critical Accounting Policies” below. Refer to Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a discussion of the fair value measurement of our contingent payment obligation.
Our secured contingent payment obligation is payable to Brickell as a result of $18 million in borrowings under a 2016 funding agreement, as amended from time to time. We have repaid Brickell an aggregate of $3.3 million to date under this agreement. The contingent payment obligation to Brickell is recorded at its estimated fair market value of $37.4 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $4.3 million or 13% from the estimated fair market value at December 31, 2020. Brickell is entitled to a priority, prorated payment of up to 100% of proceeds received by us from funded patent-related actions up to a specified minimum return. Brickell’s minimum return is determined as a multiple of the outstanding funded amount that increases over time. The estimated aggregate minimum return due to Brickell if repaid in full
at December 31, 2021 is approximately $48.8 million, an increase of approximately $6.8 million, or 16%, from the minimum return that would have been due to Brickell as of December 31, 2020.
In addition, in 2020 and 2021, we incurred unsecured contingent payment obligations in connection with various funding arrangements. These contingent payment obligations are payable from our share of patent-related proceeds after satisfaction of our obligation to Brickell and payment of contingent fees to legal counsel. These unsecured contingent payment obligations are recorded at an aggregate estimated fair value of $5.7 million at December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $0.5 million from the estimated fair market value at December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily the result of $0.4 million in new unsecured contingent payment obligations incurred in 2021. The maximum payment obligation for our unsecured contingent payment obligations is $10.8 million at December 31, 2021.
See “Change in Fair Value of Contingent Obligations” included in “Results of Operations” below for a discussion of the increase in the estimated fair value of our secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations.
Note Payable
As of December 31, 2021, we have a $0.7 million unsecured note payable to Sterne, Kessler, Goldstein, & Fox, PLLC (“SKGF”), a related party. We are obligated to make principal and interest payments totaling $0.12 million in 2022 under this note. The remaining outstanding balance of the note is subject to payment in full by April 30, 2023. Failure to comply with the payment terms of this note constitutes an event of default which, if uncured, will result in the entire unpaid principal balance of the note and any unpaid, accrued interest to become immediately due and payable. In addition, an event of default results in an increase in the interest rate under the notes to a default rate of 12% per annum. Notes payable are discussed more fully in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
Convertible Notes
As of December 31, 2021, we have $2.9 million in notes that are convertible, at the holders’ option, into shares of our common stock at fixed conversion prices ranging from $0.08 to $0.57 per share. These notes mature at varying dates from September 2023 to January 2025. The majority of the notes bear interest at a stated rate of 8%, payable quarterly. We have the option, subject to certain conditions, to pay the quarterly interest in-kind with shares of our common stock based on market price at the interest payment date. To date, all of the interest payments under these convertible notes have been paid in-kind and we anticipate that future payments of interest will also be paid in-kind. The notes provide for events of default that include failure to pay principal or interest when due, breach of any of the representations made by us, events of liquidation or bankruptcy, and a change in control. In the event of default, the interest rate increases to 12% per annum and the outstanding principal balance of the notes plus all accrued interest due may be declared immediately payable by the holders of a majority of the then-outstanding notes. Our convertible notes payable are more fully discussed in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
Deferred Tax Assets and Related Valuation Allowance
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established to reduce deferred tax assets when, based on available objective evidence, it is more likely than not that the benefit of such assets will not be realized. As of December 31, 2021, we had net deferred tax assets of approximately $93 million, primarily related to our NOL carryforwards, which were fully offset by a valuation allowance due to the uncertainty related to realization of these assets through future taxable income. In addition, our ability to benefit from our NOL
and other tax credit carryforwards could be limited under Section 382 as more fully discussed in “Risk Factors” and in Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
Results of Operations for Each of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues and Gross Margins
Licensing revenue was $0.14 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We reported no licensing revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. We entered into patent licensing and settlement agreements with Buffalo and Zyxel in May 2021 and September 2021, respectively. We recognized revenue from these contracts during the year ended December 31, 2021 when the parties’ performance obligations were met. Cost of sales related to the licensing revenue consists of amortization expense related to the patents covered under the license agreements.
Our licensing proceeds were fully offset against out-of-pocket expenses recognized under our contingent fee agreement with counsel and therefore did not impact our cash flows. These out-of-pocket expenses are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Although we do anticipate additional revenue to result from our licensing and patent enforcement actions, the amount and timing is highly unpredictable and there can be no assurance that we will achieve our anticipated results.
We reported no product revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of executive, director, technical support, and finance and administrative personnel costs, including share-based compensation, costs incurred for insurance, shareholder relations and outside legal and professional services, including litigation expenses, and amortization and maintenance expenses related to our patent assets.
Our selling, general and administrative expenses were approximately $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to approximately $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of approximately $2.6 million or 24%. This decrease results, in part, from a number of one-time, noncash charges in 2020 including $1.8 million associated with an amendment to a warrant agreement, $0.4 million from an amendment to our March 2020 equity transactions, and $0.2 million for impairment of the right-of-use asset associated with our Lake Mary lease. In addition, our litigation fees and expenses decreased by approximately $2.3 million as a result of the stay in the Qualcomm case in Jacksonville, Florida. These decreases were partially offset by a $2.1 million increase in share-based compensation attributed to nonqualified stock options awarded to executives, key employees, and nonemployee directors in January 2021 as more fully discussed in Note 14 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Payment Obligations
We have elected to measure our secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations at fair value which is based on significant unobservable inputs. We estimated the fair value of our secured contingent payment obligations using a probability-weighted income approach based on the estimated present value of projected future cash outflows using a risk-adjusted discount rate. Increases or decreases in the significant unobservable inputs could result in significant increases or decreases in fair value.
﻿
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an increase in the fair value of our secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations of approximately $4.4 million. The majority of the change in fair value is attributable to an increase in the estimated fair value of the secured contingent obligation with Brickell as a result of changes in estimated amounts and timing of projected future cash flows.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that the following are critical accounting policies and estimates that significantly impact the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Contingent Payment Obligations
We have accounted for our secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations as long-term debt. Our repayment obligations are contingent upon the receipt of proceeds from patent enforcement or other patent monetization actions. We have elected to measure our contingent payment obligations at their estimated fair values based on the variable and contingent nature of the repayment provisions. We have determined that the fair value of our secured and unsecured contingent payment obligations falls within Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy, which involves significant estimates and assumptions including projected future patent-related proceeds and the risk-adjusted rate for discounting future cash flows. Actual results could differ from the estimates made. Changes in fair value, including the component related to imputed interest, are included in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss under the heading “Change in fair value of contingent payment obligations.” Refer to Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 for a discussion of the significant estimates and assumptions used in estimated the fair value of our contingent payment obligations.
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation
We calculate the fair value of share-based equity awards to employees, including restricted stock, stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”), on the date of grant and recognize the calculated fair value as compensation expense over the requisite service periods of the related awards. The fair value of stock option awards is determined using the Black-Scholes option valuation model that requires the use of highly subjective assumptions and estimates including how long employees will retain their stock options before exercising them and the volatility of our common stock price over the expected life of the equity award. Changes in these subjective assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of share-based compensation and consequently, the related amount recognized as expense in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
New Accounting Pronouncements
We adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, "Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity's Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity's Own Equity" as of January 1, 2021. ASU 2020-06 simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. Consequently, more convertible debt instruments will be reported as a single liability instrument with no separate accounting for embedded conversion features. The ASU removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, which will permit more equity contracts to qualify for the exception. The ASU also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. For smaller reporting companies, the ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. The ASU provides for a modified retrospective method of adoption whereby the guidance is applied to transactions outstanding at the beginning of the fiscal year of adoption with the cumulative effect of the change being recorded as an adjustment to beginning retained earnings. Adoption of ASU 2020-06 resulted in an increase to our long-term debt of approximately $0.8 million, a decrease in
additional paid-in-capital of approximately $1.1 million and an adjustment to our beginning accumulated deficit of $0.3 million resulting from the elimination of the previously recognized beneficial conversion feature as a debt discount.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding warrants to purchase 10.3 million shares of our common stock. The estimated grant date fair value of these warrants of approximately $3.2 million is included in shareholders’ deficit in our consolidated balance sheet for the year ended December 31, 2021. The outstanding warrants have an average exercise price of $0.75 per share and a weighted average remaining life of approximately 3 years.