Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in this Annual Report. This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, such statements are subject to the “safe harbor” created by those sections and involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information available to our management as of the date hereof. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, accordingly, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the future. Such factors may be amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business and the global economy.
Overview
PSSA, a public company limited by shares (société anonyme) was incorporated on June 21, 2021 under the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg for the purpose of effecting a business combination. PSSA is headquartered in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg with global operations in North America, Europe, and Asia Pacific.
On November 8, 2019, EverArc was formed for the purpose of undertaking an acquisition of one target company or business. EverArc completed its initial public offering on December 17, 2019 by placing 34,000,000 EverArc Ordinary Shares and accompanying EverArc Warrants and an additional offering on January 15, 2020 by issuing 6,800,000 EverArc Ordinary Shares with no accompanying EverArc Warrants, generating net proceeds of $401.0 million. The net proceeds were not placed in any trust or escrow account but were instead held in U.S. Treasuries or money market fund instruments to be used to fund an initial business combination. EverArc Ordinary Shares and EverArc Warrants were listed for trading on the London Stock Exchange under the symbols “EVRA,” and “EVWA,” respectively.
The Merger Sub was also formed solely in contemplation of a business combination. EverArc or the Merger Sub had not commenced any operations, had only nominal assets and had no liabilities or contingent liabilities, nor any outstanding commitments other than those in connection with contemplated business combination.
On the Closing Date, PSSA consummated the transactions contemplated by the Business Combination with EverArc, SK Holdings, Perimeter Solutions and the Merger Sub pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement dated June 15, 2021.
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement,
•On November 8, 2021:
•the Merger Sub merged with and into EverArc, with EverArc surviving such merger as a direct wholly-owned subsidiary of PSSA;
•pursuant to the Merger, 155,832,600 EverArc Ordinary Shares outstanding immediately prior to the Merger were exchanged for ordinary shares of PSSA Ordinary Shares; and
•34,020,000 outstanding EverArc Warrants, in each case, with each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one-fourth of an EverArc Ordinary Share at an exercise price of $12.00 per whole EverArc Ordinary Share, were converted into the right to purchase PSSA Warrants; and
On November 8, 2021, EverArc Ordinary Shares and EverArc Warrants were formally delisted from the London Stock Exchange and pursuant to the Subscription Agreements the EverArc Subscribers purchased an aggregate of 115,000,000 EverArc Ordinary Shares at $10.00 per share that were converted into PSSA Ordinary Shares pursuant to the Merger.
•On November 9, 2021:
•SK Holdings (i) along with officers and certain key employees of SK Intermediate contributed a portion of their ordinary shares in SK Intermediate to PSSA in exchange for 10 million 6.50% Redeemable Preferred Shares of PSSA (“Redeemable Preferred Shares"), nominal value of $10.00 per share, valued at $100.0 million and (ii) sold its remaining ordinary shares in SK Intermediate for approximately $1,900.0
million in cash subject to certain customary adjustments for working capital, transaction expenses, cash and indebtedness;
•PSSA's ordinary shares, nominal value, $1.00 per share, listed and began trading on the NYSE under the symbol "PRM"; and
•the Management Subscribers were granted an aggregate of 1,104,810 PSSA Ordinary Shares at $10.00 per share as consideration and the Director Subscribers purchased an aggregate of 200,000 PSSA Ordinary Shares at $10.00 per share.
•$675.0 million Senior Notes issued by EverArc Escrow S.à r.l. (“Escrow Issuer”), a newly-formed limited liability company governed by the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and a wholly owned subsidiary of EverArc under an indenture dated as of October 22, 2021 was assumed by SK Invictus Intermediate II S.à r.l., a private limited liability company governed by the laws of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg (“SK Intermediate II.”)
The cash consideration for the Business Combination was funded through cash on hand, proceeds from the sale of the EverArc Ordinary Shares to the EverArc Subscribers, proceeds from the issuance of Senior Notes and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
In connection with the Business Combination, the Merger was accounted for as a common control transaction, where substantially all of the net assets of PSSA will be those previously held by EverArc. Upon the acquisition of SK Intermediate, PSSA was determined to be the Successor and SK Intermediate was deemed to be the Predecessor. The business combination with SK Intermediate was accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting and the Successor financial statements reflect a new basis of accounting based on the fair value of the net assets acquired. As a result of the application of the acquisition method of accounting, our consolidated financial statements and certain presentations are separated into two distinct periods to indicate the different ownership and accounting basis between the periods presented, the period before the consummation of the Business Combination, which includes the period from January 1, 2021 to November 8, 2021 (the “2021 Predecessor Period”); the year ended December 31, 2020 (the “2020 Predecessor Period”); the year ended December 31, 2019 (the “2019 Predecessor Period”); and the period on and after the consummation of the Business Combination, from the Closing Date to December 31, 2021 (the “Successor Period”).
SK Intermediate was formed by SK Capital Partners IV-A, L.P. and SK Capital Partners IV-A, L.P. (collectively, the “Sponsor”) on February 12, 2018 and commenced operations on the same date.
We are a global solutions provider, producing high-quality firefighting products and lubricant additives. Approximately 73% of our annual revenues is derived in the United States, approximately 13% in Europe, approximately 7% in Canada and approximately 2% in Mexico, respectively, and remaining approximately 5% across various other countries. Our business is organized and managed in two reporting segments: Fire Safety and Oil Additives.
The Fire Safety business is a formulator and manufacturer of fire management products that help our customers combat various types of fires, including wildland, structural, flammable liquids and other types of fires. Our Fire Safety business also offers specialized equipment and services, typically in conjunction with our fire management products to support firefighting operations. Our specialized equipment includes air base retardant storage, mixing, and delivery equipment; mobile retardant bases; retardant ground application units; mobile foam equipment; and equipment that we custom design and manufacture to meet specific customer needs. Our service network can meet the emergency resupply needs of over 150 air tanker bases in North America, as well as many other customer locations globally. The segment is built on the premise of superior technology, exceptional responsiveness to our customers’ needs, and a “never-fail” service network. Significant end markets include primarily government-related entities and are dependent on concessions, licenses, and permits granted by the respective governments and commercial customers around the world.
The Oil Additives business produces and sells high quality P2S5 primarily used in the preparation of lubricant additives, including a family of compounds called ZDDP that provide critical anti-wear protection to engine components. In addition, they inhibit oxidation of the oil by scavenging free radicals that initiate oil breakdown and sludge formulation, resulting in better and longer engine function. P2S5 is also used in pesticide and mining chemicals applications. Significant end markets are primarily producers of engine oil additives.
Known Trends and Uncertainties
Growth in Fire Safety
We believe that our Fire Safety segment benefits from several secular growth drivers, including increasing fire severity, as measured by higher acres burned and longer fire seasons, a growing wildland urban interface, and increasing airtanker capacity. We believe that these trends are prevalent in North America, as well as globally.
We are also attempting to grow our fire prevention and protection business, which is primarily focused on high hazard industries like electrical utilities, railroads and transportation agencies. Fire prevention products can be used to prevent fire ignitions and protect property from potential fire danger by providing proactive retardant treatment in high-risk areas. Treating these areas ahead of the fire season can potentially stop ignitions from equipment failures or sparks. Our new Phos-Chek Fortify product, applied before or early in the fire season, can provide protection all season. In addition, Phos-Chek Fortify can proactively be applied to protect high value assets and critical infrastructure from the danger of wildfire.
We expect these trends to continue in 2022 and beyond and drive growth in demand for fire retardant products. We have invested and also intend to continue investing in the expansion our fire safety business through acquisitions in order to further grow our global customer base. Acquisitions and divestitures during the most recent two fiscal years are described in Note 3, “Business Acquisitions,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Weather Conditions and Climate Trends
Our business is highly dependent on the needs of government agencies to suppress fires. As such, our financial condition and results of operations are significantly impacted by weather as well as environmental and other factors affecting climate change, which impact the number and severity of fires in any given year. Historically, sales of our products have been higher in the summer season of each fiscal year due to weather patterns which are generally correlated to a higher prevalence of wildfires. This is in part offset by the disbursement of our operations in both the northern and southern hemispheres, where the summer seasons alternate.
Fire severity in the United States increased significantly in 2021 and 2020, compared to 2019. This resulted in increased net sales in each of 2021 and 2020 compared to 2019, which experienced low fire activity due to cold and wet conditions in the key geographic regions, particularly the Western United States.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The pandemic caused by the outbreak of COVID-19 introduced significant volatility to the global health and economic environment, including millions of confirmed COVID-19 cases, business slowdowns or shutdowns, government challenges and market volatility in the first half of 2020. The pandemic has resulted in governments around the world implementing stringent measures to help control the spread of the virus, including quarantines, “shelter in place” and “stay at home” orders, travel restrictions, business curtailments and other measures.
Within the United States, which contributes approximately 73% of our annual revenues, our business has been designated as “essential,” which has allowed us to continue to serve our customers throughout the COVID-19 pandemic; nonetheless, the pandemic has disrupted our operations. The lingering impacts of COVID-19 into 2021 has impeded global supply chains, resulted in longer lead times and delays in procuring raw materials, and resulted in inflationary cost increases in certain raw materials, labor and transportation. In response to the global supply chain instability and inflationary cost increases we have taken several actions to minimize any potential and actual adverse impacts by working closely with our suppliers and customers and to continue to closely monitor the availability of raw materials and any other supply chain inefficiencies that may arise.
The exact pace and timing of the economic recovery remains uncertain and is expected to continue to be uneven depending on factors such as trends in the number of COVID-19 infections (e.g., impact of new variants of COVID-19 resurfacing), the continued efficacy of vaccines, particularly against any newly emerging variants of COVID-19 and easing of quarantines among other factors. As the consequences of the pandemic and adverse impact to the global economy continue to evolve, the future adverse impact on our business and financial statements remains subject to significant uncertainty as of the date of this filing.
Results of Operations
We have prepared our discussion of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 by comparing the results of the combined Successor Period and the 2021 Predecessor (“S/P Combined”) and the 2020 Predecessor Period as the Successor and Predecessor entities, are expected to be largely consistent, excluding the impact on certain financial statement line items that were impacted by the Business Combination such as depreciation and amortization expense on PSSA’s property, plant, and equipment and intangible asset balances made under the new basis of accounting. We believe this approach provides the most meaningful basis of comparison and is more useful in discussing our overall operating performance when compared to the same period in the prior year.
The combined results of operations included in our discussion below are not considered to be prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP (“non-U.S. GAAP”) and have not been prepared as pro forma results under applicable regulations, may not reflect the actual results we would have achieved had the Business Combination occurred at the beginning of fiscal 2021, and should not be viewed as a substitute for the results of operations of the Successor Period and the 2021 Predecessor presented in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 (“S/P Combined”) Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Total Company
The following table sets forth our combined results of operations for each of the periods indicated. The change column reflects the comparison of the S/P Combined amounts (“2021”) with the 2020 Predecessor Period amounts (“2020”) (in thousands):
Net Sales. Net sales in 2021 increased by $22.8 million, or 7%, compared to 2020. The growth in net sales was primarily driven by a $16.2 million increase generated by the Fire Safety segment. Within the Fire Safety segment, fire retardant and fire suppressants sales increased by $9.7 million and $6.5 million, respectively. Fire retardant sales increased by $6.7 million in the Americas due to an active wildfire season and by $3.0 million from higher sales in Europe. Fire suppressants sales increased by $5.0 million from higher sales in Europe due to an increase in market share and by $1.5
million in the Americas related to new fluorine-free foam concentrates and equipment. Net sales in the Oil Additives segment increased $6.6 million primarily due to higher global demand for lubricant additives as miles driven increased in 2021 after business slowdowns or shutdowns due to COVID-19 during 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold. Cost of goods sold in 2021 increased by $15.1 million, or 9%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to $12.1 million increase in the Oil Additives segment, which was negatively impacted by higher raw material and supply chain costs, and $3.0 million increase in the Fire Safety segment, which was also impacted by higher raw material costs, along with higher outside labor and equipment costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. Selling, general and administrative expense for 2021 increased by $18.2 million compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to $5.9 million increase in personnel related and share-based compensation expenses, $4.0 million increase in non-recurring management bonus, $3.4 million increase in accounting, legal and consulting expenses related to Business Combination, $2.5 million increase in marketing and logistics expenses and $2.4 million increase in insurance, software and supplies expenses.
Amortization Expense. Amortization expense in 2021 increased by $2.0 million, or 4%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to the effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates.
Founder advisory fees - related party. Founder advisory fees - related party of $653.0 million in 2021 represents $213.3 million in Fixed Annual Advisory Fees and $439.7 million in Variable Annual Advisory Amount payable to the EverArc Founder Entity for providing services to the Company, including strategic and capital allocation advice, until the years ending December 31, 2027 and 2031, respectively. The Fixed Annual Advisory Amount was based on the year-end closing price of our ordinary share and the Variable Annual Advisory Amount was based on the appreciation of the market price of our ordinary shares if such market price exceeds certain trading price minimums and was generated using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Other Operating Expense. Other operating expense in 2021 increased by $2.9 million compared to 2020. The increase was primarily related to $3.1 million in transaction costs related to the Business Combination, offset by $0.2 million in lower management fees paid to SK Holdings.
Interest Expense. Interest expense for 2021 increased by $3.4 million, or 8%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an $11.8 million write-off of the deferred finance fees due to repayment of Predecessor debt upon consummation of the Business Combination, offset by a $7.9 million decrease in interest expense due to lower interest rates in response to unfavorable market conditions caused by the COVID-19 and a $0.5 million decrease in the amortization of deferred finance fees, net of the aforementioned write-off.
Loss on Contingent Earn-out. The Contingent earn-out for 2021 was $3.2 million, which reflects the change in fair value of the contingent consideration for the LaderaTech earn-out of $3.2 million.
Unrealized Foreign Currency (Gain) Loss. Unrealized foreign currency loss for 2021 increased by $10.7 million, or 189%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to $5.0 million unfavorable foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations during 2021 compared to foreign currency gain of $5.6 million during 2020.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense). Income tax benefit (expense) for 2021 decreased by $1.0 million, or 10%, compared to 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a decrease in earnings in jurisdictions that were not covered by a valuation allowance.
Business Segments
We use segment net sales and adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) to evaluate our operating performance by segment, for business planning purposes and to allocate resources. The following table provides information for our net sales and Adjusted EBITDA by operating segment (in thousands):
(1)Adjustment to reflect non-recurring expenses incurred related to business combinations.
(2)Represents the non-cash impact of purchase accounting on the cost of inventory sold. The inventory acquired received a purchase accounting step-up in basis, which is a non-cash adjustment to the cost.
(3)Adjustment to reflect fees pertaining to services provided by SK Capital Partners IV-A, L.P. and SK Capital Partners IV-B, L.P (collectively, the Sponsor) when acting in a management capacity on strategic and other non-operational matters which do not represent expenses incurred in the normal course of our operations.
(4)Adjustment to reflect deferred consideration paid with respect to a 2019 acquisition.
Adjusted EBITDA for our Fire Safety segment increased by $5.9 million to $117.9 million in 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher sales partially offset by higher cost of goods sold and operating expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA for our Oil Additives segment decreased by $0.4 million to $23.6 million in 2021. The decrease was primarily due to higher cost of goods sold and operating expenses offset by higher sales.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
Total Company
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income information for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Sales. Total net sales increased by $100.3 million, or 42%, for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period. The increase in consolidated net sales was primarily the result of a $93.8 million increase in net sales generated by our Fire Safety segment. During the 2019 Predecessor Period, there was a decrease in fire activity due to cold and wet conditions in the key regions of operations. Fluctuations of weather-related performance drivers resulted in increased fire activity during the 2020 Predecessor Period. Net sales in our Oil Additives segment also increased $6.5 million primarily due to increased miles driven as a result of easing COVID-19 restrictions during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 Predecessor Period.
Cost of Goods Sold. Total cost of goods sold increased by $22.1 million, or 14%, for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period. The increase in consolidated cost of goods sold was primarily the result of a $22.7 million increase in cost of goods sold in our Fire Safety segment due to higher costs associated with the growth in net sales during the period. Our Oil Additives segment benefited from a more favorable cost structure during the 2020 Predecessor Period and, therefore, cost of goods sold remained comparable with the 2019 Predecessor Period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense. Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $1.5 million, or 4%, for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period. The increase was primarily attributable to a $0.9 million and $0.6 million increase in customer related freight and transportation costs in our Fire Safety and Oil Additives segments, respectively, as a result of higher sales.
Other Operating Expense. Other operating expense decreased by $1.0 million, or 42% for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower management fees as a result of reduced travel costs.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased by $9.6 million, or 19%, for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period. The decrease was primarily driven by lower London Inter Bank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") rates during the 2020 Predecessor Period, which resulted in a $7.9 million favorable change in interest due on the Predecessor First and Second Lien Term Loans, and lower average daily outstanding balances on the Predecessor revolving credit facility during the 2020 Predecessor Period.
Unrealized Foreign Currency (Gain) Loss. Unrealized foreign currency gain was $5.6 million for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to an unrealized foreign currency loss of $2.7 million for the 2019 Predecessor Period. The change was primarily attributable to favorable foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations during the 2020 Predecessor Period.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit. Income tax (expense) benefit decreased by $28.2 million, or 159%, for the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period. Our effective income tax rate for the 2020 Predecessor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period was 30.2% and 29.6%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate for 2020 Predecessor Period compared to the 2019 Predecessor Period was mainly due to a decrease in favorable book to tax differences.
Business Segments
The following table provides information for our net sales and Adjusted EBITDA by operating segment (in thousands):
(1)Adjustment to reflect non-recurring expenses incurred related to business combinations.
(2)Adjustment to reflect fees pertaining to services provided by SK Capital Partners IV-A, L.P. and SK Capital Partners IV-B, L.P (collectively, the Sponsor) when acting in a management capacity on strategic and other non-operational matters which do not represent expenses incurred in the normal course of our operations.
(3)Adjustment to reflect deferred consideration paid with respect to a 2019 acquisition.
Adjusted EBITDA for our Fire Safety segment increased by $67.3 million to $112.0 million in the 2020 Predecessor Period. The increase was primarily due to higher net sales in the 2020 Predecessor Period compared to decrease in fire activity due to cold and wet conditions in the key regions of operations in the 2019 Predecessor Period.
Adjusted EBITDA for our Oil Additives segment increased by $7.1 million to $24.0 million in the 2020 Predecessor Period. The increase was primarily due to higher net sales in the 2020 Predecessor Period as a result of easing COVID-19 restrictions during the third and fourth quarters of 2020 Predecessor Period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically funded our operations primarily through cash flows from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facility, and the issuance of debt and equity securities. However, future cash flows are subject to a number of variables, including the length and severity of the fire season, growth of the wildland urban interface and the availability of air tanker capacity, all of which could negatively impact revenues, earnings and cash flows, and potentially our liquidity if we do not moderate our expenditures accordingly.
We completed the following financing transactions to fund the Business Combination and supplement our liquidity position.
Revolving Credit Facility
On November 9, 2021, SK Intermediate II entered into a five-year revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Credit Facility”), which provides for a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million.
The Revolving Credit Facility matures on November 9, 2026. The Revolving Credit Facility includes a $20.0 million swingline sub-facility and a $25.0 million letter of credit sub-facility. The Revolving Credit Facility allows Invictus II to increase commitments under the Revolving Credit Facility up to an aggregate amount not to exceed the greater of (i) $143.0 million and (ii) 100.00% of consolidated EBITDA for the most recent four-quarter period (minus the aggregate outstanding principal amount of certain ratio debt permitted to be incurred thereunder). All borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility are subject to the satisfaction of customary conditions, including the absence of a default and the accuracy of representations and warranties, subject to certain exceptions.
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility bear interest at a rate equal to (i) an applicable margin, plus (ii) at Invictus II’s option, either (x) LIBOR determined by reference to the cost of funds for U.S. dollar deposits for the interest period relevant to such borrowing, adjusted for certain additional costs (but which will not be less than a 0.00% LIBOR floor) or (y) a base rate determined by reference to the highest of (a) the prime commercial lending rate published by the Wall Street Journal, (b) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (c) the one-month LIBOR rate plus 1.00% and (d) a minimum floor of 1.00%. The applicable margin is 3.25% in the case of LIBOR-based loans and 2.25% in the case of base rate-based loans, with two step downs of 0.25% each based upon the achievement of certain leverage ratios.
We borrowed $40.0 million under the Revolving Credit Facility to finance a portion of the costs and expenses in connection with the consummation of the Business Combination. On December 9, 2021, we repaid the full drawdown of $40.0 million.
Bridge Facility
In connection with entering into the Business Combination Agreement, EverArc entered into a commitment letter, dated June 15, 2021, with Morgan Stanley Senior Funding, Inc., Barclays Bank PLC and Goldman Sachs Bank USA (collectively, the “Commitment Parties”) pursuant to which the Commitment Parties had, with respect to bridge financing, committed to provide up to $600.0 million in bridge loans (the “Bridge Loan Commitment”) to ensure financing for the Business Combination. Effective November 9, 2021, the Bridge Loan Commitment was fully terminated as a result of the $675.0 million in committed amounts available under the Senior Notes, as described below. We did not make any borrowings under the Bridge Loan Commitment and incurred a commitment fee of $7.5 million, which was recorded as part of the November 9, 2021 accumulated deficit balance in the consolidated statements of shareholders’ equity included in this Annual Report.
Senior Notes
In order to finance a portion of the cash consideration payable in the Business Combination and the costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith, the Escrow Issuer launched a private offering of $600.0 million, offering amount subsequently updated to $675.0 million, of 5.00% senior secured notes due 2029. Upon the consummation of the Business Combination, SK Intermediate II assumed the Escrow Issuer’s obligations under the Senior Notes. The Senior Notes bear interest at an annual rate of 5.00%. Interest on the Senior Notes is payable in cash semi-annually in arrears on April 30 and October 30 of each year, commencing on April 30, 2022.
The Senior Notes are general, secured, senior obligations of SK Intermediate II; rank equally in right of payment with all existing and future senior indebtedness of SK Intermediate II (including, without limitation, the Revolving Credit Facility); and together with the Revolving Credit Facility, are effectively senior to all existing and future indebtedness of Invictus II that is not secured by the collateral.
For additional information about our long-term debt, refer to Note 6, “Long-Term Debt and Redeemable Preferred Shares,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Share Repurchase Plan
On December 7, 2021, subject to the approval of our shareholders, the Board authorized the Share Repurchase Plan. Under the Share Repurchase Plan, we and our subsidiaries are authorized to repurchase up to $100.0 million of our issued and outstanding ordinary shares at any time during the next 24 months or, if different, such other timeframe as approved by our shareholders. As of December 31, 2021, we had not repurchased shares under our Share Repurchase Plan. For additional information about our Share Repurchase Plan, refer to Item 5, "Market for the Company’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities," and Note 9, “Equity,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
Founder Advisory Agreement
On December 12, 2019, EverArc and the EverArc Founder Entity entered into the Founder Advisory Agreement to provide incentives to the EverArc Founders to achieve EverArc’s, and following the Merger, the Company’s, objectives. In exchange for the services provided to the Company, including strategic and capital allocation advice, the EverArc Founder Entity will be entitled to receive both a Fixed Annual Advisory Amount and a Variable Annual Advisory Amount until the years ending December 31, 2027 and 2031, respectively. Under the Founder Advisory Agreement, at the election of the EverArc Founder Entity, at least 50% of the Advisory Amounts will be paid in PSSA Ordinary Shares and the remainder in cash.
As of December 31, 2021, we recorded Advisory Amounts of $653.0 million in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations, representing $213.3 million in Fixed Annual Advisory Amount and $439.7 million in Variable Annual Advisory Amount, payable to the EverArc Founder Entity over the term of the Founder Advisory Agreement. The Fixed Annual Advisory Amount equals to 1.5% of 157,137,410 ordinary shares outstanding on the Closing Date multiplied by the year end closing price of our ordinary shares. The Variable Annual Advisory Amount is based on the appreciation of the market price of our ordinary shares if such market price exceeds certain trading price minimums and was valued using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
For 2021, the average price was $13.63 per PSSA Ordinary Share, resulting in a total Variable Annual Advisory Amount for 2021 of 7,525,906 ordinary shares, or a value of $102.5 million (the “2021 Variable Amount”). The EverArc Founder Entity also received the Fixed Annual Advisory Amount which was equal to 1.5% of 157,137,410 ordinary shares outstanding on the Closing Date: 2,357,061 ordinary shares or a value of $32.1 million, based on average price of $13.63 per PSSA Ordinary Share (the “2021 Fixed Amount” and together with the 2021 Variable Amount, the “2021 Advisory Amounts”). Per the Founder Advisory Agreement, the EverArc Founder Entity elected to receive approximately 60% of the 2021 Advisory Amounts in ordinary shares (5,952,992 ordinary shares) and approximately 40% of the Advisory Amounts in cash ($53.5 million). On February 15, 2022, the Company issued 5,952,992 PSSA Ordinary Shares and paid $53.5 million in cash in satisfaction of 2021 Advisory Amounts.
For additional information about the Founder Advisory Agreement, refer to Note 12, “Related Parties,” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents of approximately $225.6 million as of December 31, 2021, net cash flows generated from operations and availability under the Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our current capital expenditures, working capital, and debt service requirements for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report. Our fiscal year 2022 capital expenditure budget is $10.0 million, which we expect will cover both our maintenance and growth capital expenditures. We may also utilize borrowings under other various financing sources available to us, including the issuance of equity and/or debt securities through public offerings or private placements, to fund our acquisitions, the Advisory Amounts and long-term liquidity needs. Our ability to complete future offerings of equity or debt securities and the timing of these offerings will depend upon various factors including prevailing market conditions and our financial condition.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table presents the sources and uses of our cash for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash provided by (used in) operating activities was $4.4 million, $68.0 million, $70.8 million and $(0.3) million for the Successor Period, 2021 Predecessor Period, 2020 Predecessor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period, respectively. During the Successor Period the operating cash flows were negatively impacted by lower net income and an increase in working capital, offset by stock-based compensation. Operating cash flows for the 2021 Predecessor Period were negatively impacted by an increase in working capital which was offset by higher net income and non-cash depreciation and amortization expense. The increase in working capital was primarily due to an increase in accounts receivable from higher net sales. Operating cash flows for the 2020 Predecessor Period were favorably impacted by the increased net income primarily driven by higher retardant sales, partially offset by declines in working capital. Operating cash flows for the 2019 Predecessor Period were negatively impacted by the net loss generated due to decreased fire activity and decrease in working capital.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $1,210.6 million, $15.7 million, $9.5 million and $25.2 million for the Successor Period, 2021 Predecessor Period, 2020 Predecessor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period, respectively. During the Successor Period, we acquired SK Intermediate for cash consideration of $1,209.2 million, net of approximately $11.0 million in cash acquired, and purchased property and equipment of $1.5 million. During the 2021 Predecessor Period, we paid a total of $7.5 million in cash related to the acquisitions of Budenheim Iberica, S.L.U., PC Australasia Pty Ltd., and Magnum Fire & Safety Systems. We also purchased property and equipment of $8.3 million. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we paid $2.0 million, net of cash acquired, related to the acquisition of LaderaTech, Inc., and also purchased property and equipment of $7.5 million. In 2019 Predecessor Period, we paid $16.3 million, net of cash acquired of $0.5 million at closing related to the acquisition of First Response Fire Rescue, LLC, River City Fabrication, LLC, and H&S Transport, LLC. We also purchased property and equipment of $8.9 million.
Financing Activities
Cash (used in) provided by financing activities was $(697.2) million, $(64.2) million, $(45.6) million and $21.0 million for the Successor Period, 2021 Predecessor Period, 2020 Predecessor Period and 2019 Predecessor Period, respectively. During the Successor Period, we borrowed $40.0 million against the Revolving Credit Facility and paid $2.3 million of revolver fees. The Revolving Credit Facility was repaid in full on December 9, 2021. Upon the business combination, the Director Subscribers acquired PSSA Ordinary Shares valued at $2.0 million. We repaid $696.5 million of debt previously held by SK Intermediate. During the 2021 Predecessor Period, we distributed $60.0 million to our shareholders and we received $19.5 million in proceeds from the Revolving Credit Facility, which was offset by repayments of $19.5 million on the Revolving Credit Facility and repayments of $4.2 million on long-term debt. During the 2020 Predecessor Period, we received $72.1 million in proceeds from the Revolving Credit Facility, which was fully offset by repayments of $97.1 million and $20.6 million against the outstanding balance on the Revolving Credit Facility and long-term debt, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities for the 2019 Predecessor Period was primarily attributable to proceeds from the revolving credit facility of $83.3 million and long-term debt of $16.0 million, partially
offset by repayment of the revolving credit facility of $60.3 million and long-term debt of $5.6 million as well as a distribution to shareholders of $12.4 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP, which often requires the judgment of management in the selection and application of certain accounting principles and methods. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We based our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could, therefore, differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified the following estimates as our most critical accounting estimates, which are those that are most important to aid in fully understanding and evaluating the Company’s financial condition and results of operations, and that require management’s most subjective and complex judgments. Information regarding our other significant accounting estimates and policies are described in more detail in Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. We believe that the following accounting estimates and policies are most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition accounting method, which requires us to determine and recognize assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair value, including any contingent consideration and the recognition of acquisition-related costs in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations.
Accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions at the acquisition date, including estimates of the fair value of acquired inventory, property and equipment, identifiable intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, preacquisition contingencies, where applicable, and equity issued. Significant assumptions relevant to the determination of the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, discount rates, royalty rates, and other assumptions. The approach to valuing an initial contingent consideration associated with the purchase price also uses similar unobservable factors such as projected revenues and expenses over the term of the contingent earn-out period, discounted for the period over which the initial contingent consideration is measured, and relevant volatility rates. Based upon these assumptions, the initial contingent consideration is then valued using a Monte Carlo simulation. These significant assumptions are based on company specific information and projections, which are not observable in the market and, therefore, are considered Level 2 and Level 3 measurements. These significant assumptions are forward-looking and could be affected by future changes in economic and market conditions.
We generally use third-party qualified consultants to assist management in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. This includes, when necessary, assistance with the determination of economic useful lives and valuation of property, plant and equipment and identifiable intangibles. The purchase price allocation process also entails us to refine these estimates over a measurement period not to exceed one year to reflect new information obtained surrounding facts and circumstances existing at acquisition date. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identified assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill.
Impairment of Goodwill and Long-Lived Assets
Goodwill is deemed to have an indefinite life and is assessed for impairment annually at the reporting unit level or more frequently when events or circumstances occur that indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit or an intangible asset is less than its carrying value.
We perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. Factors utilized in the qualitative assessment include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors,
overall financial performance and events specific to us. If the qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired, the entity performs a quantitative assessment, which consists of a comparison of the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount.
Our reporting units are either our operating business segments or one level below our operating business segments for which discrete financial information is available and for which operating results are regularly reviewed by our business management. We estimate the fair value based on present value techniques involving future cash flows. Future cash flows for all reporting units include assumptions about revenue growth rates, adjusted EBITDA margins, discount rate as well as other economic or industry-related factors. Significant management judgment is involved in estimating these variables and they include inherent uncertainties since they are forecasting future events.
Long-lived assets include acquired property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets subject to amortization. We evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets for possible impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be fully recoverable. Such events and changes may include significant changes in performance relative to expected operating results, significant changes in asset use, significant negative industry or economic trends, and changes in our business strategy. We determine the recoverability of such assets by comparing an asset’s respective carrying value to estimates of the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from its asset group. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of long-lived assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value.
Given the timing of the Business Combination and in absence of events or circumstances that indicated that it is more likely than not that the carrying value was impaired, the fair value was equal to or greater than the carrying value of the reporting units and long-lived assets as of December 31, 2021 and no impairment charge was recorded for any period presented.
Income Taxes
We compute income taxes using the asset-and-liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities, as well as loss and tax credit carryforwards. Changes in tax rates and laws are recognized in income in the period such changes are enacted.
On a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis, we establish a valuation allowance if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We consider all positive and negative evidence, including historical operating results, the existence of cumulative losses, estimates of future operating income, and the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences in assessing the need for a valuation allowance.
Our tax positions are subject to income tax audits by multiple tax jurisdictions throughout the world. We recognize the tax benefit of an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the position will be sustainable upon examination by the taxing authority, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. This evaluation is based on all available evidence and assumes that the tax authorities have full knowledge of all relevant information concerning the tax position. The tax benefit recognized is measured as the largest amount of benefit which is more likely than not (greater than 50% likely) to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the taxing authority. We record interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. We make adjustments to these reserves in accordance with the income tax guidance when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Share-Based Compensation
We have granted equity-based awards consisting of non-qualified performance-based stock options to key employees, officers and directors. Equity-based compensation expense is measured based on the grant-date fair value of those awards and is recognized proportionately for each tranche over the vesting period, which generally is five years. We estimate the grant date fair value using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of highly subjective
assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the risk-free interest rate, the expected equity volatility, and the expected term of the option.
Service-based restricted stock units are valued using the market price of our ordinary shares on the grant date. The grant date fair value of the restricted stock units is expensed on a straight-line basis over the applicable vesting period.
Under the Founder Advisory Agreement, in exchange for the services provided to the Company, including strategic and capital allocation advice, the EverArc Founders Entity is entitled to receive both, a Fixed Annual Advisory Amount and a Variable Annual Advisory Amount until the years ending December 31, 2027 and 2031, respectively. At the election of the EverArc Founders Entity, at least 50% of the Advisory Amounts will be paid in PSSA Ordinary Shares and the remainder in cash. As of December 31, 2021, the Advisory Amounts to be paid over the term of the Founder Advisory Agreement was estimated to be $653.0 million of which $213.3 million was the Fixed Annual Advisory Amount and $439.7 million was the Variable Annual Advisory Amount. The Fixed Annual Advisory Amount was calculated using the year end closing price of our ordinary shares multiplied into 1.5% of 157,137,410 ordinary shares outstanding on the Closing Date and the Variable Annual Advisory Amount was calculated based on the appreciation of the market price of our ordinary shares if such market price exceeds certain trading price minimums using the Monte Carlo simulation model, which requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the fair value of the underlying common stock, the risk-free interest rate, the expected equity volatility, and the expected term of the Founder Advisory Agreement.
New Accounting Standards
For information about new accounting standards, see Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.