Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Summary
In 2021, we continued to grow our subscription revenue by enabling our customers to leverage our AI-driven solutions to help them compete in the digital economy, and improved our cash metrics while managing the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our subscription revenue grew by 4% as we experienced improved gross revenue retention rates, subscription bookings consistent with 2020 levels and some customer project delays. Other notable items for 2021 included:
•subscription revenue accounted for 71% of total revenue;
•recurring revenue, which consists of subscription and maintenance and support revenue, accounted for 85% of our total revenue;
•annual recurring revenue ("ARR") on a constant currency basis was $229.2 million as of December 31, 2021, up 9% year-over-year;
•we were designated as a Great Place to Work® company for the second year in a row; and
•we acquired EveryMundo, a digital offer marketing pioneer that enables brands to broaden their digital reach and deepen customer engagement.
Our 2020 new customer subscription bookings impacted 2021 subscription revenue, as there is a lag between subscription bookings and the revenue recognized on those subscription bookings. While our gross revenue retention rates continued to improve throughout 2021 and were over 93% for the year ended December 31, 2021, our new customer bookings were consistent with 2020 levels due to several factors. The ongoing disruption of COVID-19 led to continued unpredictability and inconsistency in our prospective customer purchasing decisions, including in the airline industry where certain technology investments were not prioritized as airlines focused on operational recovery. We also noted continued strong competition and pricing pressure in several of our markets. Recently, we have flattened our go-to-market organization to drive greater speed into our business and more consistent execution.
ARR is one of our key performance metrics to assess the health and trajectory of our overall business. ARR, a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined, as of a specific date, as contracted recurring revenue, including contracts with a future start date, together with annualized overage fees incurred above contracted minimum transactions, and excluding perpetual and term license agreements recognized as license revenue in accordance with GAAP. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, deferred revenue and other GAAP measures, and is not intended to be combined with any of these items. We adjust our reported ARR on an annual basis to reflect any material exchange rate changes. Our constant currency ARR is based on currency rates set at the start of the year and held constant throughout the year, and the same rates are used to measure both 2021 and 2020 ARR. Total ARR on a constant currency basis as of December 31, 2021 was $229.2 million, up from $209.7 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of 9%. Total ARR on an as reported basis as of December 31, 2021 was $226.7 million, or approximately $2.5 million lower than our constant currency ARR.
Net cash used in operating activities was $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $49.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement was attributable to lower overall operating expenses, improved customer retention rates as well as the timing of customer collections from several customers deferring payments in 2020 as a result of COVID-19. In addition, we had a lower annual incentive payment in 2021 as compared to prior year.
Free cash flow is another key metric to assess the strength of our business. We define free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities minus capital expenditures (excluding expenditures for PROS new headquarters), purchases of other (non-acquisition-related) intangible assets and capitalized internal-use software development costs. We believe free cash flow may be useful to investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating the amount of cash generated by our business operations. Free cash flow used for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $20.2 million, compared to $53.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was mainly due to the improvement in net cash used in operating activities in 2021 as compared to 2020. The following is a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Key factors and trends that have affected and we believe will continue to affect our operating results include:
•COVID-19 Global Impact. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to have a wide-spread and fluid impact on the global economy and on our business, particularly as the virus continues to evolve and variants such as Omicron spread. While we are encouraged by the increased availability of vaccines and reopening of markets, the full duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains uncertain. The economic impact of COVID-19 continues to vary significantly by geography and industry, including through disruptions in supply chains, turmoil in labor markets and inflation caused in part by strong consumer demand where local economies reopened. As explained below, COVID-19 has accelerated existing trends with respect to digital commerce, and the economic impact of COVID-19 has also affected our business. The travel industry, a sector served by our solutions, was particularly adversely impacted by unprecedented declines in travel demand early in the pandemic which forced airlines to respond by initially significantly reducing capacity and costs, adjusting corporate liquidity and, in certain cases, filing for bankruptcy protection. While the timeline for recovery of the overall travel industry remains fluid and dynamic, with significant geographic variation, the airline industry began to show signs of recovering in 2021, although not to pre-COVID levels. With recovery of flight schedules and passenger volumes, some of which has been rapid, airlines have faced operational challenges in managing severe fluctuations, including staffing shortages. As a result, airlines and their IT staffs, which face their own staffing challenges, generally have de-emphasized certain technology projects as they focus on near-term cost reductions and operational stability. In addition, many of our customers are also working remotely, which in some cases has delayed, and may continue to impact, the timing of new business and implementations of our solutions. For a full discussion on the risks and uncertainties to our business associated with COVID-19, please see the "Risk Factors" section above.
•COVID-19 Financial Impact. Given our primarily subscription-based revenue model, the global economic impact of COVID-19 adversely impacted our revenue during 2021 due to the prior year's lower customer subscription bookings, customer contract restructuring and project delays, and a decrease in revenue retention rates. Our prior year customer subscription bookings impacted 2021 subscription revenue growth given the lag between subscription bookings and the revenue recognized on those subscription bookings. While our customer base spans a variety of industries and geographies, our customers, particularly travel and travel-related customers, have been and may continue to be negatively impacted by COVID-19. This has resulted in and may continue to result in delayed purchasing decisions from prospective customers and reduced customer demand. Although we supported certain customers who requested concessions during 2020 by deferring payments, we have since collected a substantial majority of the amounts associated with these concessions. We expect the ongoing global economic impact of COVID-19 will continue to affect our revenue in 2022, as the continuing impact of COVID-19 and rate of economic recovery remains uncertain and varies across industries and geographies.
•Buying and Consumer Preferences Driving Technology Adoption. Corporate buyers are increasingly demanding the same type of digital buying experience they enjoy as consumers. Buyers often prefer not to interact with sales representatives as their primary source of research, and increasingly prefer to buy online when they have already decided what to buy. This trend has accelerated as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In response, we believe businesses are increasingly modernizing their sales process to compete in digital commerce by adopting technologies which provide fast, frictionless and personalized buying experiences across sales channels. We believe we are uniquely positioned to help power these buying experiences with our AI-powered solutions that enable buyers to move fluidly and with personalized experiences across our customers’ direct sales, online, mobile and partner channels. In the airline industry, there is evidence the COVID-19 pandemic is accelerating a long-term trend away from global distribution services and towards direct booking channels, in part due to a significant reduction in business travel. We anticipate airlines continuing to invest in technology, including mobile device-enabled solutions, to enhance their ability to capture a greater percentage of bookings through their own channels such as their websites.
•Hybrid Workplace. The global workplace environment has substantially changed in the wake of COVID-19. As we focus on the future of work, we adopted a hybrid work environment for our global workforce, with many employees working remotely. As part of this hybrid model, we emphasize flexibility based on a blend of what makes sense for each employee, their team and our business. We also offer company-wide initiatives to assist our employees in managing through the changes associated with hybrid work.
•Continued Investments. We are continuing to be measured in our investments and focused on cost control efforts across our organization, while continuing to create awareness for our solutions, expand our customer base and grow our subscription revenues. While we incurred losses in 2021, we believe our market is large and underpenetrated and intend to continue investing to expand our ability to sell and renew our subscription offerings globally. We also plan to continue investing in product development to enhance our existing technologies, including initiatives to accelerate customer time-to-value and provide out-of-the-box integration with third-party commerce solutions, and develop new applications and technologies.
•Cloud Migrations. We expect sales of our cloud-based solutions will continue to reduce our future maintenance and support revenue as long-term customers continue to migrate from our legacy licensed solutions to our current cloud solutions.
Description of Key Components of our Operating Results
Revenue
We derive our revenues primarily from recurring revenue, which includes subscription and maintenance and support services. Recurring revenues accounted for 85% of our total revenue in 2021.
Subscription. Subscription services revenue primarily consists of fees that give customers access to one or more of our cloud applications with related customer support. We primarily recognize subscription revenue ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement beginning with commencement of service. Subscription revenue related to certain offerings, where fees are based on a number of transactions, are recognized on a usage basis.
Maintenance and support. Maintenance and support revenue includes customer support for our on-premises software and the right to unspecified software updates and enhancements. We recognize revenue from maintenance arrangements ratably over the period in which the services are provided. Our maintenance and support contracts are generally one year in length, billed annually in advance, and non-cancelable.
Services. Services revenue primarily consists of fees for configuration services, consulting and training. We typically sell our services on either a fixed-fee or time-and-materials basis. Services revenue is generally recognized as the services are performed for time and material contracts, or on a proportional performance basis for fixed-price contracts. The majority of our services contracts are on a fixed-fee basis. Training revenues are recognized as the services are performed.
Services revenue varies from period to period depending on different factors, including the level of services required to implement our solutions, the timing of services revenue recognition on certain subscription contracts and any additional services requested by our customers during a particular period.
Significant judgments are required in determining whether services contained in our customer subscription contracts are considered distinct, including whether the services are capable of being distinct and whether they are separately identifiable. Services deemed to be distinct are accounted for as a separate performance obligation and revenue is recognized as the services are performed. If services are not determined to be distinct, the services and the subscription are determined to be a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized over the contractual term of the subscription beginning on the date that subscription services are made available to the customer.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of subscription. Cost of subscription consists of infrastructure costs to support our current subscription customer base including third-party hosting services and expenses related to operating our network infrastructure, including depreciation expense and operating lease payments, salaries and related expenses, amortization of capitalized software and an allocation of depreciation, amortization of certain intangible assets and allocated overhead.
Cost of maintenance and support. Cost of maintenance and support consists largely of employee-related costs and an allocation of depreciation, amortization of intangibles, and allocated overhead.
Cost of services. Cost of services includes those costs related to services and implementation of our solutions, primarily employee-related costs and third-party contractors, billable and non-billable travel and an allocation of depreciation and allocated overhead. Cost of providing services may vary from quarter to quarter depending on a number of factors, including the amount of services required to implement and configure our solutions.
Services gross profit varies period to period depending on different factors, including the level of services required to implement our solutions, our mix of employees and third-party contractors, our effective billable man-day rates, our use of third-party system integrators and the billable utilization of our services personnel.
Operating Expenses
Selling and marketing. Selling and marketing expenses primarily consist of employee-related costs, third-party contractors, sales commissions, sales and marketing programs such as lead generation programs, company awareness programs, our annual Outperform conference, participation in industry trade shows, and other sales and marketing programs, travel, amortization expenses associated with acquired intangible assets and allocated overhead. Sales commissions are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the period of benefit, which we have determined to be five to eight years.
Research and development. Research and development expenses primarily consist of employee-related costs and third-party contractors who work on enhancements of existing solutions, the development of new solutions, scientific research, quality assurance and testing, and an allocation of depreciation, facilities and allocated overhead.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily consist of employee-related costs for executive, accounting, finance, legal, human resources and internal IT support functions and an allocation of depreciation and allocated overhead. General and administrative expenses also include outside legal and accounting fees and provision for bad debts.
Acquisition-related expenses. Acquisition-related expenses consist primarily of advisory, legal, accounting and other professional fees, insurance and integration costs for our acquisitions.
Results of Operations
Comparison of year ended December 31, 2021 with year ended December 31, 2020
Revenue:
Subscription revenue. Subscription revenue increased primarily due to an increase in new and existing customer subscription contracts and a small contribution from EveryMundo post-acquisition.
Maintenance and support revenue. Maintenance and support revenue decreased primarily as a result of existing maintenance customers migrating to our cloud solutions and to a lesser extent customer maintenance churn. We expect maintenance revenue to continue to decline as we continue to migrate maintenance customers to our cloud solutions.
Services revenue. Services revenue increased primarily as a result of higher sales of professional services related to our subscription contracts and also due to follow-on services to existing customers.
Cost of revenue and gross profit.
Cost of subscription. Cost of subscription increased primarily due to increased infrastructure costs to support our current subscription customer base and increased employee-related costs. Our subscription gross profit percentage was 70% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cost of maintenance and support. Cost of maintenance and support decreased primarily due to a decrease in personnel costs as a result of the need to support a declining maintenance customer base as we migrate customers to our subscription solutions and a decrease in amortization expense related to intangible assets which were fully amortized in 2021. Maintenance and support gross profit percentages for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were 76% and 78%, respectively.
Cost of services. Cost of services decreased primarily due to the lower utilization of third-party contractors and reduced travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher personnel cost to support the increase in our services revenue during the period. Services gross profit percentages for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were (12)% and (16)%, respectively. The increase in services gross profit percentages was primarily due to the increase in services revenues.
Operating expenses:
Selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses decreased primarily due to a decrease of $2.8 million in sales and marketing events and a decrease of $1.3 million in travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset by an increase of $2.0 million in employee-related costs and a $1.4 million increase in other overhead and allocated expenses.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses increased primarily due to a $5.9 million increase in employee-related costs, including an increase of $2.2 million in noncash share-based compensation and an increase of $1.7 million related to less capitalized internal-use software development costs in 2021 than in 2020, partially offset by a decrease of $0.8 million in amortization expense related to intangible assets which were fully amortized in 2021.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses increased primarily due to an increase of $6.1 million in employee-related costs, including an increase of $3.0 million in noncash share-based compensation, and a $0.8 million increase in other overhead expenses. The increase was partially offset by a net decrease of $6.7 million in bad debt expense year over year, including a bad debt recovery of $1.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, due to improved credit conditions with certain customers.
Acquisition-related expenses. Acquisition-related expenses were $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted primarily of advisory, legal, accounting and other professional fees, insurance and integration costs for our acquisition of EveryMundo.
Other income (expense), net:
Convertible debt interest and amortization. Convertible debt interest and amortization expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 related to coupon interest and amortization of debt discount and issuance costs attributable to our Notes. Convertible debt interest and amortization decreased primarily as a result of the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Upon adoption, there was no longer a debt discount on our outstanding notes and as a result there was no related amortization cost in 2021.
Other income (expense), net. The change in other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to a decrease in interest income partially offset by foreign currency impact during the period.
Income tax provision:
Our tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 included both foreign income and withholding taxes. No tax benefit was recognized on jurisdictions with a projected loss for the year due to the valuation allowances on our deferred tax assets.
Our 2021 and 2020 effective tax rates had an unusual relationship to pretax loss from operations due to a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets. Our income tax provisions in 2021 and 2020 only included foreign income and withholding taxes, resulting in an effective tax rate of (1.1)% and (0.9)%, respectively. The difference between the effective tax rates and the federal statutory rate of 21% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to the increase in our valuation allowance of $16.6 million and $24.3 million, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had a valuation allowance on our net deferred tax assets of $146.8 million and $130.7 million, respectively. The increase in the valuation allowance was principally attributable to an additional valuation allowance recorded on our current year's tax loss.
Comparison of year ended December 31, 2020 with year ended December 31, 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had $227.6 million of cash and cash equivalents and $128.7 million of working capital as compared to $329.1 million of cash and cash equivalents and $246.4 million of working capital at December 31, 2020.
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents. In addition, we could have access to the overall capital markets to supplement our liquidity position. Our material drivers or variants of operating cash flow are net income (loss), noncash expenses (principally share-based compensation, intangible amortization and amortization of debt discount and
issuance costs) and the timing of periodic invoicing and cash collections from customer revenue. Our operating cash flows are also impacted by the timing of payments to our vendors and the payments of our other liabilities.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will provide adequate liquidity and capital resources to meet our operational requirements, anticipated capital expenditures and coupon interest payments for our Notes for the next twelve months. Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the operations of our existing business, potential growth of our subscription services, future acquisitions we might undertake, expansion into complementary businesses, and the impact of COVID-19, including the pace and timing of adoption and implementation of our solutions and customer churn. During the period of uncertainty and volatility related to COVID-19, we will continue to monitor our liquidity.
The following table presents key components of our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities in 2021 was $18.6 million and decreased as compared to $49.4 million in 2020. The $30.8 million improvement over last year was attributable to lower overall operating expenses, improved customer retention rates as well as the timing of customer collections from several customers deferring payments in 2020 as a result of COVID-19. In addition, we had a lower annual incentive payment in 2021 as compared to prior year.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2021 was $85.2 million and increased as compared to $30.5 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to the acquisition of EveryMundo in November 2021, partially offset by a decrease in capital expenditures. The higher capital expenditures in 2020 were mainly attributable to the build out of our new headquarters which was committed prior to the pandemic.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 was $2.5 million and decreased as compared to $102.9 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the issuance of our 2027 Notes in 2020, partially offset by a decrease in payments for tax withholdings on vesting of employee share-based awards in 2021 as a result of a sell-to-cover taxes program established in late 2020 and first implemented in 2021 for employee vested share-based awards.
Stock Repurchases
In August 2008, our Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program for the purchase of up to $15.0 million of our common stock. No shares were repurchased under the program during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, $10.0 million remained available in the stock repurchase program. The repurchase of stock, if continued, will be funded primarily with existing cash balances. The timing of any repurchases will depend upon various factors including, but not limited to, market conditions, the market price of our common stock and management’s assessment of our liquidity and cash flow needs. For additional information on the stock repurchase program see Item 5, "Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities."
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Our principal commitments as of December 31, 2021 consist of obligations under our Notes,
various service agreements and operating leases. See Note 18 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our contractual commitments.
Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Notes
As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding Notes consist of the 2024 and 2027 Notes. Interest on the 2024 Notes is payable semi-annually, in arrears on May 15 and November 15 of each year. Interest on the 2027 Notes is payable semiannually in arrears in cash on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on March 15, 2021. At December 31, 2021, our maximum commitment for interest payments under the 2024 and 2027 Notes was $23.8 million for their remaining duration.
Covenants
We have a $50 million secured Credit Agreement ("Revolver") with the lenders party thereto and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association as agent for the lenders party thereto. Our Revolver expires in March 2022 and contains affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants which restrict our ability to, among other things, create liens, incur additional indebtedness and engage in certain other transactions, in each case subject to certain exclusions. In addition, our Revolver contains certain financial covenants which become effective in the event our liquidity falls below $50 million or upon the occurrence of an event of default. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants in the Revolver.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
We believe the critical accounting policies listed below affect significant judgment and estimates used in the preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues primarily from subscription services, services and associated software maintenance and support services.
We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the customer contract(s);
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation in the customer contract(s); and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
Subscription revenue
Subscription revenue primarily consists of fees that give customers access to one or more of our cloud applications with related customer support. We primarily recognize subscription revenue ratably over the contractual term of the arrangement beginning with commencement of service. Subscription revenue related to certain offerings, where fees are based on a number of transactions, are recognized on a usage basis.
Maintenance and support revenue
Maintenance and support revenue includes customer support for our on-premises software and the right to unspecified software updates and enhancements. We recognize revenue from maintenance arrangements ratably over the period in which the services are provided. Our maintenance and support contracts are generally one year in length, billed annually in advance, and non-cancelable.
Services revenue
Services revenue primarily consists of fees for configuration services, consulting and training. We typically sell our services on either a fixed-fee or time-and-materials basis. Services revenue is generally recognized as the services are performed for time and material contracts, or on a proportional performance basis for fixed-price contracts. The majority of our services contracts are on a fixed-fee basis. Training revenues are recognized as the services are performed.
Significant judgments are required in determining whether services contained in our customer subscription contracts are considered distinct, including whether the services are capable of being distinct and whether they are separately identifiable. Services deemed to be distinct are accounted for as a separate performance obligation and revenue is recognized as the services are performed. If services are not determined to be distinct, the services and the subscription are determined to be a single performance obligation and revenue is recognized over the contractual term of the subscription beginning on the date subscription services are made available to the customer.
Customer contracts with multiple performance obligations
A portion of our customer contracts contain multiple performance obligations. Significant judgment is required in determining whether multiple performance obligations contained in a single customer contract are capable of being distinct and are separately identifiable. An obligation determined to be distinct is accounted for as a separate performance obligation and revenue is recognized when, or as, we satisfy the performance obligation. If obligations are not determined to be distinct, those obligations are accounted for as a single, combined performance obligation. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis.
Deferred Costs
Sales commissions earned by our sales representatives are considered incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a customer contract. Sales commissions are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis over the period of benefit, which we have determined to be five to eight years. We determined the period of benefit by taking into consideration our customer contracts, expected renewals of those customer contracts (as we currently do not pay an incremental sales commission for renewals), our technology and other factors. We also defer amounts earned by employees other than sales representatives who earn incentive payments under compensation plans tied to the value of customer contracts acquired.
Noncash Share-Based Compensation
Noncash share-based compensation expense is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period.
The fair value of the RSUs (time and performance-based) and the equity consideration stock awards, granted as part of the EveryMundo acquisition, is based on the closing price of our stock on the date of grant.
We estimate the fair value of the stock options and SARs using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires us to use significant judgment to make estimates regarding the expected life of the award, volatility of our stock price, the risk-free interest rate and the dividend yield of our stock over the life of the award. The expected life of the award is a historical weighted average of the expected lives of similar securities of comparable public companies. We estimate volatility
using our historical volatility. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on observed interest rates appropriate for the terms of our awards. The dividend yield assumption is based on our expectation of paying no dividends.
As we issue stock options and SARs, we evaluate the assumptions used to value our stock option awards and SARs. If factors change and we employ different assumptions, noncash share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested securities, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned noncash share-based compensation expense. Future noncash share-based compensation expense and unearned noncash share-based compensation will increase to the extent we grant additional equity awards to employees.
We estimate the number of awards that will be forfeited and recognize expense only for those awards that ultimately are expected to vest. Significant judgment is required in determining the adjustment to noncash share-based compensation expense for estimated forfeitures. Noncash share-based compensation expense in a period could be impacted, favorably or unfavorably, by differences between forfeiture estimates and actual forfeitures.
MSUs are performance-based awards that cliff vest based on our shareholder return relative to the total shareholder return of the Russell 2000 Index ("Index") over a three-year period. The maximum number of shares issuable upon vesting is 200% of the MSUs initially granted based on the average price of our common stock relative to the Index during the Performance Period. We estimate the fair value of MSUs on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The determination of the fair value of the MSUs is affected by our stock price and a number of assumptions including the expected volatilities of our stock and the Index, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. Our expected volatility at the date of grant was based on the historical volatilities of our stock and the Index over the Performance Period.
We record deferred tax assets for share-based compensation awards that will result in future deductions on our income tax returns, based on the amount of share-based compensation recognized at the statutory tax rate in the jurisdiction in which we will receive a tax deduction. Because the deferred tax assets we record are based upon the share-based compensation expenses in a particular jurisdiction, the aforementioned inputs that affect the fair values of our stock awards may also indirectly affect our income tax expense. In addition, differences between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on our income tax returns are recorded in our income tax (expense) income.
At December 31, 2021, we had $84.6 million of total unrecognized compensation costs related to noncash share-based compensation arrangements for stock awards granted. These costs will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.6 years.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We estimate our income taxes based on the various jurisdictions where we conduct business and we use estimates in determining our provision for income taxes. We estimate separately our deferred tax assets, related valuation allowances, current tax liabilities and deferred tax liabilities. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax rules and the potential for future adjustment of our uncertain tax positions by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or other taxing jurisdictions. We estimate our current tax liability and assess temporary differences that result from differing treatments of certain items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which we show on our balance sheet. At December 31, 2021, our deferred tax assets consisted primarily of temporary differences related to noncash share-based compensation, interest expense limited under Section 163(j), expense recognition of our lease obligations, Research and Experimentation ("R&E") tax credit carryforwards and net operating losses.
We review the realizability of our deferred tax asset on a quarterly basis, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate a review is required. In determining the requirement for a valuation allowance, the historical and projected financial results of the legal entity or consolidated group recording the net deferred tax asset are considered, along with any other positive or negative evidence. Since future financial results may differ from previous estimates, periodic adjustments to our valuation allowances may be necessary. We continually perform an analysis related to the realizability of our deferred tax assets. As a result, and after considering tax planning initiatives and other positive and negative evidence, we determine it is more likely than not our net deferred tax assets will not be realized. During 2021, there was not sufficient positive evidence to outweigh the current and historic negative evidence to determine it was more likely than not that our net deferred tax assets would not be realized. Therefore, we continue to have a valuation allowance against net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021.
We account for uncertain income tax positions recognized in our financial statements in accordance with the Income Tax Topic of the Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC"), issued by the FASB. This interpretation requires companies to use a prescribed model for assessing the financial recognition and measurement of all tax positions taken or expected to be taken in their tax returns. This guidance provides clarification on recognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosures and transition. Please see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Business Combinations, Intangible Assets and Goodwill
We record tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations under the purchase method of accounting. The allocation of the purchase price in a business combination requires management to make significant estimates in determining the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities, especially with respect to intangible assets. The excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Critical estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, projected revenue, discount rate, obsolescence rate, cost of sales, operating expenses and customer attrition rate. We estimate fair value primarily utilizing the income and market approaches, including the multi-period excess earnings method for certain intangible assets. Our estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Amortization is recorded over the estimated useful lives ranging from two to eight years. We review our intangible assets subject to amortization to determine if any adverse conditions exist or a change in circumstances has occurred that would indicate impairment or a change in the remaining useful life. If the carrying value of an asset group exceeds its undiscounted cash flows, we will write down the carrying value of the intangible asset group to its fair value in the period identified. In assessing recoverability, we must make assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows and discount rates. If these estimates or related assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges. If the estimate of an intangible asset’s remaining useful life is changed, we will amortize the remaining carrying value of the intangible asset prospectively over the revised remaining useful life.
We assess goodwill for impairment as of November 30 of each fiscal year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate the fair value of our reporting unit has been reduced below its carrying value. When conducting our annual goodwill impairment assessment, we use a two-step process. The first step is to perform an optional qualitative evaluation as to whether it is more likely than not the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying value, using an assessment of relevant events and circumstances. In performing this assessment, we are required to make assumptions and judgments including, but not limited to, an evaluation of macroeconomic conditions as they relate to our business, industry and market trends, as well as the overall future financial performance of our reporting unit and future opportunities in the markets in which it operates. If we determine it is not more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we are not required to perform any additional tests in assessing goodwill for impairment. However, if we conclude otherwise or elect not to perform the qualitative assessment, we perform a second step for our reporting unit, consisting of a quantitative assessment of goodwill impairment. This quantitative assessment requires us to compare the fair value of our reporting unit with its carrying value. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment charge will be recognized, however, loss cannot exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report, regarding the impact of certain recent accounting pronouncements on our Consolidated Financial Statements.