Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in our forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
General
We are a diversified company that offers a range of services including diagnostic testing, genomics testing and contract manufacturing. We provide traditional CLIA molecular laboratory services, including SARS-CoV-2 (“COVID-19”) testing and seek to leverage our Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (“CLIA”) accredited laboratory services to provide whole genome sequencing and research direct to consumers, while building a genomics data base to be used for further research. In addition, we have deep experience with over-the-counter (OTC) consumer healthcare products and dietary supplements. We conduct our operations through two operating segments: diagnostic services and consumer products. Until late fiscal year 2020, we were engaged primarily in the research, development, manufacture, distribution, marketing and sale of OTC consumer healthcare products and dietary supplements in the United States. This includes the development and marketing of dietary supplements under the TK Supplements® brand. However, commencing in December 2020, we also began offering COVID- 19 and other RPP Molecular tests through our new diagnostic service business, and in August 2021 we began offering personal genomics products and services.
Our wholly owned subsidiary, Pharmaloz Manufacturing, Inc. (“PMI”), is a full-service contract manufacturer and private label developer of a broad range of non-GMO, organic and natural-based cough drops and lozenges and OTC drug and dietary supplement products.
Our wholly owned subsidiary, ProPhase Diagnostics, Inc. (“ProPhase Diagnostics”), which was formed on October 9, 2020, offers a broad array of COVID-19 related clinical diagnostic and testing services at its CLIA certified laboratories including state-of-the-art polymerase chain reaction (“PCR”) testing for COVID-19. Critical to COVID-19 testing, we provide fast turnaround times for results. We also offer best-in-class rapid antigen and antibody/immunity testing for COVID-19. On October 23, 2020, we completed the acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding shares of capital stock of Confucius Plaza Medical Laboratory Corp. (“CPM”), which owned a 4,000 square foot CLIA accredited laboratory located in Old Bridge, New Jersey for approximately $2.5 million. In December 2020, we expanded our diagnostic service business with the signing of a new lease for a second, larger CLIA accredited laboratory (including build-out) in Garden City, New York. Operations at this second facility commenced in January 2021.
On August 10, 2021, we acquired Nebula Genomics, Inc. (“Nebula”), a privately owned personal genomics company, through our new wholly owned subsidiary, ProPhase Precision Medicine, Inc. (“ProPhase Precision”). We offer whole genome sequencing and related services through this new subsidiary. ProPhase Precision Medicine, Inc. focuses on genomics testing technologies, a comprehensive method for analyzing entire genomes, including the genes and chromosomes in DNA. The data obtained from genomic testing can help to identify inherited disorders and tendencies, help predict disease risk, help identify expected drug response, and characterize genetic mutations, including those that drive cancer progression.
Our diagnostic service business is and will continue to be influenced by the level of demand for COVID-19 and other diagnostic testing, how long this demand persists and the price we are able to receive for performing our testing services, as well as the availability of COVID-19 testing from other laboratories and the period of time for which we are able to serve as an authorized laboratory offering COVID-19 testing under various Emergency Use Authorizations.
Our consumer sales are and will continue to be influenced by (i) the timing of acceptance of our TK Supplements® consumer products in the marketplace, and (ii) fluctuations in the timing of purchase and the ultimate level of demand for the OTC healthcare and cold remedy products that we manufacture, which is largely a function of the timing, length and severity of each cold season. Generally, a cold season is defined as the period from September to March when the incidence of the common cold rises as a result of the change in weather and other factors. We generally experience in the first, third and fourth quarter higher levels of net revenues from our contract manufacturing business. Revenues are generally at their lowest levels in the second quarter when customer demand generally declines.
Our personal genomics business is and will continue to be influenced by demand for our genetic testing products and services, our marketing and service capabilities, and our ability to comply with applicable regulatory requirements.
In addition, we continue to actively pursue acquisition opportunities for other companies, technologies and products within and outside the consumer products industry.
While our revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of revenues from our new diagnostic services business, we have made and will continue to make substantial investments to secure the necessary equipment, supplies and personnel to provide these testing services. There can be no assurance that our efforts to offer and perform COVID-19 or other diagnostic testing will continue to be successful and the revenue and operating profits from such business will increase from or maintain their current level.
Results of Operations from Continuing Operations
Fiscal 2021 compared with Fiscal 2020
Net revenue for Fiscal 2021 increased $64.5 million to $79.0 million as compared to $14.5 million for Fiscal 2020. Net revenue was $79.0 million, or 445% higher, as compared to net revenue for Fiscal 2020. The increase in net revenue was the result of a $67.2 million increase in net revenue from diagnostic services, offset by a $2.7 million decrease in net revenue from consumer products. Fiscal 2021 had a full year of operations of diagnostic services, as compared to one month of operations in Fiscal 2020. The decrease in net revenue from consumer products for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in the volume of customer orders as a result of the demand and inventory levels of third-party contract manufacturing customers, which was partially offset by $2.2 million of net revenue from the operations of Nebula.
Cost of revenues for Fiscal 2021 were $37.1 million, comprised of $29.4 million for diagnostic services and $7.6 million for consumer products. Cost of revenues for Fiscal 2020 were $9.9 million comprised of $0.6 million for diagnostic services and $9.3 million of consumer products. We realized a gross profit $42.0 million for Fiscal 2021 as compared to $4.6 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase of $37.4 million was comprised of an increase of $38.5 million in diagnostic services, offset by a $1.1 million decrease in consumer products. For Fiscal 2021, our gross margin was 53.1% as compared to 31.7% for Fiscal 2020. The increase in gross margin for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 is principally due to margins generally associated with our new diagnostic services business. Gross margins have historically been influenced by fluctuations in quarter-to-quarter production volume, fixed production costs and related overhead absorption, raw ingredient costs, inventory mark to market write-downs and timing of shipments to customers.
Diagnostic expenses for Fiscal 2021 were $9.2 million as compared to $0.4 million of diagnostic expenses for Fiscal 2020. The increase in diagnostic expenses of $8.8 million was comprised of network providers expenses associated with our new diagnostic services business.
General and administration expenses increased $15.0 million for Fiscal 2021 to $22.5 million as compared to $7.5 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase in general and administration expenses for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 was principally growth in personnel expenses and professional fees associated with our new diagnostic services business.
Research and development costs for Fiscal 2021 and 2020 were $0.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively. The decrease in research and development costs was principally due to lower professional expenses.
In Fiscal 2020, we closed on the sale of our former corporate headquarters and relocated our headquarters to Garden City, New York. As a result of the sale, we recorded $1.9 million gain from the sale of the real estate for Fiscal 2020.
Interest income, net for Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020 were $0.6 million and $0.1 million, respectively. The increase in interest income, net for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 was principally related to the Secured Note issued to us in September 2020 that bears interest at a rate of 15% per annum. The Secured Note was in default in Fiscal 2021 for non-payment and we only recorded interest income for payments received.
Interest expense for Fiscal 2021 was $1.1 million as compared to $0.3 million for Fiscal 2020. The increase in interest expense for Fiscal 2021 as compared to Fiscal 2020 was principally due the unsecured convertible promissory notes we issued in September 2020 for an aggregate principal amount of $10.0 million, which accrue interest at a rate of 10% per year.
Loss from the change in fair value of investment securities for Fiscal 2021 was $0.2 million, which was due to a decrease in stock price as of December 31, 2021, compared to stock price on the acquired date on June 25, 2021.
Impairment of the secured promissory note receivable was $3.75 million for Fiscal 2021.
As a result of the effects of the above, the net income from continuing operations before income taxes for Fiscal 2021 was $6.3 million as compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $2.3 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Reconciliation
In an effort to provide investors with additional information regarding our results of operations as determined by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), we disclose certain non-GAAP financial measures. The primary non-GAAP financial measure we disclose are EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA.
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before net interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA further adjusts EBITDA by excluding acquisition costs, other non-cash items, and other unusual or non-recurring charges (as described in the table below).
We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA internally to evaluate and manage the Company’s operations because we believe they provide useful supplemental information regarding the Company’s ongoing economic performance. We have chosen to provide this information to investors to enable them to perform more meaningful comparisons of operating results. The following table sets forth the reconciliations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA excluding other costs to the most comparable GAAP financial measures (in thousands):
(1) We believe that net income (loss) is the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP that is most directly comparable to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA measure the Company’s operating performance without regard to certain expenses. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not presentations made in accordance with GAAP and the Company’s computation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may vary from others in the industry. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have important limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of the Company’s results as reported under GAAP.
(2) Transaction cost related to the Nebula acquisition.
(3) The non-cash portion of rent, which reflects the extent to which our GAAP rent expense recognized exceeds (or is less than) our cash rent payments. For newer leases, our rent expense recognized typically exceeds our cash rent payments, while for more mature leases, rent expense recognized is typically less than our cash rent payments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our aggregate cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash as of December 31, 2021 were $8.7 million as compared to $6.8 million at December 31, 2020. Our working capital was $45.8 million and $9.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $1.9 million in our cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2021 was principally due to our receipt of aggregate net proceeds of $40.6 million from the issuance of common stock and warrants in a registered direct offering and subsequent public offering, proceeds from the sale of marketable debt securities of $15.9 million, and repayment of promissory note receivable of 0.3 million, offset by (i) purchases of marketable securities of $21.5 million, (ii) cash dividend payments of $4.5 million, (iii) issuance of a secured promissory note receivable of $1.0 million, (iv) payment of $9.1 million related to business acquisition, (v) repurchase of common shares for $0.9 million, (vi) capital expenditures of $4.2 million, and (vii) cash used in operations of $13.6 million.
In March of 2022, we paid a special cash dividend of $4.6 million to holders of record of our common stock on March 1, 2022. In addition, we made a payment of $1.4 million on an unsecured promissory note payable, as well as $1.2 million for the repurchase of common stock that was previously converted under the terms of the promissory note.
To date the principal sources of capital to fund our operations have been from diagnostic services, product sales, net proceeds from the offering of equity securities, and issuances of promissory notes. Management believes that its current strategic position in the diagnostic services sector and our current working capital and at-the-market facility are sufficient to support continued lab development and potential acquisitions. However, due to the nature of the diagnostic business and our focus on COVID-19, there are inherent uncertainties associated with our business plan and cash flow projections. Our business is also generally subject to seasonal variations thereby impacting our liquidity and working capital during the course of our fiscal year.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $13.6 million in cash from operations. To the extent that we do not generate sufficient cash from operations, our cash balances will decline. We may also use our cash to explore and/or acquire new product technologies, applications, product line extensions, new contract manufacturing applications and other new product opportunities. In the event that our available cash is insufficient to support such initiatives, we may need to incur indebtedness or issue common stock to finance our plans for growth. Volatility in the credit markets and the liquidity of major financial institutions, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or the current conflict between Russia and Ukraine and measures taken in response thereto, may have an adverse impact on our ability to fund our business strategy through future borrowings, under either existing or newly created instruments in the public or private markets on terms that we believe to be reasonable, if at all.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on our business to date. We experienced higher than normal net revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of revenue from our new diagnostic services business, which offers COVID-19 testing. There can be no assurance that demand for our COVID-19 testing services will continue to exist in the future due to the widespread and effective vaccination of a majority of Americans against COVID-19 and successful containment efforts. If there is no demand for our COVID-19 testing services, and we are unable to generate sufficient profits from other RPP Molecular tests, our business could be materially adversely affected.
There are still numerous uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, including the efficacy of the vaccines that have been developed to treat the virus and their ability to protect against new strains of the virus, people’s willingness to receive a vaccine, possible resurgences of the coronavirus and/or new strains of the virus, the extent and duration of protective and preventative measures that may be adopted by local, state and/or the federal government in the future as a result of future outbreaks, including business closures, the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on the U.S. and world economy and consumer confidence, and various other uncertainties.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a negative impact on the global capital markets and economies worldwide and could ultimately have a material adverse impact on our ability to raise capital needed to develop and commercialize products.
HRSA Funding
Our customer base for our COVID-19 tests is principally comprised of governmental bodies, municipalities, and large corporations who pay us directly or through third-party payors. In March 2020, the CARES Act was enacted, providing for reimbursement to healthcare providers for COVID-19 tests provided to uninsured individuals, subject to continued available funding. Approximately 59.5% of our revenue for Fiscal 2021 was generated from this program for the uninsured. On March 15, 2022, the HRSA announced that the uninsured program would stop accepting claims for COVID-19 testing and treatment as of March 22, 2022 at 11:59 PM ET due to lack of sufficient funds. In a letter dated March 15, 2022, the Acting Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the White House Coordinator for COVID-19 Response, sent a letter to Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, in which they reiterated previous requests for additional emergency funding for the uninsured program and stated that the failure to provide funding could result in numerous negative consequences, particularly in light of the rising COVID-19 cases abroad. If emergency funding is not allocated to the HRSA uninsured program, our ability to collect payment from uninsured individuals in the future could be adversely affected, which could adversely affect our revenues, results of operations and financial condition if we are unable to generate revenue to replace the HRSA revenues from other sources.
At-the-Market Facility
On December 28, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with ThinkEquity LLC (the “Sales Agent”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time through the Sales Agent, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100,000,000, subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement. We are not obligated to make any sales of shares under the Sales Agreement.
We will pay the Sales Agent a fixed commission rate of 2.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from the sale of any shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement and have agreed to provide the Sales Agent with customary indemnification and contribution rights. We also agreed to reimburse the actual out-of-pocket accountable expenses of the Sales Agent up to $60,000 (of which a $25,000 advance was paid on December 7, 2021), which amount includes the fees and expenses of legal counsel to the Sales Agent up to $50,000, and to pay the costs associated with bound volumes of the public offering materials as well as commemorative mementos and lucite tombstones, in an amount not to exceed $3,000.
Additionally, we will pay to H.C. Wainwright & Co. (“Wainwright”), a fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds of the sales price of all the shares sold under the Sales Agreement, pursuant to a separate financial services agreement with Wainwright. Wainwright is not a sales agent under the Sales Agreement.
For the period from December 28, 2021, through December 31, 2021, we did not have any sales under the at-the-market facility.
Impact of Inflation
We are subject to normal inflationary trends and anticipate that any increased costs for our contract manufacturing and retail operations would be passed on to our customers; however, any increased costs related to diagnostic services would be absorbed by the Company. Inflation has not had a material effect on our business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included under Item 8 of this Part II. However, certain accounting policies are deemed “critical”, as they require management’s highest degree of judgment, estimates and assumptions. These accounting policies, estimates and disclosures have been discussed with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. A discussion of our critical accounting policies and estimates, the judgments and uncertainties affecting their application and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions are as follows:
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto, in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the respective reporting periods. Examples include revenue recognition and the estimation of the variable consideration associated with the diagnostic reimbursement rates, the provision for bad debt and billing discrepancies, sales returns and allowances, inventory obsolescence, useful lives of property and equipment, impairment of goodwill, intangibles and property and equipment, income tax valuations and assumptions related to accrued advertising. The estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time the financial statements are prepared. Management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments on a quarterly basis. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition and Accounts Receivables
We generate revenue principally through four types of revenue streams: diagnostic services, contract manufacturing, genomic products and services, and retail and other. The process for estimating revenues and the ultimate collection of receivables involves assumptions and judgments.
Revenue from our diagnostic services is recognized when the lab test is complete, and the diagnostic test result is provided to the customer. Revenue from our genomics services is recognized when the sequencing report is provided to the customer. Revenue from our consumer products is recognized when the shipments to contract manufacturing and retailer customers are recognized at the time ownership is transferred to the customer. In 2021, we had $79.0 million of net revenue of which approximately $68.6 million was from lab processing services, $5.8 million was generated from contract manufacturing customers, $2.4 million was from retailer sales, and $2.2 million was from genomic products and services. We bill the providers at standard price and take into consideration for negotiated discounts and an anticipated reimbursement remittance adjustments based on the payer portfolio, when revenue is recorded. We use the most expected value method to estimate the transaction price for reimbursements that may vary from the standard price.
We carry our accounts receivable at cost less an allowance for doubtful accounts. Allowances for doubtful accounts are based upon our judgment regarding collectability. On a periodic basis, we evaluate our receivables and establish an allowance for doubtful accounts, based on a history of past write-offs, collections, current credit conditions or generally accepted future trends in the industry and/or local economy. Accounts are written off as uncollectible at the time we determine that collections are unlikely. The reserve is not intended to address return activity or disputed balances with ongoing customers, as this should be addressed in a reserve for credit memos with a corresponding charge to revenue.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets
We review our goodwill at least annually for impairment as well as the carrying value of goodwill and our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be fully recoverable. When it is determined that the carrying amount of long-lived assets or goodwill is impaired, impairment is measured by comparing an asset’s estimated fair value to its carrying value. The determination of fair value is based on quoted market prices in active markets, if available, or independent appraisals; sales price negotiations; or projected future cash flows discounted at a rate determined by management to be commensurate with our business risk. The estimation of fair value utilizing discounted forecasted cash flows includes significant judgments regarding assumptions of revenue, operating and marketing costs; selling and administrative expenses; interest rates; property and equipment additions and retirements; and industry competition, general economic and business conditions, among other factors.
Income Taxes
Accounting for income taxes requires recognition of deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities. These deferred taxes are measured by applying the provisions of tax laws in effect at the balance sheet date, including the impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) enacted on December 22, 2017. The TCJA made broad and significant changes to the U.S. tax code that affects the year ended December 31, 2017, including, but not limited to, a change in the federal rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018.
We recognize in income the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the period that includes the TCJA enactment date. We utilize the asset and liability approach which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our financial statements or tax returns. In estimating future tax consequences, we generally consider all expected future events other than enactments of changes in the tax law or rates. Until sufficient taxable income to offset the temporary timing differences attributable to operations and the tax deductions attributable to option, warrant and stock activities are assured, a valuation allowance equaling the total net current and non-current deferred tax asset is being provided.
Inventories
Inventory is valued at the lower of cost, determined on a first-in, first-out basis (“FIFO”), or net realizable value. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record a provision for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on current and anticipated customer demand, production and laboratory requirements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In October 2021, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU No. 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805)-Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers. The amendments in ASU No. 2021-08 address diversity and inconsistency related to the recognition and measurement of contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination. The amendments in ASU No. 2021-08 require that an acquirer recognize and measure contract assets and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination in accordance with Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Upon adoption, an acquirer should account for the related revenue contracts of the acquiree as if it has originated the contracts.
For public business entities, the amendments in ASU No. 2021-08 are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The amendments in ASU No. 2021-08 should be applied prospectively to business combinations occurring on or after the effective date of the amendments. Early adoption of the amendments is permitted. An entity that early adopts should apply the amendments (1) retrospectively to all business combinations for which the acquisition date occurs on or after the beginning of the fiscal year that includes the interim period of early application and (2) prospectively to all business combinations that occur on or after the date of initial application. The Company has early adopted ASU No. 2021-08 effective January 1, 2021. 	
The adoption of ASU No. 2021-08 resulted in adjustments to the fair value assigned to deferred revenue assumed as of the acquisition date of the acquisition occurring during the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to recognition of revenue earned during the period for deferred revenue contracts acquired in business combinations, with a corresponding adjustment to goodwill. The adoption of ASU 2021-08 did not have a material impact on the results of the Company’s cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021, or the interim periods therein.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”), which is intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. This standard became effective for the Company January 1, 2021. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards, Not Yet Adopted
In September 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). The ASU sets forth a “current expected credit loss” (“CECL”) model which requires the Company to measure all expected credit losses for financial instruments held at the reporting date based on historical experience, current conditions, and reasonable supportable forecasts. This replaces the existing incurred loss model and is applicable to the measurement of credit losses on financial assets measured at amortized cost and applies to some off-balance sheet credit exposures. In February 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-02, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), which amends the effective date of the original pronouncement for smaller reporting companies. ASU 2016-13 and its amendments will be effective for the Company for interim and annual periods in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. We are currently assessing the impact of the adoption of this ASU on our financial statements.
The FASB recently issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470- 20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, to reduce complexity in applying GAAP to certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. The guidance in ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock by removing the existing guidance that requires entities to account for beneficial conversion features and cash conversion features in equity, separately from the host convertible debt or preferred stock. The guidance in ASC 470-20 applies to convertible instruments for which the embedded conversion features are not required to be bifurcated from the host contract and accounted for as derivatives. In addition, the amendments revise the scope exception from derivative accounting in ASC 815-40 for freestanding financial instruments and embedded features that are both indexed to the issuer’s own stock and classified in stockholders’ equity, by removing certain criteria required for equity classification. These amendments are expected to result in more freestanding financial instruments qualifying for equity classification (and, therefore, not accounted for as derivatives), as well as fewer embedded features requiring separate accounting from the host contract. The amendments in ASU 2020-06 further revise the guidance in ASC 260, Earnings Per Share, to require entities to calculate diluted earnings per share (EPS) for convertible instruments by using the if-converted method. In addition, entities must presume share settlement for purposes of calculating diluted EPS when an instrument may be settled in cash or shares. The amendments in ASU 2020-06 are effective for public entities, excluding smaller reporting companies, for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. For all other entities, the amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020. We are currently assessing the impact of the adoption of this ASU on our financial statements.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40). This ASU reduces diversity in an issuer’s accounting for modifications or exchanges of freestanding equity-classified written call options (for example, warrants) that remain equity classified after modification or exchange. This ASU provides guidance for a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that is not within the scope of another Topic. It specifically addresses: (1) how an entity should treat a modification of the terms or conditions or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity classified after modification or exchange; (2) how an entity should measure the effect of a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity classified after modification or exchange; and (3) how an entity should recognize the effect of a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity classified after modification or exchange. This ASU will be effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. An entity should apply the amendments prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date of the amendments. Early adoption is permitted, including adoption in an interim period. The adoption of ASU 2021-04 is not expected to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements or disclosures.