Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Information
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including this Management’s Discussion and Analysis, contains forward-looking statements. These statements are based on management’s current views, assumptions or beliefs of future events and financial performance and are subject to uncertainty and changes in circumstances. Readers of this report should understand that these statements are not guarantees of performance or results. Many factors could affect our actual financial results and cause them to vary materially from the expectations contained in the forward-looking statements. These factors include, among other things: the expected or potential impact of COVID-19 which is highly uncertain and will depend on future developments, our expected revenue, income (loss), receivables, operating expenses, supplier pricing, availability and prices of raw materials, insurance reimbursements, product pricing, sources of funding operations and acquisitions, our ability to raise funds, sufficiency of available liquidity, future interest costs, future economic circumstances, business strategy, industry conditions, our ability to execute our operating plans, the success of our cost savings initiatives, competitive environment and related market conditions, expected financial and other benefits from our organizational restructuring activities, actions of governments and regulatory factors affecting our business, retaining key employees and other risks as described in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission. In some cases these statements are identifiable through the use of words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “project,” “target,” “can,” “could,” “may,” “should,” “will,” “would” or the negative versions of these terms and other similar expressions.
You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. The forward-looking statements we make are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to various assumptions, risks and other
factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested by these forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ materially from those suggested by the forward-looking statements that we make for a number of reasons, including those described in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We expressly disclaim any obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Overview
We are a healthcare solutions company focused on cancer diagnostics. Our business mission is to address the pervasive problem of cancer misdiagnoses by developing solutions to mitigate the root causes of this problem in the form of diagnostic products, reagents and services. Misdiagnoses originate from aged commercial diagnostic cancer testing technologies, lack of subspecialized expertise, and sub-optimal laboratory processes that are needed in today’s diagnostic cancer testing in order to provide accurate, rapid, and resource-effective results to treat patients. Industry studies estimate 1 in 5 blood-cancer patients are misdiagnosed. As cancer diagnostic testing has evolved from cellular to molecular (genes and exons), laboratory testing has become extremely complex, requiring even greater diagnostic precision, attention to process and a more appropriate evaluation of the abundance of genetic data to effectively gather, consider, analyze and present information for the physician for patient treatment. Precipio sees cancer diagnostics as requiring a holistic approach to improve diagnostic data for improved interpretations with the intent to reduce misdiagnoses. By delivering diagnostic products, reagents and services that improve the accuracy and efficiency of diagnostics, leading to fewer misdiagnoses, we believe patient outcomes can be improved through the selection of appropriate therapeutic options. Furthermore, we believe that better patient outcomes will have a positive impact on healthcare expenses as misdiagnoses are reduced. Better diagnostic results - Better Patient Outcome - Lower Healthcare Expenditures.
To deliver its strategy, the Company has structured its organization in order to drive development of diagnostic products. Laboratory and R&D facilities located in New Haven, Connecticut and Omaha, Nebraska house development teams that collaborate on new products and services. The Company operates CLIA laboratories in both the New Haven, Connecticut and Omaha, Nebraska locations providing essential blood cancer diagnostics to office-based oncologists in many states nationwide. To deliver on our strategy of mitigating misdiagnoses we rely heavily on our CLIA laboratory to support R&D beta-testing of the products we develop, in a clinical environment.
In April 2020, we formed a Joint Venture with Poplar. Poplar provides specialized laboratory testing services to a nationwide client base of gastroenterologists, dermatologists, oncologists, urologists, gynecologists and their patients. The business purpose of the Joint Venture is to facilitate and capitalize on the combined capabilities, resources and healthcare industry relationships of its members by partnering, promoting and providing oncology services to office based physicians, hospitals and medical centers. Under the terms of the Joint Venture, Precipio SPV has a 49% ownership interest in the Joint Venture, with Poplar having a 51 % ownership. We have determined that we hold a variable interest in the Joint Venture and that we are the primary beneficiary of the Joint Venture. Due to this determination, we consolidate the Joint Venture. See Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report for further discussion.
The following discussion should be read together with our financial statements and related notes contained in this Annual Report. Results for the year ended December 31, 2021 are not necessarily indicative of results that may be attained in the future.
Going Concern
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) applicable for a going concern, which assume that the Company will realize its assets and discharge its liabilities in the ordinary course of business. The Company has incurred substantial operating losses and has used cash in its operating activities for the past several years. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a net loss of $8.5 million, an accumulated deficit of $80.1 million, working capital of $9.3 million and net cash used in operating activities of $6.6 million. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern over the next twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements were issued is dependent upon a combination of achieving its business plan, including
generating additional revenue, and raising additional financing to meet its debt obligations and paying liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due.
To meet its current and future obligations the Company has taken the following steps to capitalize the business and successfully achieve its business plan:
● On April 2, 2021, the Company entered into a sales agreement with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (“AGP”), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell its common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”) (the “Shares”), having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $22.0 million, to or through AGP, as sales agent (the “AGP Sales Agreement”), from time to time, in an “at the market offering” (as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended) of the Shares (the “ATM Offering”). The Company is limited in the number of shares it can sell in the ATM Offering due to the offering limitations currently applicable to the Company under General Instruction I.B.6. of Form S-3 and the Company’s public float as of the applicable date of such sales, as well as the number of authorized and unissued shares available for issuance, in accordance with the terms of the AGP Sales Agreement. The offer and sales of our shares of Common Stock to or through AGP, will be made pursuant to the registration statement (the “Registration Statement”) on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237445), which was declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on April 13, 2020, for an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. From April 2, 2021 through the date the consolidated financial statements were issued, we have already received approximately $15.4 million in gross proceeds through the AGP Sales Agreement from the sale of 4,501,000 shares of common stock, leaving the Company an additional $6.6 million available for future sales pursuant to the AGP Sales Agreement.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned circumstances, there remains substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for the next twelve months from the date the consolidated financial statements were issued. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to successfully achieve its initiatives summarized above in order to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern and do not include any adjustments that might result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern as a result of the outcome of this uncertainty.
Outlook - COVID-19 related
The COVID-19 outbreak, which spread worldwide in the first quarter of 2020, has caused significant business disruption. The extent of the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, public health crisis and actions taken to contain or prevent the further spread, including the development and deployment of any vaccine program and impact on the Company’s customers, employees and vendors, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. These uncertainties could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations. We have been actively monitoring the COVID-19 situation and its impact on the global economy and the Company. As the global pandemic evolves, we will continue to monitor the extent to which COVID-19 impacts our revenues, expenses and liquidity.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Sales. Net sales were as follows:
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $8.8 million, an increase of $2.8 million, as compared to the same period in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, patient diagnostic service revenue had an increase of $2.4 million as compared to the same period in 2020 due to an increase in cases processed and a lower allowance for doubtful accounts that was recorded. We billed 4,345 cases during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 3,677 cases during the same period in 2020, or an 18% increase in cases. Patient diagnostic service revenue accounted for 89% our total net sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in patient diagnostic service revenue was partially offset by a decrease of $0.4 million in service revenue from contract diagnostics for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. Other revenues increased by $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, mostly resulting from increased revenue related to our HSRR program.
Cost of Sales. Cost of sales includes material and supply costs for the patient tests performed, costs related to HSRR products and other direct costs (primarily personnel costs, pathologist interpretation costs and rent) associated with the operations of our laboratory. Cost of sales increased by $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase included an increase in patient diagnostic costs offset by a decrease in contract diagnostic costs which are in line with the changes in related revenues discussed above.
Gross Profit. Gross profit and gross margins were as follows:
Gross margin was 27% of total net sales, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 19% of total net sales for the same period in 2020 and the gross profit was approximately $2.4 million and $1.2 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The gross margin increased during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year period, as a result of increases in case volume and revenue. We operate a fully staffed CLIA and CAP certified clinical pathology and molecular laboratory. As such, it is necessary to maintain appropriate staffing levels to provide industry standard laboratory processing and reporting to ordering physicians. The increase in case volume enabled our laboratory to yield economies of scale and to leverage fixed expenses. We anticipate case volume to increase in 2022 and for our costs per case to improve as additional economies of scale are possible.
Operating Expenses. Operating expenses primarily consist of personnel costs, professional fees, travel costs, facility costs, stock based compensation costs and depreciation and amortization. Our operating expenses increased by $1.7 million to $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase included an increase of $1.3 million in general and administrative expenses due to a $0.4 million increase in personnel costs and a $1.1 million increase in legal and professional fees partially offset by a $0.2 million decrease in franchise and other tax expenses. Operating expenses also include an increase of $1.2 million in stock based compensation expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.8 million in sales and marketing expenses resulting from a decrease in personnel costs due to a decrease in headcount.
Other Income (Expense). We recorded net other income of $1.1 million and net other expense of $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The current year period other income of $1.1 million includes $0.3 million of income from warrant revaluations, $0.8 million of a gain on forgiveness of debt related to the forgiveness of our PPP Loan and $0.1 million from a gain on settlement of liabilities. These other income amounts were partially offset by less than $0.1 million of net interest expense.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net other expense of $1.5 million includes $0.3 million of interest expense from the amortization of debt discounts, net of accretion of debt premiums, related to convertible notes, $0.2 million of other interest expense and $1.2 million expense for loss on extinguishment of convertible notes which was recorded in conjunction with the March 2020 Amendment to the securities purchase agreements entered into in April 2018 and May 2019. The expenses were partially offset by $0.2 million of gains on settlements of liabilities and other income. Approximately $0.1 million of the other income is funds we received from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (“HHS”). As part of the CARES Act, HHS distributed funds to healthcare providers that received Medicare fee-for-service reimbursements in 2019. The payments from HHS are not loans and will not be required to be repaid.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital positions at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
During the year ended December 31, 2021 we received net proceeds of $16.2 million from sale of 5,001,000 shares of our common stock and $0.4 million from the issuance of 74,000 shares of our common stock in connection with the exercise of 74,000 warrants.
Analysis of Cash Flows - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Change in Cash. Cash increased by $9.0 million and $1.8 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities. The cash flows used in operating activities of $6.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 included a net loss of $8.5 million, an increase in inventories and other assets of $0.6 million and a decrease in accrued expenses and operating lease liabilities of $0.3 million. These were partially offset by a decrease in in accounts receivable of $0.3 million, an increase in accounts payable of $0.1 million and non-cash adjustments of approximately $2.4 million. The non-cash adjustments included a $0.2 million change in provision for losses on doubtful accounts. We routinely provide a reserve for doubtful accounts as a result of having limited in-network payer contracts. Non-cash adjustments also included $0.8 million for a gain on forgiveness of debt. The other non-cash adjustments to net loss of approximately $3.3 million include, among other things, depreciation and amortization, warrant revaluations and stock based compensation. The cash flows used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 included the net loss of $10.6 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $1.6 million, an increase in inventories and other assets of $0.2 million and a decrease in accounts payable and operating lease liabilities of $0.5 million. These were partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $0.7 million and non-cash adjustments of $4.8 million.
Cash Flows Used In Investing Activities. Cash flows used in investing activities were $0.7 million and $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulting from purchases of property and equipment partially offset by proceeds from sales of fixed assets.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities. Cash flows provided by financing activities totaled $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which included proceeds of $16.2 million from the issuance of common stock and $0.4 million from warrant exercises. These were partially offset by payments on our long-term debt and finance lease obligations of $0.2 million and payments on common stock warrant liabilities of $0.1 million. Cash flows provided by financing activities totaled $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which included proceeds of $8.9 million from the issuance of common stock and proceeds of $0.8 million from the PPP Loan. These proceeds were partially offset by payments on our long-term debt and convertible notes of $0.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At each of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
At December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations and other commitments were as follows:
(1) Total payments include $205,000 in principal and $23,000 in interest. See Note 5 - "Long-Term Debt" to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2) See Note 8 - "Leases" to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3) These amounts represent purchase commitments, including all open purchase orders.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The Company’s significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included with this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain accounting estimates are particularly important to the understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by the Company’s management and can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside the control of management. The Company’s management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on historical operations, future business plans and projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, the observance of trends in the industry, information provided by
customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. The following discusses the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates:
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its revenues from diagnostic testing - histology, flow cytometry, cytology and molecular testing; clinical research from bio-pharma customers, state and federal grant programs; biomarker testing from bio-pharma customers and, from; diagnostic product sales.
Service revenues are comprised of patient diagnostic services for cancer as well as contract diagnostic services for pharmacogenomics trials. Service revenue is recognized upon completion of the testing process and when the diagnostic result is delivered to the ordering physician and/or customer. Net patient service revenue is reported at the estimated net realizable amounts from patients, third-party payers and others for services rendered, including retroactive adjustment under reimbursement agreements with third-party payers. Revenue under third-party payer agreements is subject to audit and retroactive adjustment. Provisions for third-party payer settlements are provided in the period in which the related services are rendered and adjusted in the future periods, as final settlements are determined.
Revenue from clinical research grant is recognized over time as the service is being performed using a proportional performance method. The Company uses an "efforts based" method of assessing performance. If the arrangement requires the performance of a specified number of similar acts (i.e. test), then revenue is recognized in equal amounts as each act is completed.
Other revenues are comprised of the Company’s ICP technology kit sales to bio-pharma customers, clinical research, HemeScreen and COVID-19 antibody tests.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, service revenue represented 90% of our consolidated revenues and other revenues represented 10%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, service revenue represented 96% of our consolidated revenues and other revenues represented 4%.
Allowance for Contractual Discounts
We are reimbursed by payers for services we provide. Payments for services covered by payers average less than billed charges. We monitor revenue and receivables from payers and record an estimated contractual allowance for certain revenue and receivable balances as of the revenue recognition date to properly account for anticipated differences between amounts estimated in our billing system and amounts ultimately reimbursed by payers. Accordingly, the total revenue and receivables reported in our financial statements are recorded at the amounts expected to be received from these payers. For service revenue, the contractual allowance is estimated based on several criteria, including unbilled claims, historical trends based on actual claims paid, current contract and reimbursement terms and changes in customer base and payer/product mix. The billing functions for the remaining portion of our revenue are contracted and fixed fees for specific services and are recorded without an allowance for contractual discounts.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
The allowance for doubtful accounts is based on estimates of losses related to receivable balances. The risk of collection varies based upon the service, the payer (commercial health insurance and government) and the patient’s ability to pay the amounts not reimbursed by the payer. We estimate the allowance for doubtful accounts based upon several factors including the age of the outstanding receivables, the historical experience of collections, adjusting for current economic conditions and, in some cases, evaluating specific customer accounts for the ability to pay. Collection agencies are employed and legal action is taken when we determine that taking collection actions is reasonable relative to the probability of receiving payment on amounts owed. Management judgment is used to assess the collectability of accounts and the ability of our customers to pay. Judgment is also used to assess trends in collections and the effects of systems and business process changes on our expected collection rates. We review the estimation process quarterly and make changes to the estimates as necessary. When it is determined that a customer account is uncollectible, that balance is written off against the existing allowance.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts Receivable results from diagnostic services provided to self-pay and insured patients, project based testing services, clinical research and miscellaneous product sales. The services provided by the Company are generally due within 30 days from the invoice date. Accounts receivable are reduced by an allowance for doubtful accounts. In evaluating the collectability of accounts receivable, the Company analyzes and identifies trends for each of its sources of revenue to estimate the appropriate allowance for doubtful accounts. For receivables associated with self-pay patients, including patients with insurance and a deductible and copayment, the Company records an allowance for doubtful accounts in the period of services on the basis of past experience of patients unable or unwilling to pay for service fee for which they are financially responsible. For receivables associated with services provided to patients with third-party coverage, the Company analyzes contractually due amounts and provides an allowance, if necessary. The difference between the standard rates and the amounts actually collected after all reasonable collection efforts have been exhausted is charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the grantee’s requisite vesting period. For the purpose of valuing stock options granted to our employees, directors and officers, we use the Black-Scholes option pricing model. To determine the risk-free interest rate, we utilized the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant with a term consistent with the expected term of our awards. The expected term of the options granted is in accordance with Staff Accounting Bulletins 107 and 110, and is based on the average between vesting terms and contractual terms. The expected dividend yield reflects our current and expected future policy for dividends on our common stock. The expected stock price volatility for our stock options was calculated by examining the trading history for our common stock. We will continue to analyze the expected stock price volatility and expected term assumptions and will adjust our Black-Scholes option pricing assumptions as appropriate.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We assess the recoverability of our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets, whenever significant events or changes in circumstances indicate impairment may have occurred. If indicators of impairment exist, projected future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to our carrying amount to determine whether the asset’s value is recoverable. Any resulting impairment is recorded as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset in excess of fair value and a charge to operating results.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2019-12 “Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes”, which is intended to improve consistent application and simplify the accounting for income taxes. This ASU removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and clarifies and amends existing guidance. The Company adopted this guidance on January 1, 2021. The adoption of this standard was not material to our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
In July 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-05, Lease (Topic 842), “Lessors - Certain Leases with Variable Lease Payments”. This guidance amends the lease classification accounting for lessors for certain leases with variable lease payments that do not depend on a reference index or a rate and would have resulted in the recognition of a loss at lease commencement if classified as a sales-type or direct financing lease. Under the new guidance, these leases will be classified as an operating lease. The amendments are effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact that this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, “Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options” which clarifies the accounting for a modification or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option that remains equity classified after a modification or exchange and the related EPS effects of such transaction if recognized as an adjustment to equity. This ASU becomes effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years, and should be applied prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date. The Company is currently evaluating the impact that this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06 “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity.” This ASU amends the guidance on convertible instruments and the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity and improves and amends the related EPS guidance for both Subtopics. The ASU will be effective for annual reporting periods after December 15, 2023 and interim periods within those annual periods and early adoption is permitted in annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the potential impact that the adoption of this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 “Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments”, which replaces current methods for evaluating impairment of financial instruments not measured at fair value, including trade accounts receivable and certain debt securities, with a current expected credit loss model. This ASU, as amended, is effective for the Company for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company is currently assessing the potential impact that the adoption of this ASU will have on its consolidated financial statements.
Impact of Inflation
We do not believe that price inflation or deflation had a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations during the periods presented.