ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on July 10, 2019 for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business transaction with one or more businesses or entities that the Company has not yet identified (a “Business Combination”. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placements of the private warrants, our shares, rights, new debt, or a combination of these.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
Proposed Business Combination
On November 10, 2021, the Company entered into the Merger Agreement. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the Company will acquire all of the outstanding equity interests of Presto, and stockholders of Presto will receive $800,000,000 in aggregate consideration (the “Aggregate Base Consideration”) in the form of newly issued common stock in New Presto, calculated based on a price of $10.00 per share.
In addition to the Aggregate Base Consideration, Presto stockholders may be entitled to receive 15,000,000 additional shares of common stock of New Presto (the “Presto Earnout Shares”), to be issued as follows: (A) 7,500,000 Presto Earnout Shares, if, during the period from and after the Closing until the third anniversary of the Closing, the Volume Weighted Average Price (“VWAP” as defined in the Merger Agreement) of New Presto common stock is greater than or equal to $12.50 for any 20 trading days within a period of 30 consecutive trading days, and (B) an additional 7,500,000 Presto Earnout Shares, if, during the period from and after the Closing until the fifth anniversary of the Closing, the VWAP of New Presto common stock is greater than or equal to $15.00 for any 20 trading days within a period of 30 consecutive trading days.
The Company entered into Equity Subscription Agreements with certain accredited investors, pursuant to which, among other things, the Company agreed to issue and sell, in private placements to close immediately prior to or substantially concurrently with the Closing, an aggregate of 1,500,000 shares of common stock for $10.00 per share.
The Company also entered into the Convertible Note Subscription Agreement with an institutional accredited investor, pursuant to which, among other things, the Company agreed to issue and sell, in a private placement to close immediately prior to the Closing, an aggregate of $55,000,000 in aggregate principal amount of convertible notes and an aggregate of 1,000,000 warrants.
For a detailed description of the proposed business combination, please see the section of this Annual Report titled “Business-Proposed Business Combination.”
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Presto. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $3,841,344, which consists of a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,953,000 and interest earned on marketable securities held in our trust account of $41,206, offset by general and administrative expenses of $990,862 and a loss on initial issuance of private warrants of $162,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,363,061, which consists of general and administrative expenses $18,208, a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $180,000, a loss on initial issuance of private warrants of $1,140,000 and transaction costs allocable to warrant liabilities of $24,853.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 30, 2020, we completed the Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of 6,000,000 private warrants at a price of $1.00 per private warrant in a private placement to the co-sponsors, generating gross proceeds of $6,000,000.
On January 5, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we completed the sale of an additional 2,250,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $22,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the over-allotment we completed a sale of an additional 675,000 private warrants, at $1.00 per private warrant, generating total proceeds of $675,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private warrants a total of $174,225,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $3,993,017 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $3,450,000 of underwriting fees and $543,017 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $638,090. Net income of $3,841,344 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $41,206, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,953,000 and loss on initial issuance of private warrants of $162,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $352,772 of cash for operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $30,735. Net loss of $1,363,061 was affected by transaction cost allocable to warrant liabilities of $24,853, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $180,000 and loss on initial issuance of private warrants of $1,140,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $12,527 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $174,266,206 (including approximately $41,206 of interest income) invested in a money market account that invests in US Treasury Bills. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $313,158. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our initial stockholders, officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination is not consummated, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private warrants. Loans made by Chardan Capital Markets, LLC or any of its related persons will not be convertible into private warrants, and Chardan Capital Markets, LLC and its related persons will have no recourse with respect to their ability to convert their loans into private warrants.
If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a Business Combination. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
As a result of the above, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have determined that the liquidity condition and date for mandatory liquidation and dissolution raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through March 30, 2022, the scheduled liquidation date of the Company if it does not complete a Business Combination prior to such date. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay Chardan Capital Markets, LLC a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial support. We began incurring these fees on December 23, 2020, and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
We have engaged Chardan Capital Markets, LLC as an advisor in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential Business Combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay Chardan Capital Markets, LLC a marketing fee for such services upon the completion of a Business Combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, including proceeds from the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. As a result, Chardan Capital Markets, LLC will not be entitled to such fee unless the Business Combination is consummated.
In addition to Chardan Capital Markets, LLC, we have engaged certain advisors to assist in capital raising efforts in connection with the proposed Business Combination. The fee arrangement with the advisors, including William Blair & Company LLC, Truist Securities Inc. and others are only payable upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued warrants to purchase shares of common stock, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815. We account for the private warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the private warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the private warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the private warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The private warrants are valued using a Modified Black Scholes model.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Certain of our common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.