ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and should be read together with the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
OVERVIEW
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to intercepting and preventing immune-mediated diseases. Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to business planning, research and development, pre-commercial activities, recruiting management and technical staff, acquiring operating assets, partnering and raising capital. We have not yet commenced any commercial revenue-generating operations, do not have any positive cash flows from operations and we will need to raise additional capital to finance our operations.
We have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales to date and, through December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $292.1 million. We have financed our operations primarily through equity offerings.
We expect that over the next several years we will continue to incur losses from operations as we increase our expenditures in research and development in connection with our regulatory submissions, clinical trials and other development activities, as well as costs to support our commercialization efforts to launch teplizumab, if we receive regulatory approval in the United States. If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we may be required to terminate or delay certain development and pre-commercial activities.
KEY COMPONENTS OF OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Collaboration Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from commercial product sales. Our revenue currently consists only of collaboration revenue recognized under our License Agreement with Huadong, including certain amounts recognized in connection with the upfront license payment and research, development and manufacturing funding. We recognize revenue under the Huadong License Agreement using a cost-based input method according to costs incurred to date compared to estimated total costs of the clinical research activities over the period which the activities are performed under the agreement, which is currently expected to occur from mid-2021 through the first half of 2024. We expect that revenue will fluctuate from period to period as a result of the timing of expenses incurred in conjunction with the related research and development activities.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of clinical studies, the cost of manufacturing our drug candidates for clinical study, regulatory costs, other internal operating expenses, and the cost of conducting preclinical activities. Expenses also include the cost of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel serving in our research and development functions. In addition, our research and development expenses include payments to third parties, as well as the fair value of equity issuances to third parties for the license rights to products in development (prior to marketing approval). Our expenses related to clinical trials are primarily related to activities at CROs and other consultants that design, obtain regulatory approval, and conduct clinical trials on our behalf. Our expenses related to the production of drug substance or drug product for our clinical trials and development programs are primarily related to activities performed by licensors, strategic partners or CMOs and other consultants on our behalf. Our development efforts from inception through December 31, 2021, have been principally related to the acquisition and development of our clinical programs, as well as the build out of our medical affairs infrastructure, medical education programs and grants to support the screening of potential T1D patients.
All research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development. We account for non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when the payment is made.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel serving in our executive, business development, pre-commercial, legal, finance and accounting and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for marketing and other pre-commercial activities, legal, including patent-related expenses, consulting, insurance, board of director fees, tax and accounting services. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase significantly in the future as a result of the build out of our commercial organization and pre-commercial activities for teplizumab.
Interest Income, net
Interest income, net, consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities offset by amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts to maturity on our marketable securities.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, recognized from the Huadong License Agreement. We did not recognize any collaboration revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $69.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.2 million, compared to $66.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase related primarily to increased costs for our teplizumab program, including the PROTECT study and the PROTECT Extension study, as well as the build out of our medical affairs infrastructure, medical education programs and grants to support the screening of potential T1D patients. Also contributing to the increase were costs for the PROACTIVE study (PRV-015), which was initiated in August 2020, and the PREVAIL Phase 2a study (PRV-3279), for start-up costs incurred in the second half of 2021. We also incurred $1.1 million in expense, which was paid to MacroGenics in May 2021, in connection with the Company’s grant of certain rights of PRV-3279 to Huadong under the Huadong License Agreement and $0.5 million in expense related to a milestone payment to Vactech for the first subject dosed in the PROVENT study during the first quarter of 2021. These increases were offset by a decrease in teplizumab manufacturing costs, including costs for GMP and process performance qualification (“PPQ”) batches of drug supply and drug product, which were produced in 2020, drug supply manufacturing costs for PRV-101 and regulatory activities for the initial teplizumab BLA submission incurred in the prior year period.
Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 also included personnel costs of $16.3 million and $11.7 million, respectively, including stock-based compensation of $4.4 million and $5.6 million in each respective year. The increase in personnel costs relates to an increase in headcount and is offset by a decrease in stock-based compensation due to the vesting of certain performance-based metrics related primarily to the completion of CMC activities and submission of the BLA for teplizumab that occurred in the prior year period.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $47.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $14.0 million, compared to $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were comprised of the following:
Pre-commercial expenses were $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and primarily consisted of $12.2 million in external costs for our pre-commercial activities, such as marketing and market access costs, and $11.1 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $2.0 million. Pre-commercial expenses were $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily consisted of $11.7 million in external costs of pre-commercial activities for teplizumab and $4.6 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.7 million. The increase in pre-commercial expenses related primarily to an increase in headcount, as we continue to buildout out our infrastructure to support a potential commercial launch of teplizumab.
Other general and administrative expenses were $24.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and primarily consisted of $10.7 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $5.5 million, $8.4 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and approximately $2.6 million in insurance and other public company costs. Other general and administrative expenses were $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and were primarily comprised of $9.0 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $5.9 million, $5.0 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and approximately $2.0 million in insurance and other public company costs.
Interest Income, net
Interest income, net was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income, net during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to a reduction in interest rates since the COVID-19 pandemic began in early 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded an income tax benefit of $1.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Both benefits recognized related to proceeds from the sale of certain of our prior years New Jersey net operating losses. The increase in income tax benefit related to an overall increase in the amount of NOLs sold year over year.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $66.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $30.0 million, compared to $36.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase related primarily to increased costs for our teplizumab program, including manufacturing activities, the PROTECT study, and BLA submission activities. Specifically, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $21.3 million in manufacturing costs for teplizumab, including production costs for GMP and PPQ batches of drug supply and drug product. Also contributing to the increase were costs for the PROACTIVE study (PRV-015), which was initiated in August 2020. These costs were offset by a decrease in clinical development expenses for the PRINCE study (PRV-6527) and the PREVAIL Phase 1b study (PRV-3279), each of which were substantially completed in 2019. Research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 also included $11.7 million and $5.1 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $5.6 million and $1.3 million in each respective year. The increase in stock-based compensation relates to the increase in headcount as well as the vesting of certain performance-based metrics related primarily to the completion of CMC activities and submission of the BLA for teplizumab.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $33.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $25.3 million, compared to $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. General and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were comprised of the following:
Pre-commercial expenses were $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily consisted of $11.7 million in external costs for our pre-commercial activities such as marketing and market access, and $4.6 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.7 million. There were no pre-commercial expenses during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Other general and administrative expenses were $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily consisted of $9.0 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $5.9 million, $5.0 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and approximately $2.0 million in insurance and other public company costs. Other general and administrative expenses were $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and were primarily comprised of $3.5 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation of $1.5 million, $2.7 million in professional fees and legal expenses, and approximately $1.3 million in insurance and other public company costs.
The increase in general and administrative stock-based compensation in 2020 relates to the increase in headcount as well as the vesting of certain performance-based metrics related primarily to the completion of CMC activities and submission of the BLA for teplizumab.
Interest Income, net
Interest income, net was $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to an overall reduction in interest rates in 2020, which is largely a result of changes in the economic environment related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded an income tax benefit of $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, which related to proceeds from the sale of certain of our prior year New Jersey net operating losses. We did not record any income tax benefit or provision during the year ended December 31, 2019.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources and Uses of Cash
There is considerable time and cost associated with developing a potential drug or pharmaceutical product to the point of regulatory approval and commercialization. We expect to continue to incur losses, as we plan to continue to fund development activities and prepare for a potential commercial launch of teplizumab, if we receive regulatory approval in the United States.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $127.1 million. We currently have invested our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities primarily in money market funds and corporate debt securities. Since our inception in October 2016, we have financed our operations primarily through equity offerings. Through these equity offerings, we have raised aggregate net proceeds of approximately $364.2 million to date, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses.
In September 2019, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 5,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $8.00 per share. The 5,750,000 shares sold included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase 750,000 shares at a price of $8.00 per share. Concurrent with the underwritten public offering, we sold 2,500,000 shares of common stock to Amgen. at the public offering price of $8.00 per share in a private placement pursuant to the terms of our License and Collaboration Agreement with Amgen. Aggregate net proceeds from the underwritten public offering and the concurrent private placement were $62.7 million, net of approximately $2.8 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses of $0.5 million.
In August 2019, we established an at-the-market program (“2019 ATM Program”) through which we may sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock. In February 2021, we established a new at-the-market program (the “2021 ATM Program”) through which we may sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, up to $150.0 million of shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, no sales have been made under this program. In connection with the establishment of the 2021 ATM Program, we terminated the 2019 ATM Program, and no additional stock may be issued thereunder. Prior to its termination, we sold 725,495 shares of our common stock for aggregate net proceeds of approximately $9.9 million, net of $0.3 million in sales commissions, under the 2019 ATM Program, all of which occurred during the quarter ended June 30, 2020.
In June 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 7,590,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $14.50 per share. The 7,590,000 shares sold included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase 990,000 shares at a price of $14.50 per share. We received net proceeds from the underwritten public offering of $103.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.6 million and other offering expenses of $0.2 million.
In January 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 6,250,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share. In February 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their option to purchase an additional 587,500 shares at a price of $16.00 per share. In the aggregate, total net proceeds from the underwritten public offering were $102.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $6.6 million and other offering expenses of $0.5 million.
We will need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, to develop and commercialize teplizumab, PRV-015, PRV-3279 and PRV-101 and to develop, acquire, or in-license other products. We currently plan to raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt, or potential out-licensing transactions. Such additional funding will be necessary to continue to develop our product candidates, to pursue the license or purchase of other technologies, to commercialize our product candidates or to purchase other products. We may seek to sell common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, enter into a credit facility or another form of third-party funding, or seek other debt financing. In addition, we may consider raising additional capital to fund operating activities, to expand our business, to pursue strategic investments, to take advantage of financing opportunities, or for other reasons. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and those securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of preferred stock, convertible debt securities or other debt financing, these securities or other debt could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Any other third-party funding arrangement could require us to relinquish valuable rights. We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain sufficient additional funds when required, we may be forced to delay, restrict or eliminate all or a portion of our development programs, dispose of assets or technology or cease operations.
Our cash requirements for 2022 and into 2023 will be impacted by a number of factors, the most significant of which are expenses related to teplizumab, including costs, timing and outcome of our regulatory activities, costs to build out our commercial infrastructure, pre-commercial activities for teplizumab, and if approval is received from the FDA, commercial sales activities, the PROTECT clinical trial, manufacturing activities for teplizumab and any potential milestone payments that may become due upon a potential regulatory approval of teplizumab by the FDA. Other factors include costs related to our other ongoing clinical trials, such as the Phase 2b PROACTIVE clinical study of PRV-015 in celiac disease, the Phase 2a PREVAIL clinical study of PRV-3279 in lupus, which was recently initiated in January 2022, and the completion of the first-in-human PROVENT study of our PRV-101 polyvalent inactivated CVB vaccine candidate.
Depending on the timing and outcome of our regulatory activities and the status of our plans to prepare for a potential regulatory approval of teplizumab by the FDA, we may encounter near-term liquidity needs that could impact our cash runway over the next 12 months. If our teplizumab BLA resubmission is approved by the FDA, factors that could impact our cash runway include, but are not limited to, anticipated costs of commercialization and potential milestone payments that may be triggered under our current agreements, including with MacroGenics. If we do not obtain additional financing, or prudently manage our expenses, our financial condition, cash flows and results of operations could be materially and adversely affected.
Based on our current business plans, management believes that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities on hand at December 31, 2021 are sufficient to meet our operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of the financial statements included in this report.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $95.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and primarily related to cash used to fund clinical development, manufacturing, regulatory activities and pre-commercial activities for teplizumab, clinical development activities for PRV-015, PRV-3279 and PRV-101, and increased personnel costs to support our clinical programs and the build out of our corporate and commercial infrastructure. Cash expenses were offset by $8.5 million received from Huadong in connection with the Huadong License Agreement, of which $7.1 million is currently recorded as deferred revenue as of December 31, 2021. Our working capital was $78.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in operating activities was $76.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to cash used to fund clinical development, manufacturing, and pre-commercial activities for teplizumab, clinical development activities for PRV-015, development activities for PRV-101, and increased personnel costs to support our clinical programs and the build out of our corporate and commercial infrastructure.
Net cash used in operating activities was $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily related to cash used to fund clinical development activities for teplizumab, PRV-6527, PRV-3279 and PRV-300, development activities for PRV-101, and increased personnel costs to support our clinical programs and our public company infrastructure.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $31.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and primarily related to the purchase of marketable securities totaling $55.3 million and capital expenditures associated with data information systems of $1.0 million offset by proceeds received from the maturity of marketable securities totaling $25.2 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to the proceeds received from the maturity of marketable securities totaling $55.0 million offset by purchases of marketable securities totaling $28.7 million and net capital expenditures associated with the build out of our new corporate headquarters and information systems infrastructure of $1.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $46.2 million and relates to the purchase of marketable securities during the period.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $102.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and primarily related to aggregate net proceeds of $102.3 million received from our underwritten public offering which closed in January 2021, including the subsequent partial exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares in February 2021, as well as approximately $0.1 million in proceeds from stock option exercises during the period.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $114.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to net proceeds received from our underwritten public offering in June 2020 of $103.3 million, net proceeds received from the sale of our common stock under our ATM program of $9.9 million, as well as $1.1 million received from stock option exercises during the period.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $62.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and primarily related to the net proceeds we received from the completion of our underwritten public offering and concurrent private placement in September 2019.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We have entered into a number of license, collaboration, acquisition and other agreements with third parties. For further details regarding our significant contracts, and the commitments and contractual obligations contained within each contract, please refer to the section titled Significant Contracts and Agreements Related to Research and Development Activities within Item 1. above.
In July 2020, we entered into an agreement to lease approximately 7,000 square feet of office space in Red Bank, NJ, for which the initial lease term expires approximately 64 months from the lease commencement date, which occurred in October 2020, with base annual lease payments of approximately $0.2 million.
In addition, in the course of normal business operations, we have agreements with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. Expenditures to CROs, CMOs and other clinical development related vendors represent significant costs in clinical development. Subject to required notice periods and our obligations under binding purchase orders, we can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We could also enter into additional collaborative research, contract research, manufacturing, and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and even long-term commitments of cash. As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.7 million of contracted purchase obligations which represents our commitments under binding forecasts, and purchase orders (inclusive of cancellation fees), including those provided under our agreement(s) with AGC and our other CMOs. The actual amounts incurred will be determined based on the amount of goods purchased and the pricing then in effect under the applicable arrangement. These committed purchase obligations are expected to be incurred within one year from the issuance of these financial statements.
We also have employment agreements with certain employees which require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a change in control or termination without cause, occur.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We do not have any interest in special purpose entities, structured finance entities or other variable interest entities.
TRENDS AFFECTING OUR BUSINESS
We are a clinical development stage company and do not currently generate revenue from commercial product sales. As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we do not have any product candidates that have received regulatory approval from the FDA, or any other comparable foreign regulatory authority. The results of our operations are not significantly impacted by any known or reasonably known material trends and uncertainties. Our revenue recognized from our collaborative agreements are dependent largely on internal efforts, which are mostly within our control.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to adversely affect global economies, financial markets and the overall environment. We have experienced some level of disruption to three of our current clinical trials. In March 2020, we announced a temporary pause in the randomization of patients with newly diagnosed T1D into our global Phase 3 PROTECT study of teplizumab. During the second quarter of 2020, we resumed enrolling patients in the PROTECT study on a country by country and site by site basis and by the end of the third quarter of 2020, all sites were activated, with a majority of the sites actively enrolling patients. We completed target enrollment in the PROTECT study in August 2021 and expect to report top-line results in the second half of 2023, subject to change for any potential interruptions related to COVID-19, regulatory issues or other interruptions. In addition, we, with our development partner Amgen, collectively decided that, to protect the integrity and quality of the PRV-015 Phase 2b trial in gluten free diet NRCD, we would stagger study startup throughout the third quarter of 2020 rather than initiating screening in the second quarter of 2020, as had originally been scheduled. We initiated the Phase 2b trial in August 2020 and the pandemic has caused difficulties and delays in recruitment. As a result of these delays, we now expect to report top-line results from the PROACTIVE study by the end of 2023. Additionally, our plans to initiate the Phase 2a portion of the PREVAIL study in lupus patients by the first half of 2021 were delayed predominantly due to COVID-19 related impacts, and we recently initiated the study in January 2022.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The following disclosure supplements the descriptions of our accounting policies contained in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements regarding significant areas of judgement. Management made certain estimates and assumptions during the preparation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements. These estimates involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had a material impact on our results of operations. Actual results could differ from our estimates.
Management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting policies and estimates with the audit committee of our board of directors. A discussion of some of our more significant accounting policies and estimates follows.
Collaboration Revenue
From time to time, we enter into licensing agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) and ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”), under which we may license rights to research, develop and commercialize our product candidates to third parties. The terms of these collaborative research and development agreements typically include non-refundable, upfront license fees; reimbursement for research and development activities; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of commercialized products. We may also enter into development and manufacturing service agreements with our collaborators.
Generally, as part of the accounting for these agreements under ASC 606, we must develop estimates and assumptions that require judgment to determine the underlying stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation which determines how the transaction price is allocated among each identified performance obligation within the agreement. If observable standalone selling prices are not available, we estimate the applicable standalone selling price, which may include the use of forecasted revenues or costs, development timelines, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. However, we currently do not have any agreements that contain more than one performance obligation, and as such we allocate the entire transaction price to the single performance obligation.
Revenue is then recognized over time using an appropriate method of measuring progress towards fulfilling our performance obligation for the respective out-licensing agreement. Determining the measure of progress that consistently depicts our satisfaction of the performance obligations requires judgement as well as estimates, and the effect of any changes made to an estimated input, therefore impacting revenue or expenses recognized, would be recorded as a change in estimate.
For certain milestone payments included in these agreements, at the inception of each agreement, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of occurring and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using either the expected value or most likely amount method, depending on the facts and circumstances relative to the agreement. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our, or our collaborative partner’s control, such as non-operational developmental and regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received, and as such are constrained. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of milestones that are within our, or our collaborative partner’s control, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price.
There have been no material changes in estimates used in accounting for any of our collaborative agreements accounted for under ASC 606 and ASC 808, since the inception of each agreement.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses are related to expenses incurred with respect to CROs, CMOs and other vendors in connection with research and development and manufacturing activities.
We base our expenses related to CROs and CMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotations and contracts with such vendors that conduct research and development and manufacturing activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the applicable research and development or manufacturing expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. There have been no material changes in estimates for the periods presented within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for awards of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of those awards. The grant-date fair value of the award is recognized as compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period, which generally equals the vesting period of the award. We also grant performance-based stock options. The grant-date fair value of the performance-based stock options is recognized as compensation expense once it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. We record actual forfeitures in the period the forfeiture occurs.
We used the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of option awards with the following weighted-average assumptions for the period indicated:
The weighted-average valuation assumptions were determined as follows:
● Risk-free interest rate: we base the risk-free interest rate on the interest rate payable on United States Treasury securities in effect at the time of grant for a period that is commensurate with the assumed expected option term.
● Expected annual dividends: the estimate for annual dividends is 0%, because we have not historically paid, and do not expect for the foreseeable future to pay, a dividend.
● Expected stock price volatility: the expected volatility used is based on historical volatilities of similar entities within our industry which were commensurate with our expected term assumption.
● Expected term of options: the expected term of options represents the period of time options are expected to be outstanding. The expected term of the options granted to employees is derived from the “simplified” method as described in Staff Accounting Bulletin 107 relating to stock-based compensation, whereby the expected term is an average between the vesting period and contractual period due to our limited operating history. For non-employee stock option grants, the Company has the option to utilize either the expected term or the contractual term, determined on an award-by-award basis.
Stock-based compensation expense is included in both research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss. There have been no material changes in estimates, or our estimation methods, for the periods presented within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3, “Significant Accounting Policies”, in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.