ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion summarizes the significant factors affecting the operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of Post Holdings Partnering Corporation. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements under Item 8 of this report and the “Cautionary Statement On Forward-Looking Statements” on page 1.
OVERVIEW
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 27, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar partnering transaction with one or more businesses that we have not yet identified (a “Partnering Transaction”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
On May 28, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 30,000,000 units (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one share of Series A common stock, $0.0001 par value per share (the “Series A common stock” and such shares, the “Public Shares”) and one-third of one redeemable warrant (the “Public Warrants”). Each whole Public Warrant will entitle the holder to purchase one share of Series A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $300,000,000. The Units began trading on the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) under the ticker symbol “PSPC.U” on May 26, 2021. As of July 16, 2021, holders of the Units could elect to separately trade their shares of Series A common stock and Public Warrants, with the shares of Series A common stock and the Public Warrants listed on the NYSE under the symbols “PSPC” and “PSPC WS”, respectively.
On June 3, 2021, we issued an additional 4,500,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise in full of their over-allotment option in connection with the initial public offering. The Over-Allotment Units were priced at $10.00 per Over-Allotment Unit, generating total gross proceeds of $45,000,000. The term “IPO” as used herein generally refers to the consummation of the initial public offering on May 28, 2021 and the underwriters’ exercise in full of their over-allotment option on June 3, 2021. We incurred offering costs in connection with the IPO of $17,887,856, of which $10,675,000 was for deferred underwriting commissions.
On May 28, 2021, in conjunction with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the private sale of 1,000,000 Private Placement Units (the “Private Placement Units”) at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit to our sponsor, PHPC Sponsor, LLC (the “Sponsor”), generating total gross proceeds of $10,000,000. Concurrently with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the Sponsor purchased an additional 90,000 Private Placement Units for total gross proceeds of $900,000. Each Private Placement Unit consists of one share of Series A common stock (“the “Private Placement Shares”) and one-third of one warrant, each whole warrant entitling the Sponsor to purchase one share of Series A common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share (the “Private Placement Warrants”). The term “Private Placement” as used herein generally refers to the consummation of the private sale of Private Placement Units on May 28, 2021 and the private sale of Private Placement Units in conjunction with the sale of the Over-Allotment Units on June 3, 2021.
Of the gross proceeds received from the IPO and Private Placement, $345,000,000 (or $10.00 per Unit sold in the IPO) was deposited in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) located in the United States (the “U.S.”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee.
Our Sponsor, executive officers and directors (the “initial stockholders”) agreed not to propose an amendment to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation that would modify the substance or timing of our obligation to provide holders of our Public Shares the right to have their shares redeemed in connection with a Partnering Transaction or to redeem 100% of our Public Shares if we do not complete a Partnering Transaction within 24 months from the closing of our IPO, or May 28, 2023, or 27 months, or August 28, 2023, following an agreement in principle event, which means we have executed a letter of intent, agreement in principle or definitive agreement for a Partnering Transaction within 24 months from the closing of the IPO but have not completed the Partnering Transaction within such 24-month period (such 24-month or 27-month period, the “Combination Period”) or with respect to any other provision relating to the rights of holders of Public Shares (the “Public Stockholders”), unless we provide the Public Stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their shares of Series A common stock in conjunction with any such amendment.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of a Partnering Transaction. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Partnering Transaction will be successful.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from January 27, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and IPO, and from the IPO date relates to our search for potential target businesses. We will not generate any operating revenue until after the completion of our Partnering Transaction, at the earliest. We incur general and administrative expenses through operating as a blank check company. We generate other income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from our IPO, and non-operating unrealized gains and losses related to derivative instruments initially recorded at the IPO date.
For the period beginning January 27, 2021, the inception date of the Company, and ending December 31, 2021, we had net earnings of $7,488,319, which consisted of a $9,707,400 gain on derivative warrant liabilities and $13,507 of income on investments held in the Trust Account, offset by $2,232,588 of general and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses included professional fees, offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, franchise taxes and fees related to the services agreement with Post.
Changes in the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities recognized in the Statement of Operations were primarily due to market factors largely driven by changes in the fair value of the underlying shares of the warrants.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $2,426,458, which included $2,444,148 of cash in our operating bank account.
Our liquidity needs prior to the closing of the IPO were satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from the Sponsor to purchase 11,500,000 shares of Series F common stock, $0.0001 par value per share (the “Founder Shares”) and the loan of $213,424 from the Sponsor under an unsecured promissory note, which was repaid in full on May 28, 2021. On April 8, 2021, the Sponsor surrendered 2,875,000 Founder Shares to the Company for no consideration resulting in an aggregate of 8,625,000 Founder Shares outstanding. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, our liquidity has been satisfied through the proceeds from the IPO and Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Partnering Transaction, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors, may, but are not obligated to, provide us with working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, we believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors, to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Partnering Transaction or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will use these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Partnering Transaction candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Partnering Transaction.
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, finance lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
On May 28, 2021, we entered into a services agreement that provided that, commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the NYSE through the earlier of consummation of the Partnering Transaction and our liquidation, we agreed to pay Post Holdings, Inc. (“Post”) $40,000 per month for office space and administrative and support services provided to members of our management team.
The underwriters are entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of $16,775,000, of which $6,100,000 was paid at the closing of the IPO and $10,675,000 was deferred. The deferred underwriting commissions will be paid to the underwriters upon the consummation of the Partnering Transaction subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Derivative Financial Instruments
We account for our warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be
recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify our warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. The Public Warrants were initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation at their original issuance and subsequently measured using their quoted market price once they became actively traded on the NYSE during the third quarter of fiscal 2021. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was determined using a Black-Scholes Pricing Model using observable and unobservable market data as the significant inputs (risk free rate, dividend yield and volatility).
Series A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Series A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”). Conditionally redeemable Series A common stock (including shares of Series A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Series A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Series A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 34,500,000 shares of Series A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of stockholders’ equity on our Balance Sheet.
Net Earnings (Loss) per Share
Basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share of Series A common stock subject to possible redemption (the “redeemable common stock”) and the Series A common stock and Series F common stock not subject to possible redemption (collectively, the “non-redeemable common stock”) are presented separately under the two-class method. Basic earnings (loss) per share is based on the average number of shares outstanding during the periods presented for the redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock. Net earnings is allocated between the redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock based on the weighted-average shares outstanding during the periods presented. The redeemable common stock is measured at its redemption value each period. As allowed for within ASC 480, we have made an election to treat the portion of the remeasurement adjustment that exceeds fair value as an adjustment to income available to holders of shares of redeemable common stock and to income available to holders of shares of non-redeemable common stock for basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share. Diluted earnings (loss) per share is based on the average number of shares of redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock used for the basic earnings per share calculation, adjusted for the dilutive effect of warrants, if any, using the “treasury stock” method. In addition, net earnings (loss) for diluted earnings per share is adjusted for the after-tax impact of changes to the fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, to the extent it is dilutive. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the IPO and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate 11,863,333 shares of Series A common stock in the calculation of diluted earnings (loss) per share, since the exercise of the warrants into shares of Series A common stock is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. See Note 6 within “Notes to Financial Statements” for the calculation of basic and diluted earnings (loss) per share of redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock.
RECENTLY ISSUED AND ADOPTED ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
See Note 3 within “Notes to Financial Statements” for a discussion regarding recently issued and adopted accounting standards.