Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Investors should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the section titled “Selected Consolidated Financial Data” and the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in the section titled” Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See also the section titled “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this report. Our fiscal year end is the first Sunday after January 30.
Overview
Data is foundational to our customers’ digital transformation, and we are focused on delivering innovative and disruptive data storage technologies, products and services that enable customers to maximize the value of their data.
We are a global leader in data storage and management with a mission to redefine the storage experience by simplifying how people consume and interact with data. Our vision integrates our foundation of simplicity and reliability with three major market trends that are impacting all organizations large and small: (1) adoption of the cloud operating model everywhere; (2) the increase of modern cloud-native applications; and (3) the shift to modernizing today’s data infrastructure with all-flash.
Our products and subscription services support a wide range of structured and unstructured data, at scale and across any data workloads in hybrid and public cloud environments, and include mission-critical production, test and development, analytics, disaster recovery, and backup and recovery.
COVID-19, Supply Chain and Inflation
We continue to actively monitor, evaluate and respond to developments relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. During fiscal 2022, our operating margin benefited, in part from reduced travel, limited physical marketing events, and slower hiring while we navigated through the various challenges that arose from COVID-19 restrictions.
We expect our operating expenses will increase in fiscal 2023 as a result of business operations beginning to normalize from COVID-19, and due to the overall effects of inflation. Expected increases in operating expenses include higher wages and personnel related costs, costs impacting our supply chain such as material and logistics costs, and increased travel.
Global supply chain disruptions and the higher inflationary environment remain unpredictable and our past results may not be indicative of future performance. See "Risk Factors" in Part I, Item 1A. for additional details.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue primarily from the sale of our storage infrastructure products, FlashArray and FlashBlade, and subscription services which include our Evergreen Storage subscription, our unified subscription that includes Pure as-a-Service and Cloud Block Store, and Portworx. Subscription services revenue also include our professional services offerings such as installation and implementation consulting services.
Provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we typically recognize product revenue upon transfer of control to our customers and the satisfaction of our performance obligations. Products are typically shipped directly by us to customers, and our channel partners generally do not stock our inventory. We expect our product revenue may vary from period to period based on, among other things, the timing and size of orders and delivery of products and the impact of significant transactions.
We generally recognize revenue from subscription services ratably over the contractual service period and professional services as delivered. We expect our subscription services revenue to increase and continue to grow faster than our product revenue as more customers choose to consume our storage solutions as a service and our existing subscription customers renew and expand their consumption and service levels.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of costs paid to our third-party contract manufacturers, which includes the costs of our raw material components, and personnel costs associated with our supply chain operations. Personnel costs consist of salaries, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense. Our cost of product revenue also includes allocated overhead costs, inventory write-offs, amortization of intangible assets pertaining to developed technology, and freight. Allocated overhead costs consist of certain employee benefits and facilities-related costs. We expect our cost of product revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our product revenue increases.
Cost of subscription services revenue primarily consists of personnel costs associated with delivering our subscription and professional services, part replacements, allocated overhead costs and depreciation of infrastructure used to deliver our subscription services. We expect our cost of subscription services revenue to increase in absolute dollars, as our subscription services revenue increases.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses. Salaries and personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, are the most significant component of each category of operating expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs for employee benefits and facilities-related costs.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, prototype expenses, depreciation associated with assets acquired for research and development, data center and cloud services costs, third-party engineering and contractor support costs, as well as allocated overhead. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars and it may slightly decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses, sales commissions, marketing programs, travel and entertainment expenses as well as allocated overhead. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, corporate communications and brand-building activities. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars and it may slightly decrease as a percentage of revenue as we continue to realize efficiencies from scaling our business.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and related expenses for administrative functions including finance, legal, human resources, IT and fees for third-party professional services as well as amortization of intangible assets pertaining to defensive technology patents and allocated overhead. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income related to cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, interest expense related to our debt and gains (losses) from foreign currency transactions.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and state income taxes in the United States. We have recorded no U.S. federal current income tax and provided a full valuation allowance for U.S. deferred tax assets, which includes net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits related primarily to research and development. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future as it is more likely than not that the assets will not be realized based on our history of losses.
Results of Operations
Basis of Presentation
We operate using a 52/53 week fiscal year ending on the first Sunday after January 30. Fiscal 2020 and 2021 were both 52-week years that ended on February 2, 2020 and January 31, 2021, respectively. Fiscal 2022 was a 53-week year that ended on February 6, 2022. Unless otherwise stated, all dates refer to our fiscal years.
Year Over Year Comparisons
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue (in thousands):
Revenue
Total revenue increased in fiscal 2022 by $496.7 million, or 29%, compared to fiscal 2021, driven by sales to new and existing enterprise, commercial and public sector customers, with particular strength in the United States, across our entire product and solutions portfolio and key geographies. The increase in product revenue during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was driven by increased sales from our entire portfolio of FlashArray and FlashBlade solutions, including sales of FlashArray//C to a large hyperscaler customer, and repeat sales to existing customers. The increase in subscription services revenue was largely driven by increases in sales of both our Evergreen Storage subscription services, and our unified subscription that includes PaaS and Cloud Block Store, as well as increased Portworx revenue.
Total revenue increased in fiscal 2021 by $40.7 million, or 2%, compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in product revenue during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was largely driven by headwinds caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, despite sales growth from our FlashBlade and FlashArray//C offerings and purchases from new customers. The increase in subscription services revenue was primarily driven by increases in sales of our Evergreen Storage subscription services, and our unified subscription that includes PaaS and Cloud Block Store, as well as increased recognition of deferred subscription services revenue contracts.
During fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, total revenue in the United States grew by 32% from $1.2 billion to $1.6 billion and total rest of the world revenue grew by 23% from $488.8 million to $600.8 million. During fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, total revenue in the United States grew slightly by 1% to $1.2 billion and total rest of the world revenue grew by 7% from $458.5 million to $488.8 million.
Subscription Annual Recurring Revenue (ARR)
We use Subscription ARR as a key business metric to evaluate the performance of our subscription services. Subscription ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, deferred revenue and remaining performance obligations and is not intended as a substitute for any of these items.
Subscription ARR is calculated as the total annualized contract value of all active customer subscription agreements, including our Evergreen Storage subscription contracts, at the end of the fiscal quarter, plus on-demand revenue during the current fiscal quarter ended multiplied by four. Contract values are established prior to any adjustments made in accordance with ASC 606.
The following table sets forth our Subscription ARR for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue primarily consists of amounts that have been invoiced but have not yet been recognized as revenue including performance obligations pertaining to subscription services. The current portion of deferred revenue represents the amounts that are expected to be recognized as revenue within one year of the consolidated balance sheet dates.
Changes in total deferred revenue during the periods presented are as follows (in thousands):
Revenue recognized during fiscal 2021 and 2022 from deferred revenue at the beginning of each respective period was $353.1 million and $442.7 million.
Remaining Performance Obligations
Total remaining performance obligations (RPO) which is total contracted but not recognized revenue was $1.4 billion at the end of fiscal 2022. RPO consists of both deferred revenue and non-cancelable amounts that are expected to be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. Product orders are generally cancelable until delivery has occurred, and as such unfulfilled product orders are excluded from RPO. Cancelable orders will fluctuate depending on numerous factors and have increased year over year. Of the $1.4 billion contracted but not recognized revenue at the end of fiscal 2022, we expect to recognize approximately 47% over the next 12 months, and the remainder thereafter. RPO is expected to increase as our subscription services business grows over time.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $173.1 million, or 32%, for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase in product cost of revenue was primarily attributable to increased sales. Other factors include higher component and logistics costs due to supply chain environment, and an increase in the amortization of acquired intangible assets. The increase in subscription services cost of revenue was primarily attributable to supporting our growing installed base including PaaS and Portworx.
The decline in product gross margin for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was impacted by the sale of FlashArray//C to a larger hyperscaler customer, and to a lesser extent higher component and logistics costs due to supply chain environment, as well as increased sales of FlashArray//C and FlashBlade products which generally have a modestly lower gross margin compared to our other FlashArray products. The increase in subscription services gross margin for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was driven by increased sales of unified subscription services, PaaS and Cloud Block Store, higher renewals in Evergreen Storage subscriptions, and increasing economies of scale.
Cost of revenue increased by $25.4 million, or 5%, for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The decrease in product cost of revenue was primarily attributable to the corresponding decline in product revenue due to headwinds caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by increased costs in our manufacturing operations associated with increased headcount and an increase in the amortization of acquired intangible assets. The increase in subscription services cost of revenue was primarily attributable to higher costs in our customer support organization.
The decline in product gross margin for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily attributable to lower component costs for certain key raw materials that we use for our solutions and increased sales of larger FlashArray systems in fiscal 2021. The increase in subscription services gross margin for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was driven by increased renewals in Evergreen Storage subscriptions and increased sales of unified subscription services, PaaS and Cloud Block Store.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $101.5 million, or 21%, during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily driven by a $71.0 million increase in employee compensation and related costs, which included a $25.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $14.2 million increase in data center and cloud services costs and a $9.3 million increase in depreciation expense from property and equipment due, in part, to revising our estimated useful lives of test equipment and certain computer equipment and software during the first quarter of fiscal 2021.
Research and development expense increased by $46.8 million, or 11%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, as we continued to innovate and develop technologies to both enhance and expand our solution portfolio. The increase was primarily driven by a $56.5 million increase in employee compensation and related costs, including a $9.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, and a $10.1 million increase in data center and cloud services costs. These increases were partially offset by a $22.4 million decrease in depreciation expense primarily due to revising our estimated useful lives of test equipment and certain computer equipment and software during fiscal 2021.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $83.0 million, or 12%, during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to an increase of $62.7 million in employee compensation and related costs, which included a $24.7 million increase in sales commission expense, and a $14.3 million increase in marketing and travel spend due to the gradual reduction in COVID-19 restrictions.
Sales and marketing expense decreased by $12.0 million, or 2%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020, primarily due to a decrease of $63.0 million in marketing and travel spend as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by an increase of $37.7 million in employee compensation and related costs as we continue to invest in certain areas within sales and marketing and expand our international presence, including an $8.2 million increase in sales commission expense. The remainder of the increase was primarily attributable to a $7.2 million increase in outside services expenses and a $4.2 million increase in subscription costs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $7.5 million, or 4%, during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $16.4 million in employee compensation and related costs driven by increased headcount, partially offset by a $8.5 million decrease in office and facilities related costs primarily attributable to the exit of certain facilities in fiscal 2021.
General and administrative expense increased by $19.3 million, or 12%, during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase of $21.4 million in employee compensation and related costs, including a $7.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related, in part, to certain performance restricted stock awards, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in office and facilities related costs.
Restructuring and Other
During fiscal 2021, we incurred incremental costs of $8.9 million directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic. These costs primarily included the write-off of marketing commitments no longer deemed to have value for the remainder of the fiscal year and estimated non-recoverable costs for internal events that could not be held. In addition, we expensed $9.9 million relating to the cease use of certain lease facilities and recognized $12.2 million in one-time involuntary termination benefit costs related to workforce realignment plans.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net decreased during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily attributable to an increase in net foreign exchange losses as the U.S. dollar strengthened relative to certain foreign currencies, a decrease in interest income resulting from a lower interest rate environment, and higher interest expense due to borrowings under our revolving credit facility. The outstanding balance of the revolver was paid in the first quarter of fiscal 2023.
Other income (expense), net decreased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily attributable to a decrease in interest income of $9.8 million from our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities resulting from a lower interest rate environment and, to a lesser extent, higher interest expense due to borrowings under our revolving credit facility, partially offset by a $6.0 million reduction in net foreign exchange losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes increased during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily attributable to an increase in foreign income taxes.
Provision for income taxes increased during fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 primarily attributable to an increase in foreign income taxes and the release of the valuation allowance related to unrealized gains on available-for-sale securities from fiscal 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At the end of fiscal 2022, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $1.4 billion. Our cash and cash equivalents primarily consist of bank deposits and money market accounts. Our marketable securities generally consist of highly rated debt instruments of the U.S. government and its agencies, debt instruments of highly rated corporations, debt instruments issued by foreign governments, asset-backed securities, and municipal bonds.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. The following table sets forth our non-cancelable contractual obligations and commitments associated with agreements that are enforceable and legally binding at the end of fiscal 2022. Obligations under contracts that we can cancel without a significant penalty are not included.
_________________________________
(1) Consists of (i) principal and interest payments on our convertible senior notes due 2023, (ii) principal, interest, and unused commitment fees on our August 2020 revolving credit facility based on debt outstanding and rates in effect at February 6, 2022, and (iii) principal and interest on a five year loan.
(2) Represents aggregate future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating and finance leases.
(3) Includes primarily non-cancelable inventory purchase commitments, software service and sponsorship contracts, and hosting arrangements. Purchase orders are not included as they represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our sales growth, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of international operation activities, the addition or closure of office space, the timing of new product introductions and the continuing market acceptance of our products and services, the volume and timing of our share repurchases, and the timing and settlement election of the Notes. The downstream effects of the pandemic and global supply chain disruptions have also resulted in higher inflation which we believe will continue to persist for some time and may impact our cash expenditures for employee compensation and other operating expenses. We may continue to enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may seek additional equity or debt financing in the future.
Convertible Senior Notes
In April 2018, we issued $575.0 million of 0.125% convertible senior notes due 2023 (the Notes), in a private placement and received proceeds of $562.1 million, after deducting the underwriters' discounts and commissions. The Notes are unsecured obligations that do not contain any financial covenants or restrictions on the payments of dividends, the incurrence of indebtedness, or the issuance or repurchase of securities by us or any of our subsidiaries. The Notes mature on April 15, 2023 unless repurchased or redeemed by us or converted in accordance with their terms prior to the maturity date. The Notes are convertible for up to 21,884,155 shares of our common stock at an initial conversion rate of approximately 38.0594 shares of common stock per $1,000 principal amount, which is equal to an initial conversion price of approximately $26.27 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment.
Holders may surrender their Notes for conversion at their option at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding October 15, 2022, only under the following circumstances: (i) during any fiscal quarter if the last reported sales price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price for the Notes on each applicable trading day, (ii) during the five business day period after any five consecutive trading day period (the measurement period), in which the trading price per $1,000 principal amount of Notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate for the Notes on each such trading day, (iii) if we call any or all of the Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date, or (iv) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. On or after October 15, 2022 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert all or any portion of their Notes at any time regardless of the foregoing circumstances. Upon conversion, holders will receive cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. We currently intend to settle the principal of the Notes in cash.
In connection with the offering of the Notes, we entered into capped call transactions with certain financial institutions that provide us with the option to purchase up to a total of 21,884,155 shares of our common stock to offset the dilution and/or any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of the Notes upon conversion of the Notes at maturity with such offset subject to a cap of $39.66 per share. However, for conversions prior to maturity, the capped call transactions would be settled at their fair value, which may not completely offset, and may be substantially less than, the value of the consideration in excess of the principal amount of the Notes delivered upon such conversion. See further discussion about our Notes in Note 7 in Part II, Item 8 of this report.
Revolving Credit Facility
In August 2020, we entered into a Credit Agreement with a consortium of financial institutions and lenders that provides for a five-year, senior secured revolving credit facility of $300.0 million (Credit Facility). Proceeds from the Credit Facility may be used for general corporate purposes and working capital. The Credit Facility expires, absent default or early termination by us, on the earlier of (i) August 24, 2025 or (ii) 91 days prior to the stated maturity of the convertible senior notes unless, on such date and each subsequent day until the convertible senior notes are paid in full, the sum of our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and the aggregate unused commitments then available to us exceed $625.0 million. The annual interest rates applicable to loans under the Credit Facility are, at our option, equal to either a base rate plus a margin ranging from 0.50% to 1.25% or LIBOR (based on one, three, or six-month interest periods), subject to a floor of 0%, plus a margin ranging from 1.50% to 2.25%. Interest on revolving loans is payable quarterly in arrears with respect to loans based on the base rate and at the end of an interest period in the case of loans based on LIBOR (or at each three-month interval, if the interest period is longer than three months). We are also required to pay a commitment fee on the unused portion of the commitments ranging from 0.25% to 0.40% per annum, payable quarterly in arrears that commenced on September 30, 2020. Loans under the Credit Facility are collateralized by substantially all of our assets and subject to certain restrictions and two financial ratios measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter: a Consolidated Leverage Ratio not to exceed 4.5:1 and an Interest Coverage Ratio not to be less than 3:1.
We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility at the end of fiscal 2022 and in February 2022, we repaid, in full, the $250.0 million outstanding under the Credit Facility.
Letters of Credit
At the end of fiscal 2021 and 2022, we had outstanding letters of credit in the aggregate amount of $6.7 million in connection with our facility leases. The letters of credit are collateralized by restricted cash and mature on various dates through August 2029.
Share Repurchase Program
In August 2019, our board of directors approved a stock repurchase program to repurchase up to $150.0 million of our common stock and in February 2021, an additional $200.0 million of our common stock, both of which were completed by the end of fiscal 2022. In March 2022, our board of directors authorized the repurchase of up to an additional $250.0 million of our common stock. The authorization allows us to repurchase shares of our common stock opportunistically and will be funded from available working capital. Repurchases may be made at management’s discretion from time to time on the open market through privately negotiated transactions, transactions structured through investment banking institutions, block purchase techniques, 10b5-1 trading plans, or a combination of the foregoing. The share repurchase program does not obligate us to acquire any of our common stock, has no end date, and may be suspended or discontinued by us at any time without prior notice. During fiscal 2021, we repurchased and retired 9,526,556 shares of common stock at an average purchase price of $14.17 per share for an aggregate repurchase price of $135.0 million. During fiscal 2022, we repurchased and retired 8,489,168 shares of common stock at an average purchase price of $23.56 per share for an aggregate repurchase price of $200.0 million.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by cash collections from sales of our product and subscription services and improved operating leverage, partially offset by payments to our contract manufacturers, employee compensation, and general corporate operating expenditures. Net cash provided by operating activities substantially increased year-over-year primarily due to increased sales of our product and subscription services, including improved timing of cash collections, partially offset by the timing of vendor payments and full payment of the deferred employer portion of social security payroll tax under the CARES Act during fiscal 2022.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by cash collections from sales of our product and subscription services including certain invoices with extended payment terms and deferral of the employer portion of social security payroll tax under the CARES Act, partially offset by payments to our contract manufacturers, employee compensation, and general corporate operating expenditures.
Net cash provided by operating activities during fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by cash collections related to the sales of our product and subscription services, partially offset by payments to our contract manufacturers, employee compensation, and general corporate operating expenditures.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2022 of $153.3 million was driven by capital expenditures of $102.3 million, and net purchases of marketable securities of $50.4 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2021 of $418.1 million was driven by net cash paid for our acquisition of Portworx of $339.6 million in October 2020, and capital expenditures of $95.0 million, partially offset by net sales of marketable securities of $21.5 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2020 of $324.7 million resulted from net purchases of marketable securities of $176.3 million, capital expenditures of $87.8 million, net cash paid for acquisitions of $51.6 million, and intangible assets acquired of $9.0 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities of $127.8 million during fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by share repurchases of $200.2 million, and $10.8 million in tax withholdings on vesting of equity awards, partially offset by $48.7 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $36.6 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan (ESPP).
Net cash provided by financing activities of $200.2 million during fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by $251.9 million of net proceeds from borrowings primarily under our revolving credit facility, $59.4 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $32.4 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock under our ESPP, partially offset by share repurchases of $135.2 million and $8.3 million in tax withholdings on vesting of equity awards.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $49.2 million during fiscal 2020 was due to $43.3 million of proceeds from issuance of common stock under our ESPP and $42.9 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by repurchases of our common stock for $15.0 million under the share repurchase program, the repayment of $11.6 million of debt assumed in connection with our acquisition of Compuverde, and $10.4 million in tax withholdings on vesting of restricted stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Through the end of fiscal 2022, we did not have any relationships with any entities or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other purposes.
Critical Accounting Policy and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue primarily from two sources: (1) product revenue which includes the sale of integrated storage hardware and embedded operating system software and (2) subscription services revenue which includes Evergreen Storage subscriptions, our unified subscription that includes Pure as-a-Service and Cloud Block Store, and Portworx. Subscription services revenue also include our professional services offerings such as installation and implementation consulting services.
We typically recognize product revenue upon transfer of control to our customers. Products are typically shipped directly by us to customers.
Our subscription services revenue is derived from the services we perform in connection with the sale of subscription services and is recognized ratably over the contractual term, which generally ranges from one to six years. The majority of our product solutions are sold with an Evergreen Storage subscription service agreement, which typically commences upon transfer of control of the corresponding products to our customers. Costs for subscription services are expensed when incurred. In addition, our Evergreen Storage subscription provides our customers with a new controller based upon certain contractual terms. The new controller represents a separate performance obligation that is included within the Evergreen Storage subscription service agreement and the allocated revenue is recognized upon shipment of the controller.
Our subscription services also include the right to receive unspecified software updates and upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis, software bug fixes, replacement parts and other services related to the underlying infrastructure, as well as access to our cloud-based management and support platform. We also sell professional services such as installation and implementation consulting services and the related revenue is recognized as services are performed.
We recognize revenue upon the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. This is achieved through applying the following five-step approach:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
•Determination of the transaction price
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
When applying this five-step approach, we apply judgment in determining the customer's ability and intention to pay, which is based on a variety of factors including the customer's historical payment experience and/or published credit and financial information pertaining to the customer. To the extent a customer contract includes multiple promised goods or services, we determine whether promised goods or services should be accounted for as a separate performance obligation. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration which we will be entitled to in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer. We allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation for contracts that contain multiple performance obligations based on a relative standalone selling price (SSP). SSP is determined based on the price at which the performance obligation is sold separately, or if not observable through past transactions, is estimated taking into account available information such as market conditions and internally approved pricing guidelines related to performance obligations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncement
Refer to “Recent Accounting Pronouncement” in Note 2 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.