Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes the following sections:
•
Overview that discusses our business and some of the relevant trends.
•
Results of Operations that includes a detailed discussion of our revenue and expenses.
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources which discusses key aspects of our statements of cash flows, changes in our financial position and our financial commitments.
Overview
Plus Therapeutics, Inc. is a U.S. pharmaceutical company developing innovative, targeted radiotherapeutics for adults and children with rare and difficult-to-treat cancers. Our novel radioactive drug formulations and therapeutic candidates are designed to deliver safe and effective doses of radiation to tumors. To achieve this, we have developed innovative approaches to drug formulation, including encapsulating radionuclides such as Rhenium isotopes with nanoliposomes and microspheres. Our formulations are intended to achieve elevated patient absorbed radiation doses and extended retention times such that the clearance of the isotope occurs after significant radiation decay, which will contribute and provide less normal tissue/organ exposure and improved safety margins.
Traditional approaches to radiation therapy for cancer such as external beam radiation have many disadvantages including continuous treatment for 4-6 weeks (which is onerous for patients), that the radiation damages healthy cells and tissue, and that the amount of radiation delivered is very limited and, therefore, is frequently inadequate to fully destroy the cancer.
Our targeted radiotherapeutic platform and unique investigational drugs have the potential to overcome these disadvantages by directing higher, more powerful radiation doses at the tumor-and only the tumor-potentially in a single treatment. By minimizing radiation exposure to healthy tissues while simultaneously maximizing efficacy, we hope to reduce the toxicity of radiation for patients, improving their quality and life expectancy. Our radiotherapeutic platform, combined with advances in surgery, nuclear medicine, interventional radiology, and radiation oncology, affords us the opportunity to target a broad variety of cancer types.
Our lead radiotherapeutic candidate, Rhenium-186 NanoLiposome (“186RNL”) is designed specifically to target central nervous system (CNS) cancers including recurrent glioblastoma, leptomeningeal metastases, and pediatric brain cancers by direct localized delivery utilizing approved standard-of-care tissue access such conduction enhanced delivery (“CED”) and intraventricular brain catheters (Ommaya reservoir). Our recently acquired radiotherapeutic candidate, Rhenium-188 NanoLiposome Biodegradable Alginate Microsphere (“188RNL-BAM”) is designed to treat many solid organ cancers including primary and secondary liver cancers.
Our headquarters and manufacturing facilities are Texas are in proximity to world-class cancer institutions and researchers. Our dedicated team of engineers, physicians, scientists, and other professionals are committed to advancing our targeted radiotherapeutic technology for the benefit of cancer patients and healthcare providers worldwide and our current pipeline is focused on treating rare and difficult-to-treat cancers with significant unmet medical needs.
Pipeline
Our most advanced investigational drug, 186RNL, is a patented radiotherapy potentially useful for patients with central nervous system (CNS) and other cancers. Preclinical study data describing the use of 186RNL for several cancer targets have been published in peer-reviewed journals. Besides glioblastoma, leptomeningeal metastases, and pediatric brain cancer, 186RNL has been reported to have potential applications for head and neck cancer, ovarian cancer, breast cancer and peritoneal metastases.
The 186RNL technology was part of a licensed radiotherapeutic portfolio that we acquired from NanoTx, Corp. (“NanoTx”) on May 7, 2020. The licensed radiotherapeutic has been evaluated in preclinical studies for several cancer targets and we have an active $3.0 million award from U.S. National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute which will provide financial support for the continued clinical development of 186RNL for recurrent glioblastoma through the completion of a Phase 2 clinical trial including enrollment of up to 55 patients. Thus far, 23 patients have been treated in the Phase 1 clinical trial and the Phase 2 clinical trial has not yet been initiated.
We are currently conducting the ReSPECT-GBM and ReSPECT-LM clinical trials for recurrent glioblastoma (GBM) and leptomeningeal metastases (LM), respectively. In addition, we anticipate seeking FDA IND approval for the ReSPECT-PBC clinical trial for pediatric brain cancer (PBC) in late 2022 or early 2023.
186RNL versus External Beam Radiation Therapy
186RNL is a novel injectable radiotherapy designed to deliver targeted, high dose radiation directly into glioblastoma tumors in a safe, effective, and convenient manner that may ultimately prolong patient survival. 186RNL is composed of the radionuclide Rhenium-186 and a nanoliposomal carrier, and is infused in a highly targeted fashion, directly into the tumor via precision brain mapping and convection enhanced delivery (CED). Potential benefits of 186RNL compared to standard external beam radiotherapy or EBRT include:
•The 186RNL radiation dose delivered to patients may be up to 20 times greater than what is possible with commonly used external beam radiation therapy (EBRT).
•186RNL can be visualized in real-time during administration, possibly giving clinicians better control of radiation dosing and distribution.
•186RNL potentially more effectively treats the bulk tumor and microscopic disease that has already invaded healthy tissue.
•186RNL is infused directly into the targeted tumor, bypassing the blood brain barrier, which reduces radiation exposure to healthy cells, in contrast to EBRT which passes through normal tissue to reach the tumor, continuing its path through the tumor, hence being less targeted and selective.
•186RNL is given during a single, short, in-patient hospital visit, and is available in all hospitals with nuclear medicine and neurosurgery, while EBRT requires out-patient visits 5 days a week for approximately 4-6 weeks.
ReSPECT-GBM Trial for Recurrent GBM
Glioblastoma is the most common, complex, and aggressive primary brain cancer in adults. Annually in the U.S., there are 12,900 glioblastoma (GBM) cases diagnosed and approximately 10,000 patients succumb to the disease each year. The average life expectancy with primary glioblastoma is less than 24 months, with a one-year survival rate of 40.8% and a five-year survival rate of only 6.8%. GBM often causes and presents with headaches, seizures, vision changes and other significant neurological complications. Despite the best available medical treatments to eliminate the initial brain tumor, some microscopic disease frequently remains, with tumor regrowth within months. Approximately 90% or more of patients with primary GBM experience tumor recurrence. Complete surgical removal of GBM is not typically possible and GBM is often resistant or quickly develops resistance to most available therapies. Even today, the treatment of GBM remains a significant challenge and it has been nearly a decade since the FDA approved a new therapy for this disease.
For recurrent GBM, there are few currently approved treatments that in the aggregate, provide only marginal survival benefit. Furthermore, these therapies are associated with significant side effects, which limit dosing and prolonged use.
While EBRT has been shown to be safe and effective in many malignancies including glioblastoma but the maximum possible administered dose is limited by toxicity to the normal tissues surrounding the malignancy. In contrast, targeted radiopharmaceuticals that precisely deliver radiation in the form of beta particles such as Iodine-131 for thyroid cancer, are known to be very safe and effective and minimize exposure to normal cells and tissues.
Interim results from our ongoing Phase 1/2a ReSPECT-GBM trial, suggest beta particle energy from our lead investigational drug 186RNL may also have utility in treating glioblastoma and other malignancies. More specifically, the preliminary data from ReSPECT-GBM indicates that radiation, in the form of high energy beta particles or electrons, can be effective against glioblastoma. Thus far, we have been able to deliver up to 740 Gy of absorbed radiation to tumor issue without significant or dose limiting toxicities. In comparison, current EBRT protocols for recurrent glioblastoma typically recommend a total maximum dose of about 35 Gy.
In September 2020, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) granted both Orphan Drug designation and Fast Track designations to 186RNL for the treatment of patients with glioblastoma.
186RNL is presently under clinical investigation in a multicenter, sequential cohort, open-label, volume and dose escalation study of the safety, tolerability, and distribution of 186RNL given by CED to patients with recurrent or progressive malignant glioma after standard surgical, radiation, and/or chemotherapy treatment (NCT01906385). The study uses a modified Fibonacci dose escalation, followed by a planned expansion at the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) / maximum feasible dose (MFD) to determine efficacy. The trial is funded through Phase 2 in large part by a NIH/NCI grant. The planned enrollment in the NIH/NCI grant is 21 patients in the dose-escalation part of the study and 34 patients in the expansion cohort. The study is in its 8th dosing administration cohort and is under development and internal review to potentially advance to a Phase 2 or registration trial.
At the Society for Neuro-Oncology Annual Meeting in November 2021, Plus presented patient data which at that time included the results for 22 patients treated in the ReSPECT trial. The trial, thus far, has shown that CED in recurrent GBM patients is
feasible. Median absorbed dose to the tumor volume across all subjects in the first eight cohorts (n=22) was 267.5 Gy (range 8.9-740). In a subset of patients in whom tumor coverage was greater than or equal to 75%, the median absorbed dose was 405 Gy (range 146-593). By contrast, the median absorbed doses to the whole brain and the total body across all subjects were 0.55 Gy (range 0.001-2.728) and 0.09 Gy (range 0.001-0.182), respectively. Small doses, as delivered to the body, are typically well-tolerated. Based on observed and reported patient protocol activity and all available adverse event (AE) data, 186RNL has been well-tolerated. No AEs with an outcome of death or study drug-related serious AEs have been reported. Furthermore, no patient was discontinued from the study because of an AE. All AEs have been mild or moderate (Grade 1 or 2) in intensity, except for one case of Grade 3 vasogenic edema, which was considered by the investigator to be unrelated to the study drug. AEs considered by the investigator to be at least possibly related to 186RNL have included Grade 1 to 2 skin and soft tissue infection, intermittent cephalgia, neck and jaw pain, nausea with or without vomiting, constipation, increased lethargy, difficulty walking (gait disturbance), worsening double vision, and dysuria. Scalp discomfort and tenderness related to the surgical procedure has also been reported.
In the 22 subjects with recurrent GBM receiving a single administration of 186RNL, the mean & median OS for all 22 patients as of November 2021 was 48.1 & 33.1 weeks, respectively, with 7 patients alive. In a subset of 13 patients receiving a presumed therapeutic absorbed radiation dose to the tumor (>100 Gy), the mean & median OS was 64.8 & 47.1 weeks, respectively, with 7 of 13 patients alive. In contrast, in 9 patients receiving a presumed sub-therapeutic absorbed radiation dose to the tumor (<100 Gy), the mean and median OS was 23.9 & 22.3 weeks, respectively. A Kaplan-Meier curve comparing patients with presumed therapeutic vs. sub-therapeutic radiation dose to the tumor showed a statistically significant difference between the groups (p=.0002). It is hypothesized that targeted infusion of 186RNL into the tumor by CED, bypassing the blood-brain barrier and normal brain and external tissues, significantly spares normal tissues from radiation exposure and potential toxicity and concentrates radiation to the tumor and surrounding region of interest.
ReSPECT-LM Clinical Trial for Leptomeningeal Metastases
Leptomeningeal Metastases or LM is a rare complication of cancer in which the disease spreads to the membranes (meninges) surrounding the brain and spinal cord. The incidence of LM is growing and occurs in approximately 5% of people with late-stage cancer, or 110,000 people in the U.S. each year. It is highly lethal with an average 1-year survival of just 7%. LM occurs with cancers that are most likely to spread to the central nervous system. The most common cancers to spread to the leptomeninges are breast cancer, lung cancer, melanoma and gastrointestinal cancers---though most solid tumors have the potential for LM spread.
The ReSPECT-LM Phase 1 clinical trial (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT05034497) is predicated in part upon preclinical studies in which tolerance to doses of 186RNL as high as 1,075 Gy was shown in animal models with LM without significant observed toxicity. Furthermore, treatment led to marked reduction in tumor burden in both C6 and MDA-231 LM models.
In October 2021, the FDA announced clearance of our Investigational New Drug (IND) application for 186RNL for the treatment of LM. Subsequently, in November 2021, the FDA granted a Fast Track designation for 186RNL for the treatment of leptomeningeal metastases. The Company initiated the trial and began screening patients for the ReSPECT-LM Phase 1 clinical trial in Q4 2021.
The ReSPECT-LM multi-center, sequential cohort, open-label, dose escalation study is evaluating the safety, tolerability, and distribution of 186RNL via intrathecal infusion to the ventricle of patients with LM after standard surgical, radiation, and/or chemotherapy treatment. The primary endpoint of the study is the incidence and severity of adverse events and dose limiting toxicities.
ReSPECT-PBC Clinical Trial for Pediatric Brain Cancer
In August 2021, we announced plans for treating pediatric brain cancer at the 2021 American Association of Neurological Surgeons (AANS) Annual Scientific Meeting. In July 2021, we reported that we had received FDA feedback pertaining to a pre-IND meeting briefing package in which the FDA stated that we are not required to perform any additional preclinical or toxicology studies.
Currently, the Company plans to investigate the use of 186RNL in 2 pediatric bran cancers. High-grade glioma (HGG) is a rare, fast-growing CNS tumor that forms in glial cells of the brain and spinal cord. It can be found almost anywhere within the CNS, but is most commonly within the supratentorium in children ages 15-19. HGG tumors in children act differently from those in adults, causing headaches, seizures, and difficulty achieving developmental milestones depending on the tumor location. Approximately 360-400 children are diagnosed with HGG annually in North America and the 5-year survival rate is approximately 20%. In contrast to HGG, ependymoma is a rare, slow- or fast-growing (depending on the grade) primary CNS tumor that forms in ependymal cells in the brain and spinal cord-and may spread throughout the CNS, though infrequently. All ependymomas can recur, but patients are often tumor-free for years before testing shows tumor regrowth, either at the initial tumor site or elsewhere within the CNS. Symptoms
depend on tumor location and size, usually including irritability, sleeplessness, vomiting, nausea, back pain, arm/leg weakness, and headaches.
Approximately 250 children are diagnosed with ependymoma annually in the U.S. while 71% of children with Grade II and 57% with Grade III survive 5 years from diagnosis.
Based on the aggregate preclinical and clinical work completed to date in adult recurrent glioblastoma, we hypothesized that 186RNL may offer potential clinical benefit for PBCs, such as high-grade glioma and ependymoma. We intend to submit an IND application to the FDA for 186RNL for the treatment of PBC (high-grade glioma and ependymoma) in late 2022 or early 2023.
Rhenium-188 NanoLiposome Biodegradable Alginate Microsphere Technology
In January 2022, we announced that we licensed Biodegradable Alginate Microsphere (BAM) patents and technology from The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio (“UT Health Science Center at San Antonio”) to expand our tumor targeting capabilities and precision radiotherapeutics pipeline. We intend to combine our Rhenium NanoLiposome technology with the BAM technology to create a novel radioembolization technology. Initially, we intend to utilize the Rhenium-188 isotope, 188RNL-BAM foer the intra-arterial embolization and local delivery of a high dose of targeted radiation for a variety of solid organ cancers such as hepatocellular cancer, hepatic metastases, pancreatic cancer and many others.
Preclinical data from an ex vivo embolization experiment in which Tc-BAM was intra-arterially delivered to a bovine kidney perfusion model was presented at the recent 2021 Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) Annual Scientific Meeting. The study concluded that the technology required for radiolabeling BAM could successfully deliver, embolize and retain radiation in the target organ. 188RNL-BAM is a preclinical investigational drug we intend to further develop and move into clinical trials. Specifically, in 2022, we intend to transfer the 188RNL-BAM technology from UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, fabricate and scale the drug product, and complete certain preclinical studies to support a future FDA IND submission. Our likely initial clinical target is liver cancer which is the 6th most common and 3rd deadliest cancer worldwide. It is a rare disease with increasing U.S. annual incidence (42,000) and deaths (30,000).
Recent Developments
UT Health Science Center San Antonio (UTHSA) License Agreement
On December 31, 2021, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with UT Health Science Center at San Antonio for the global rights to develop and commercialize Rhenium-188 NanoLiposome biodegradable alginate microspheres (188RNL-BAM). Under the license agreement with UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, we are required to use commercial reasonable efforts to develop the 188RNL-BAM product candidate acquired under the license agreement. Further, we are subject to future milestone, earn-out and other payments to UT Health Science Center at San Antonio all of which are tied to our commercialization and sale activities for product candidates.
Piramal Master Services Agreement
On January 8, 2021, we entered into a Master Services Agreement (the “MSA”) with Piramal Pharma Solutions, Inc. (“Piramal”), for Piramal to perform certain services related to the development, manufacture, and supply of our RNL-Liposome Intermediate Drug Product. The MSA includes the transfer of analytical methods, development of microbiological methods, process transfer and optimization, intermediate drug product manufacturing, and stability studies for us. The transfer will be performed at Piramal’s facility located in Lexington, Kentucky. The parties contemplate that the MSA will lead to clinical and commercial supply agreements between us and Piramal.
The MSA has a term of five years and will automatically renew for successive one-year terms unless either party notifies the other no later than six months prior to the original term or any additional terms of its intention to not renew the MSA. We have the right to terminate the MSA for convenience upon thirty days’ prior written notice. Either party may terminate the MSA upon an uncured material breach by the other party or upon the bankruptcy or insolvency of the other party.
Recent Financings
Refer to the “Liquidly and Capital Resources” section below for information on our recent financings.
Exercise of Warrants
In February 2021, certain warrant holders exercised warrants to purchase 896,500 shares of our common stock for total exercise proceeds of $2.0 million.
Results of Operations
Development revenue
We did not recognize any revenue or related costs during 2021. We recognized a total of $0.3 million in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as $0.3 million in qualified expenditures for those periods. Our Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (“BARDA”) contract was terminated in December 2019 and the contract close out process was completed during 2020.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses include costs associated with the design, development, testing, and enhancement of our product candidates, payment of regulatory fees, laboratory supplies, pre-clinical studies, and clinical studies.
The following table summarizes the components of our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The increase in research and development expenses of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 was due primarily to an increase in developments costs of 186RNL of $2.2 million as we ramp up to plan for the pivotal trial, an increase in personnel costs including recruiting expenses and share-based compensation of $0.3 million due to increased headcount and grants of share based awards, and an increase in other professional services of $0.1 million.
We expect aggregate research and development expenditures to increase in absolute dollars during 2022 due to the expected costs of development of the 186RNL™ therapy acquired from NanoTx and development expenses related to 188 RNL-BAM.
In process research and development acquired from UT Heather Science Center at San Antonio and NanoTx
In process research and development acquired from UT Heather Science Center at San Antonio in the amount of $250,000 represents the upfront cash payment. In process research and development acquired from NanoTx in the amount of $781,000 represents the upfront cash payment of $400,000 and fair value of 230,769 shares of common stock, with fair value of $1.65 per share, issued to NanoTx in accordance with the terms of the License Agreement.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses include costs for administrative personnel, legal and other professional expenses, and general corporate expenses. The following table summarizes the general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to an increase of share-based compensation expenses of $0.3 million as more share-based awards were granted during 2021 as well as increased grant date fair value of the awards, as compared with 2020.
We expect general and administrative expenditures to remain generally consistent in 2022 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2021, subject to litigation cost which is not predictable at this time.
Share-based compensation expenses
Share-based compensation expenses include charges related to options and restricted stock awards issued to employees, directors and non-employees. We measure stock-based compensation expenses based on the grant-date fair value of any awards granted to our employees. Such expense is recognized over the requisite service period.
The following table summarizes the components of our share-based compensation expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The increases in our share-based compensation was due to increases in grants of share-based options during 2021 as compared to 2020, as well as higher grant-date fair value of share-based awards during 2021 compared with 2020. Refer to Note 13 for weighted average assumptions used in valuation of our stock options as of the grant date.
Financing items
The following table summarizes interest income, interest expense, and other income and expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020 was primarily due to the repayments of debt principal of $0.3 million in 2021 and $5.3 million in 2020, respectively. The changes in fair value of our warrant liabilities are primarily due to reclassification of liability-classified warrants to equity during 2020 (see Note 12), as well as fluctuations in the valuation inputs for the warrants. See Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein for disclosure and discussion of our warrant liabilities.
We expect interest expense in 2022 to decrease as compared with 2021 due to scheduled debt principal repayments starting on November 1, 2021. As disclosed in Note 12 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein, in 2020 we entered into revised Series U warrant agreements with certain Series U warrant holders. The amended Series U warrants meet the requirements for equity classification under authoritative accounting guidance and are no longer subject to fair value accounting post amendment. The remaining Series U warrants accounted for as liabilities are immaterial.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Short-term and long-term liquidity
The following is a summary of our key liquidity measures at December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
For the periods presented, operating losses have been funded primarily from outside sources of invested capital in our common stock, proceeds raised from the Loan and Security Agreement. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $18.4 million at December 31, 2021 and the net proceeds of approximately $7.9 million received so far during 2022 from the issuance of
common stock will enable the Company to fund its current and planned operations for at least the next twelve months and beyond from the date these consolidated financial statements were issued.
We have had, and we will continue to have, an ongoing need to raise additional cash from outside sources to fund our future clinical development programs and other operations. Our inability to raise additional cash would have a material and adverse impact on operations and would cause us to default on our loan.
On January 14, 2022, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “2022 Distribution Agreement”) with Canaccord Genuity LLC (the “Agent”, or “Canaccord”), pursuant to which we may issue and sell, from time to time, shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $5,000,000 (the “Shares”), depending on market demand, with the Agent acting as an agent for sales. Sales of the Shares may be made by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), including, without limitation, sales made directly on or through the Nasdaq. As of the date of filing of this Form 10-K, we issued 1,000,000 shares under the 2022 Distribution Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $0.9 million.
On October 23, 2020, we entered into the 2020 Distribution Agreement with Canaccord, pursuant to which we could issue and sell, from time to time, our common stock in “at the market” offerings, depending on market demand, with Canaccord acting as an agent for sales. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 1,616,331 shares under the 2020 Distribution Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $3.2 million. During 2021, we issued 2,179,193 shares under the 2020 Distribution Agreement for net proceeds of $6.3 million. As of December 31, 2021, there were no remaining shares to issue and sell under the 2020 Distribution Agreement.
On September 30, 2020, we entered into the 2020 Purchase Agreement and a registration rights agreement with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which Lincoln Park committed to purchase up to $25.0 million of our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 353,113 shares, excluding 180,701 shares issued as commitment fee, under the 2020 Purchase Agreement for net proceeds of approximately $0.7 million. During 2021, we issued 5,685,186 shares of our common stock under the 2020 Purchase Agreement for total proceeds of $12.5 million. During January 2022, we issued 5,665,000 shares of common stock for net proceeds of approximately $7.0 million under the 2020 Purchase Agreement. We no longer have any additional shares of common stock registered to sell under the 2020 Purchase Agreement, and at this time, we do not intend to register any additional shares of common stock under the 2020 Purchase Agreement.
On March 29, 2020, we entered into the Ninth Amendment, pursuant to which, among other things, Oxford agreed to defer the start date of principal repayment to November 1, 2021. In addition, on April 1, 2020, we made a $5.0 million paydown of principal upon execution of the Ninth Amendment. As a result of this Ninth Amendment, the term of the Term Loan has been extended from September 1, 2021 to June 1, 2024, with all other major terms remained consistent.
Capital Resources
We continue to seek additional capital through strategic transactions and other financing alternatives. Without additional capital, current working capital and cash generated from sales will not provide adequate funding for research and product development activities at their current levels. If sufficient capital is not raised, we will at a minimum need to significantly reduce or curtail our research and development and other operations, and this would negatively affect our ability to achieve corporate growth goals. Although the stock markets and our stock price have recovered to some extent in recent weeks, there may likely be continued market volatility due to the pandemic or other events, which could cause our stock price to decline. This in turn will likely negatively impact our ability to raise funds through equity-related financings. Further, a continued global economic downturn may impair our ability to obtain additional financing through other means, such as strategic transactions or debt financing. The overall deterioration of the credit and financial markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic will likely generally reduce our ability to obtain additional financing to fund our operations.
Should we be unable to raise additional cash from outside sources or if we are unable to do so in a timely manner or on commercially reasonable terms, it would have a material adverse impact on our operations.
Cash (used in) provided by operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is summarized as follows (in thousands):
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $10.3 million compared to $8.4 million in the same period of 2020. Overall, our operational cash use increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, due primarily to increased expenditures for our research and development activities.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were related to purchases of fixed assets of $144,000, offset by proceeds of $62,000 from sale of property and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to cash payments of $0.4 million made for in process research and development assets from NanoTx, and $0.1 million for purchases of fixed assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to sales of common stock of $18.7 million, net of offering cost through the 2020 Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park and the Distribution Agreement with Canaccord, as well as $2.0 million from exercise of warrants, offset by principal repayment of the Oxford term loan of $0.3 million. Net cash used for financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to repayment of $5.3 million of the Term Loan in April 2020 (consisting of $5.0 million principal and $0.3 million of related final payment), and cash payments of $0.1 million for our finance leases, offset by cash proceeds received from issuance of common stock of $4.0 million and warrant exercises of $1.1 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses, and that affect our recognition and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
While our estimates are based on assumptions we consider reasonable at the time they were made, our actual results may differ from our estimates, perhaps significantly. If results differ materially from our estimates, we will make adjustments to our financial statements prospectively as we become aware of the necessity for an adjustment.
We believe it is important for you to understand our most critical accounting policies, which are included in Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements in Item 8.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere herein for disclosure and discussion of new accounting standards.