Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to utilizing our proprietary genetic engineering platform technologies to create next-generation cell and gene therapeutics with the capacity to cure. We were incorporated in December 2014 and subsequently spun out from Transposagen, a company that has been developing gene engineering technologies since 2003. Since our inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing, developing and acquiring intellectual property rights and establishing and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, developing our gene engineering technologies, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking research and development and manufacturing activities, including preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates, and engaging in strategic transactions. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity. Since our inception, we have raised an aggregate of $334.3 million of gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, received $60.0 million of gross proceeds from borrowings under our loan agreement and received an aggregate of $23.8 million in grant funding from the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine, or CIRM. On July 14, 2020, we completed our initial public offering, or the IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold 14,000,000 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $224.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, and cash equivalents of $206.3 million. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our net losses were $125.0 million and $129.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $406.9 million.
We have discovered and are developing a broad portfolio of product candidates in a variety of indications based on our core proprietary platforms, including our non-viral piggyBac DNA Delivery System, Cas-CLOVER Site-specific Gene Editing System and nanoparticle and AAV-based gene delivery technologies. Our core platform technologies have utility, either alone or in combination, across many cell and gene therapeutic modalities and enable us to engineer our portfolio of product candidates that are designed to overcome the primary limitations of current generation cell and gene therapeutics.
Within cell therapy, we believe our technologies allow us to create product candidates with engineered cells that engraft in the patient’s body and drive lasting durable responses that may have the capacity to result in single treatment cures. Our CAR-T therapy portfolio consists of both autologous and allogeneic, or off-the-shelf, product candidates. We are advancing a broad pipeline and have multiple CAR-T product candidates in the clinical phase in both hematological and solid tumor oncology indications. Within gene therapy, we believe our technologies have the potential to create next-generation therapies that can deliver long-term, stable gene expression that does not diminish over time and that may have the capacity to result in single treatment cures.
The following chart summarizes our current product candidate portfolio for CAR-T in Oncology:
Our most advanced investigational clinical programs are:
•
P-PSMA-101, which is an autologous CAR-T product candidate targeting prostate-specific membrane antigen, or PSMA, being developed to treat patients with metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer, or mCRPC. We are currently evaluating P-PSMA-101 in a Phase 1 clinical trial. We presented encouraging preliminary results from our Phase 1 clinical trial of P-PSMA-101 in our first solid tumor indication on February 17, 2022 at ASCO-GU and may provide a further clinical update in the second half of 2022 or early 2023.
•
P-BCMA-ALLO1, which is a fully allogeneic CAR-T product candidate targeting BCMA, being developed to treat relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma patients. Our investigational new drug application, or IND, for this program was cleared by the FDA in August 2021 and we expect initial clinical data from our Phase 1 in the second half of 2022. P-BCMA-ALLO1 follows our first BCMA targeted program, P-BCMA-101, which was an autologous program, and we plan to continue using the learnings from that program in this second-generation approach.
•
P-MUC1C-ALLO1, which is a fully allogeneic CAR-T product candidate for multiple solid tumor indications. We believe P-MUC1C-ALLO1 has the potential to treat a wide range of solid tumors derived from epithelial cells, such as breast, colorectal, lung, ovarian, pancreatic and renal cancers, as well as other cancers expressing a cancer-specific form of the Mucin 1 protein, or MUC1-C. Our IND for this program was cleared by the FDA in December 2021 and we expect initial clinical data from our Phase 1 clinical trial in the second half of 2022. P-MUC1C-ALLO1 is the first program for which clinical product will be sourced from our internal pilot manufacturing facility.
We manufacture these product candidates using our non-viral piggyBac DNA Delivery System. Our fully allogeneic CAR-T product candidates are developed using well-characterized cells derived from a healthy donor as starting material with the goal of enabling treatment of potentially hundreds of patients from a single manufacturing run. Doses are cryopreserved and stored at treatment centers for future off-the-shelf use. In addition, our allogeneic product candidates use our proprietary Cas-CLOVER site-specific Gene Editing System to reduce or eliminate reactivity, as well as our booster molecule technology for manufacturing scalability.
Our most advanced preclinical cell therapy program is:
•
P-CD19CD20-ALLO1, which is a fully allogeneic CAR-T product candidate for B-cell hematological indications. This is our first Dual CAR program, which contains two fully functional CAR molecules to target cells that express at least one of the two intended targets. We believe that our ability to include two fully functional CAR molecules into a T cell could provide a competitive advantage compared to current therapies. We anticipate an IND filing and initiation of a Phase 1 clinical trial in the first half of 2023.
The following chart summarizes our current product candidate portfolio in gene therapy:
Our gene therapy product candidates have been developed by utilizing our piggyBac technology together with AAV to overcome the major limitations of traditional AAV gene therapy. We believe that our approach can result in integration and long-term stable expression at potentially much lower doses than AAV technology alone, thus also conferring cost and tolerability benefits. Our eventual goal is to completely replace AAV with our nanoparticle technology, freeing future product development in gene therapy of AAV limitations.
Our most advanced gene therapy programs are:
•
P-OTC-101, which is a liver-directed gene therapy combining piggyBac technology with AAV and nanoparticles for the in vivo treatment of Ornithine Transcarbamylase, or OTC, deficiency. OTC deficiency is an often fatal or morbid urea cycle disease caused by congenital mutations in the OTC gene with a high unmet medical need. We are currently evaluating whether to modify the P-OTC-101 program to move completely to our non-viral nanoparticle delivery system. A decision as to whether to pursue the fully nanoparticle or hybrid approach going forward is expected by mid-2022.
•
P-FVIII-101, which is a liver-directed gene therapy combining piggyBac technology with our nanoparticle delivery technology for the in vivo treatment of Hemophilia A. Hemophilia A is a bleeding disorder caused by a deficiency in Factor VIII production with a high unmet need. Our P-FVIII-101 program is included in the collaboration and license agreement, or the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, with Takeda Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., or Takeda, and Takeda will be responsible for all future development costs.
We expect our expenses and losses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue our development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates, including P-PSMA-101, P-BCMA-ALLO1, and P-MUC1C-ALLO1, and begin to commercialize any approved products. While we anticipate an overall increase in development costs as we continue to expand the number of product candidates in our pipeline and pursue clinical development of those candidates, we expect a decrease in our development costs for our BCMA programs as we are transitioning to our allogeneic platform. In addition, all development costs related to partnered gene therapy programs will be reimbursed by Takeda. We also expect increases related to an anticipated increase in personnel, accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and consulting services, and costs associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq listing rules and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance, investor and public relations activities and other expenses associated with operating as a public company. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
The manufacturing process for our allogeneic product candidates is nearly identical to the process for our autologous product candidates, except for the gene editing and related steps. We work with a number of third-party contract manufacturing organizations for production of our product candidates. We also work with a variety of suppliers to provide our manufacturing raw materials including media, DNA and RNA components. We have completed construction of an internal pilot GMP manufacturing facility in San Diego, California adjacent to our headquarters to develop and manufacture preclinical materials and clinical supplies of our product candidates for Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials in the future. We commenced GMP activity in the third quarter of 2021, however we expect that we will continue to rely on third parties for various manufacturing needs. In the future, we may also build one or more commercial manufacturing facilities for any approved product candidates.
Collaboration Agreements
In October 2021, we entered into the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, pursuant to which we granted to Takeda a worldwide exclusive license under our piggyBac, Cas-CLOVER, biodegradable DNA and RNA nanoparticle delivery technology and other proprietary genetic engineering platforms to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize gene therapy products for certain indications, including Hemophilia A. We will collaborate with Takeda to initially develop up to six in vivo gene therapy programs and
Takeda also has an option to add two additional programs to the collaboration. We are obligated to lead research activities up to candidate selection, after which Takeda is obligated to assume responsibility for further development, manufacturing and commercialization of each program.
Under the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, Takeda made an upfront payment to us of $45.0 million. Takeda is also obligated to provide funding for all collaboration program development costs including our P-FVIII-101 program; provided that we are obligated to perform certain platform development activities at our own cost. Timelines for P-FVIII-101 and other programs subject to the Takeda Collaboration Agreement will be driven by Takeda. Under the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, we are eligible to receive preclinical milestone payments that could potentially exceed $82.5 million in the aggregate if preclinical milestones for all six programs are achieved. We are also eligible to receive future clinical development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments of $435.0 million in the aggregate per target, with a total potential deal value over the course of the collaboration of up to $2.7 billion, if milestones for all six programs are achieved and up to $3.6 billion if the milestones related to the two optional programs are also achieved. We are entitled to receive tiered royalty payments on net sales in the mid-single to low double digits, subject to certain standard reductions and offsets. Royalties will be payable, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, until the latest of the expiration of the licensed patents covering such product in such country, ten years from first commercial sale of such product in such country, or expiration of regulatory exclusivity for such product in such country.
In-License Agreements
Below is a summary of our key license agreements. For a more detailed description of these and our other license agreements, see the section titled “Business-In-License Agreements” and Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.
•
License Agreement with Janssen Biotech Inc., or the Janssen Agreement, pursuant to which we obtained exclusive worldwide rights to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize pharmaceutical products comprising autologous CAR-modified T-cells or any CAR-modified natural killer or CAR-modified natural-killer-like cells expressing certain Centyrin molecules CAR-modified for the treatment or prevention of any disease in humans. This is the binding technology we use in our P-PSMA-101 product candidate. Under the Janssen Agreement, we also have the right to screen Janssen’s Centyrin library for agents that bind or modify targets of interest for our internal research and development purposes for potential use in a licensed product.
Pursuant to the Janssen Agreement, we are required to pay Janssen up to an aggregate of $75.8 million upon the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestones for the first licensed product and up to an aggregate of $46.8 million upon the achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestones for each licensed product thereafter. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, royalties in the low single-digit percentage range on annual net sales, with the royalty rates varying depending on if there is a valid claim present within the licensed patent rights covering the licensed product in the applicable country in which the net sales occur. The royalty rates are subject to reduction upon certain events.
•
2017 Commercial License Agreement with TeneoBio, Inc., or the 2017 TeneoBio Agreement, pursuant to which we obtained exclusive worldwide rights to use and develop pharmaceutical products comprising allogeneic T-cells expressing a CAR molecule containing certain heavy chain sequences provided by TeneoBio for the treatment of human disease. We use this heavy-chain-only binder in our P-BCMA-ALLO1 product candidate.
Pursuant to the 2017 TeneoBio Agreement, we are required to pay TeneoBio up to an aggregate of $20.5 million upon the first achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones for any allogeneic product and up to an aggregate of $20.5 million upon the first achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones for any autologous product. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, a royalty in the low single-digit percentage on net sales of any licensed products.
•
2018 Commercial License Agreement with TeneoBio, Inc., or the 2018 TeneoBio Agreement, for the development and use of TeneoBio’s human heavy-chain-only antibodies in CAR-T cell therapies. Under the terms of the 2018 TeneoBio Agreement, we have the option to obtain exclusive rights to research, develop and commercialize up to a certain number of targets.
Pursuant to the 2018 TeneoBio Agreement, we are required to pay additional fees in the low- to mid-six figure dollar range upon (1) selecting exclusivity for a particular target, which restricts TeneoBio from licensing that particular target to a third party for a period of time, (2) continuing exclusivity for any selected target on each anniversary thereafter and (3) exercising our commercial option for each target. We are required to pay TeneoBio up to an aggregate of $31.0 million upon the first achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones for each licensed product. We are also obligated to
pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, a low single-digit percentage royalty on net sales of any licensed products. The royalty rate is subject to reduction upon certain events.
•
License Agreement with Genus Oncology, LLC, or the Genus Agreement, pursuant to which we obtained an exclusive worldwide license under certain patents and a non-exclusive worldwide license under certain know-how controlled by Genus to research, develop and commercialize pharmaceutical products incorporating CAR cells expressing antibodies and derivatives thereof targeting MUC1-C, or a Genus licensed product, and a non-exclusive worldwide license under certain patents and know-how controlled by Genus to research, develop and commercialize companion diagnostics for the treatment, prevention and palliation of human diseases and conditions. We use a Genus antibody or derivative thereof targeting MUC1-C as a binder in our P-MUC1C-ALLO1 product candidate.
Pursuant to the Genus Agreement, we are required to pay Genus up to an aggregate of $71.0 million upon first achievement of certain clinical, regulatory and sales milestones for any Genus licensed product and companion diagnostics. We are also obligated to pay, on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis, tiered royalties in the low to mid-single-digit percentage on net sales of any Genus licensed products and related companion diagnostics. The royalty rate is subject to reduction upon certain events.
CIRM Grant Funding
In 2017, we were granted an award in the amount of $19.8 million from California Institute of Regenerative Medicine, or CIRM, to support our clinical trial for P-BCMA-101. Through December 31, 2021, we have received a total of $19.7 million from this grant and we may receive up to $0.1 million in future grant payments. In 2018, we were granted an additional award in the amount of $4.0 million from CIRM to support our preclinical studies for P-PSMA-101, of which we have received all proceeds from this grant. The terms of these awards include an option to repay the grant or convert it to a royalty obligation upon commercialization of the program. Based upon the terms of the grant agreements, we record proceeds as a liability when received. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we made the decision to wind down clinical development of the P-BCMA-101 program, however there is no obligation to repay the amounts associated with the P-BCMA-101 program and derecognized the respective liability and recorded such amount in other income during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue consists of revenue recognized from our collaboration and license agreement with Takeda and reflects the timing and pattern in which we deliver the contractual deliverables to Takeda.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of external and internal costs incurred for our research and development activities, including development of our platform technologies, our drug discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates.
External costs include:
•
expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates and research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and contract research organizations, or CROs;
•
the cost of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs;
•
payments made under third-party licensing agreements; and
•
laboratory supplies and research materials.
Internal costs include:
•
personnel-related expenses, consisting of employee salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
the cost to develop manufacturing capability at our San Diego facility for manufacturing of cell therapies for use in clinical trials;
•
the cost of manufacturing clinical materials for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials at our San Diego facility; and
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, consisting of direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. External expenses are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers or our estimate of the volume of service that has been performed at each reporting date. Upfront payments and milestone payments made for the licensing of technology are related to clinical stage programs and expensed as research and development in the period in which they are incurred. Advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses or other long-term assets. These amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
At any one time, we are working on multiple research and development programs. We track external costs by the stage of program, clinical or preclinical. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one program and are typically deployed across multiple programs. As such, we do not track internal costs on a specific program basis.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to CRO activity and manufacturing expenses. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future, including in connection with our ongoing Phase 1 trial of P-PSMA-101 for the treatment of patients with mCRPC, Phase 1 trial of P-BCMA-ALLO1 for the treatment of patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma and Phase 1 trial of P-MUC1C-ALLO1 for the treatment of patients with solid tumor cancers and additional clinical programs expected to commence as we expand our pipeline of drug candidates. We cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. Our development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•
the number and scope of preclinical and IND-enabling studies;
•
per patient trial costs;
•
the number of trials required for approval;
•
the number of sites included in the trials;
•
the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•
the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
•
the phase of development of our product candidates;
•
the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates;
•
the extent to which we establish additional licensing agreements; and
•
whether we choose to partner any additional product candidates and the terms of such partnership.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the cost structure and timing associated with the development of respective product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. We may obtain unexpected results from our clinical trials and preclinical studies.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting and audit services. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates, including P-PSMA-101, P-BCMA-ALLO1 and P-MUC1C-ALLO1, and begin to commercialize any approved products.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense on outstanding borrowings under our loan agreement and amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of interest income and miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations. Interest income is comprised of interest earned on our available-for-sale securities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue of $31.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, represents revenue recognized from the Takeda Collaboration Agreement consisting of $30.2 million related to one-time performance obligations delivered upon the inception of the Takeda Collaboration Agreement in the fourth quarter of 2021 and $1.0 million related to the research services we performed for Takeda in the fourth quarter of 2021 pursuant to the terms of the Takeda Collaboration Agreement.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)
Clinical stage programs include costs related to P-BCMA-101 and P-PSMA-101 for the year ended December 31, 2020 and costs related to P-BCMA-ALLO1, P-BCMA-101, and P-PSMA-101 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and development expenses were $136.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $103.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses of $33.2 million was primarily related to increases in the following: $14.8 million of personnel expenses due to an increase in headcount combined with a $4.2 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, $8.0 million of external costs related to our preclinical programs due an increased number of early stage programs, $6.0 million of external costs related to our clinical stage programs including the ongoing enrollment and manufacturing for the P-BCMA-101 clinical trial and increased enrollment of the Phase 1 P-PSMA-101 trial, and $4.4 million of internal costs related to facilities and other expenses primarily due to the increased activities in the pilot plant.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $35.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $23.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses of $12.9 million was primarily related to an increase of $9.5 million of personnel expenses due to an increase in headcount combined with a $5.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, an increase of $1.9 million in insurance costs, and an increase of $1.5 million of professional fees.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense consisted of interest on the outstanding principal under our 2021 Amended Loan Agreement (as defined below) with Oxford Finance LLC, or Oxford, which was consistent during the respective periods.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income was $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in other income of $19.5 million was primarily due to write off of deferred CIRM grant liability of $19.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 related to an amount of grant awards that we no longer intend to repay as a result of our decision to wind down the P-BCMA-101 program and a loss on warrant liability of $0.4 million recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 driven by a decrease in the amount we invested in short-term investments combined with a decrease in available interest rates for investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception in 2014, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $125.0 million and $129.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and negative cash flows from operations of $102.5 million and $113.3 million, respectively. We expect to continue to incur net losses and negative cash flows from operations for at least the next several years. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $406.9 million.
Our operations to date have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, in-licensing and acquiring intellectual property rights and establishing and protecting our intellectual property portfolio, developing our gene engineering technologies, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking research and development and manufacturing activities, including preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates, and engaging in strategic transactions.
Our primary use of cash is to fund our operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures including payroll and external costs associated with our preclinical and clinical stage programs, and to a lesser extent, general and
administrative expenditures. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if at all. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity. Since our inception, we have raised $224.0 million of gross proceeds from the sale of our common stock in our initial public offering in July 2020, raised an aggregate of $334.3 million of gross proceeds from the sale of shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock, received $60.0 million of gross proceeds from borrowings under our loan agreement and received an aggregate of $23.8 million in grant funding from CIRM. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we entered into a collaboration agreement with Takeda and received an upfront payment of $45.0 million.
We expect that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 of $206.3 million will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the long term we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy.
We do not expect to generate any revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for P-PSMA-101, P-BCMA-ALLO1 and P-MUC1C-ALLO1 or any other product candidates, which will not be for at least the next several years, if ever. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution activities. Accordingly, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential grants, collaborations, licenses or other similar arrangements. However, we may not be able to secure additional financing or enter into such other arrangements in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. Especially in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as recent or anticipated changes in interest rates and economic inflation, there can be no assurances that we will be able to secure such additional sources of funds to support our operations, or, if such funds are available to us, that such additional financing will be sufficient to meet our needs. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, reduce or terminate our research and development programs or other operations, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Loan Agreement
In 2017, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Oxford, as subsequently amended, pursuant to which we drew a Term A loan in the amount of $20.0 million and a Term B loan, in the amount of $10.0 million for a total outstanding balance of $30.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Term A loan and Term B loan, or collectively Term Loans, bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to 6.94% plus the greater of (a) the 30-day U.S. Dollar (USD) LIBOR rate and (b) 2.00%. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate applicable to our Term Loans borrowing was 8.94%.
In June 2021, we entered into an amendment to the 2018 Loan Agreement, or the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement, with Oxford to extend the interest-only payment period and maturity date resulting in the interest-only payments period extend through June 30, 2023, followed by 30 equal monthly payments of principal and unpaid accrued interest and all outstanding Term Loans maturing on December 1, 2025. In conjunction with this amendment, we incurred a facility fee of $1.1 million, which is due to Oxford on the maturity date. Our obligations under the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement are secured by a first priority security interest in substantially all of our current and future assets, except for our intellectual property. In addition, we have also agreed not to encumber our intellectual property assets, except as permitted by the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement. While any amounts are outstanding, we are subject to a number of affirmative and restrictive covenants, including covenants regarding dispositions of property, business combinations or acquisitions, among other customary covenants. We are also restricted from paying dividends or making other distributions or annual payments on our capital stock in excess of $250,000, subject to limited exceptions. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement.
In February 2022, we entered into a new Loan and Security Agreement, or the 2022 Loan Agreement, with Oxford. Pursuant to the terms of the 2022 Loan Agreement we borrowed $60.0 million in term loans, a portion of which was used to repay the balance outstanding under the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement. Under the 2022 Loan Agreement the initial interest-only period is through April 1, 2025, followed by 23 equal monthly payments of principal and applicable interest. Upon the satisfaction of certain conditions set forth in the 2022 Loan Agreement, the interest-only period may be extended through April 1, 2026, followed by 11 equal monthly payments of principal and applicable interest. As a result, all amounts outstanding under the 2022 Loan Agreement will mature on February 1, 2027. In connection with the repayment of the balance outstanding under the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement, we incurred amendment and final payment fees of $1.6 million previously due on the earlier of (i) the maturity date, (ii) acceleration of any Term Loan, or (iii) the prepayment of the Term Loans. We have an option to repay the outstanding debt under the 2022 Loan Agreement at any time in increments of $5.0 million, subject to a prepayment fee of 1.0% if the term loans are prepaid on or prior to February 22, 2024, after which no prepayment penalty would be applied. Consistent with the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement, there is
a 7.5% final payment fee payable on the earlier of (i) the new maturity date, (ii) acceleration of the new loan, or (iii) the prepayment of the new loan.
On November 30, 2020, ICE Benchmark Administration, with the support of the United States Federal Reserve and the FCA, announced plans to consult on ceasing publication of USD LIBOR on December 31, 2021 for only the one week and two month USD LIBOR tenors, and on June 30, 2023 for all other USD LIBOR tenors. Various central bank committees and working groups continue to discuss replacement of benchmark rates, the process for amending existing LIBOR-based contracts, and the potential economic impacts of different alternatives. The Alternative Reference Rates Committee has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, as its preferred alternative rate for USD LIBOR. SOFR is a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized by U.S. Treasury securities, and is based on directly observable U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions.
Operating Lease Agreements
As of December 31, 2021, we had operating leases for manufacturing, laboratory and office space in San Diego, California consisting of approximately 87,000 square feet with remaining lease terms of 8.0 years. The manufacturing and laboratory and office space lease agreements include two options to extend the term for a period of 5 years each. Additionally, we had operating leases for dedicated manufacturing suites at our contract manufacturers with remaining lease terms of up to 2 years.
In October 2018, we entered into a lease agreement for a facility in San Diego, California to be used for research and development and administrative activities. The lease term commenced on April 1, 2019 and will expire on December 31, 2029. In October 2019, we entered into a lease amendment to expand the existing premises. The lease term for the additional premises commenced on July 29, 2020 and will expire on December 31, 2029.
In July 2019, we entered into a lease agreement for a facility in San Diego, California that was retrofitted to Good Manufacturing Practice standards and is used for manufacturing in our early-stage clinical trials. The lease term commenced on June 26, 2020 and will expire on December 31, 2029.
In October 2021, we entered into a sublease agreement for a facility in San Diego, California consisting of approximately 24,000 square feet to be used for research and administrative activities. The lease term will commence on or around May 1, 2022 and will expire on December 31, 2025.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
The debt obligation payments associated with the 2021 Amended Loan Agreement presented in the table above do not reflect the terms of the 2022 Loan Agreement, which we entered into in February 2022. In addition to the contractual obligations and commitments presented in the table above, a significant portion of our cash requirements is associated with personnel expense, including payroll, employment benefits, and hiring, employee retention and training costs. We expect that the amount of our personnel expense will increase in the foreseeable future as we continue to increase our headcount.
Furthermore, we enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations, CMOs and other third parties for preclinical research studies, clinical trials and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to one year after the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the table above as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
We have also entered into a several in-license agreements under which we are obligated to make aggregate milestone payments upon the achievement of specified preclinical, clinical and regulatory milestones as well as royalty payments. We have not included future payments under this agreement in the table above since the payment obligations under this agreement are contingent upon future events, such as our achievement of specified milestones or generating product sales. As of December 31, 2021, we were unable
to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving these milestones or generating future product sales. See the subsection titled “-In-License Agreements” above.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $102.5 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $125.0 million, offset by non-cash items of $2.3 million, and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $20.2 million. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of a $19.8 million write off of the deferred CIRM grant liability, $16.7 million in stock-based compensation, $4.6 million in depreciation expense, and $0.6 million of accretion of discount on issued term debt. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of a $13.8 million increase in deferred revenue associated with the upfront payment received pursuant to the Takeda Collaboration Agreement, a $7.8 million increase in accounts payable, a $3.6 million decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets, and a $2.0 million decrease in other long-term assets, offset in part by a $3.1 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, a $2.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and a $1.2 million decrease in accrued liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $113.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $129.8 million, offset in part by non-cash expenses of $10.8 million, and net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $5.6 million. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of $7.2 million in stock-based compensation, $2.6 million in depreciation expense, $0.8 million of accretion of discount on issued term debt, and $0.4 million from change in fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability, offset in part by $0.2 million in accretion of investment discount, net. Net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of a $10.3 million increase in accrued liabilities and a $3.1 million decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets, offset in part by a $4.2 million decrease in accounts payable, a $3.3 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.2 million increase in other long-term assets, and a $0.1 million decrease in operating lease liabilities.
Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $222.4 million, consisting of proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $225.0 million, partially offset by purchases of property and equipment of $2.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $204.4 million, consisting of purchases of short-term investments of $295.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $16.9 million, offset by proceeds from maturities of short-term investments of $107.5 million. The purchase of short-term investments reflects the use of a higher cash balance from the proceeds of the IPO and Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock financing.
The timing of purchase and sales of our short-term investments is driven by our available cash balance and maturity of existing investments. The purchase of property and equipment for all periods related to equipment purchases as we expanded our research and development and manufacturing activities, in addition to corporate office space.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $2.5 million, consisting of proceeds from the exercises of stock options and stock purchases under our employee stock compensation plans.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $313.9 million, consisting primarily of $205.7 million in net proceeds from our initial public offering, $104.1 million in net proceeds from the sale of preferred stock and $4.2 million in grant payments from CIRM.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with accounting principles that are generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, related disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of expenses and other income during the reporting period. We continually evaluate our estimates and judgments, the most critical of which are those related to revenue, preclinical and clinical study accruals and stock-based compensation costs. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Materially different results can occur as circumstances change and additional information becomes known.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenues to date have been generated primarily through collaboration and license agreements. Our collaboration and license agreements may contain multiple elements including intellectual property licenses and research, and development services. Consideration we receive under these arrangements may include upfront payments, research and development funding, cost reimbursements, research, development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments, and royalty payments.
We apply Accounting Standard Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) to account for our contracts with customers. Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these services and excludes sales incentives and amounts collected on behalf of third parties. We analyze the nature of these performance obligations in the context of individual collaboration and license agreements in order to assess the distinct performance obligations. We evaluate our contracts with customers for proper classification in the consolidated statements of operations based on the nature of the underlying activity. Transactions with customers recorded in our consolidated statements of operations are recorded on either a gross or net basis, depending on the characteristics of the collaborative relationship.
To determine revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
We use judgment in determining the customer's ability and intent to pay, which is based upon factors including the customer's historical payment experience or, for new customers, credit and financial information pertaining to the customers. Determining whether a promised goods or service is a separate performance obligation requires the use of significant judgment. A change in such judgment could result in a significant change in the period in which revenue is recognized. We determine standalone selling price based on our overall pricing and discounting objectives, taking into consideration the type of services, estimates of hourly market rates, and stage of the research, development or clinical trials. The process for determining the transaction price involves significant judgment and includes consideration of multiple factors such as estimated revenues, market size, and development risk, among other factors contemplated in negotiating the arrangement with the customer. We determine the transaction price based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. In determining the transaction price, any variable consideration would be considered, to the extent applicable, if, in our judgment, it is probable that a significant future reversal of cumulative revenue under the contract will not occur. In accordance with the royalty exception under ASC 606 for licenses of intellectual property, the transaction price excludes future royalty payments to be received from our customers. Our collaboration and license agreement contains no consideration payable to our customer or a significant financing component.
Performance Obligations
The following is a description of principal goods and services from which we generate revenue.
Intellectual property licenses
We generate revenue from licensing our intellectual property including know-how and development and commercialization rights. These licenses provide customers with a term-based license to further research, develop and commercialize our internally-discovered platform technologies for specified therapeutic indications. The consideration we receive in the form of nonrefundable upfront consideration allocated to the functional intellectual property licenses is recognized at a point in time for licenses determined to be distinct from other performance obligations in the contract when we transfer such license to the customer. If the license is combined with other goods or services into one performance obligation, the revenue is recognized over a period of time based on our method of measuring progress in which we satisfy the combined performance obligation. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. Our licensing agreements are generally cancelable. Customers have the right to terminate their contracts upon notice. We have the right to terminate the contracts generally only if the customer is in breach of the contract and fails to remedy the breach in accordance with the contractual terms.
Material Rights
Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right, (i.e., an optional good or service offered for free or at a discount) to the customer and if so, whether they are considered performance obligations. The identification of material rights requires judgments related to the determination of the value of the underlying license relative to the option exercise price, including assumptions about the amount of the discount and likelihood that the option will be exercised. The exercise of a material right is accounted for as a contract modification for accounting purposes. Amounts allocated to any material right are recognized as revenue when or as the related future goods or services are transferred or when the option expires.
Research and development services
We generate revenue from research and development services we provide to our customers in connection with the licensed intellectual property. The services we provide to our customers primarily include scientific research activities. Revenue associated with these services is recognized over time using the cost-to-cost input method, based on the total estimated costs to fulfill the obligations.
Contracts with Multiple Performance Obligations
Our collaboration and license agreements with customers may contain multiple promised goods or services. Based on the characteristics of the promised goods and services we analyze whether they are separate or combined performance obligations. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price basis. We determine standalone selling price based on our overall pricing and discounting objectives, taking into consideration the type of services, estimates of hourly market rates, and stage of the development and clinical trials.
ASC 606 requires that we allocate the arrangement consideration on a relative standalone selling price basis for each performance obligation after determining the transaction price of the contract and identifying the performance obligations to which that amount should be allocated. The relative standalone selling price is defined in ASC 606 as the price at which an entity would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer. If other observable transactions in which we have sold the same performance obligation separately are not available, we estimate the standalone selling price of each performance obligation. When standalone selling prices for our products or services are not directly observable, we determine the standalone selling prices using relevant information available and apply suitable estimation methods considering market conditions and entity-specific factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the underlying intellectual property licenses and the economic potential associated with ongoing research activities. Key assumptions to determine the standalone selling price may also include development timelines, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services, however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to vendors in connection with preclinical development activities, CMOs in connection with the process development and scale-up activities and the production of clinical trial materials and contract research organizations in connection with clinical trials.
We base the expense recorded related to contract research and manufacturing on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CMOs and contract research organizations that supply materials and conduct services. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards granted to employees, non-employees and directors based on their fair value on the date of the grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model for options. Compensation expense for those awards is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We use the straight-line method to record the expense of awards with service-based vesting conditions. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards and shares purchasable under the ESPP. These assumptions include:
•
Fair value of common stock-Determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock
•
Expected term-The expected term represents the period that stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. The expected term for option grants is determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the expected term to be the midpoint between the vesting date and the contractual life of the stock-based awards.
•
Expected volatility-Since we were a privately held company until July 2020 and do not have significant trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•
Risk-free interest rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
•
Expected dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
As of December 31, 2021, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options was $42.8 million and is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.9 years. The intrinsic value of all outstanding stock options as of December 31, 2021 was approximately $2.9 million, of which approximately $2.8 million related to vested options and approximately $0.1 million related to unvested options.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700.0 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) December 31, 2025.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report.