Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following information should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical information, this report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties that may cause our actual results to differ materially from plans and results discussed in forward-looking statements. We encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties discussed in the sections entitled Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” included above in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The risks and uncertainties can cause actual results to differ significantly from those in our forward-looking statements or implied in historical results and trends. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the SEC, to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions, or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
PolarityTE is a clinical stage biotechnology company developing regenerative tissue products and biomaterials. PolarityTE also operates a pre-clinical research business. PolarityTE’s first regenerative tissue product is SkinTE, which is intended for the repair, reconstruction, replacement, and supplementation of skin in patients who have a need for treatment of acute or chronic wounds, burns, surgical reconstruction events, scar revision, or removal of dysfunctional skin grafts.
Since the beginning of 2017, PolarityTE has incurred substantial operating losses and its operations have been financed primarily by public equity financings. The clinical trials for SkinTE and the regulatory process will likely result in an increase in PolarityTE’s expenses. PolarityTE will continue to incur substantial operating losses as we pursue an IND and BLA, and PolarityTE expects to seek financing from external sources over the foreseeable future to fund its operations.
Regenerative Tissue Product
Our first regenerative tissue product is SkinTE. On July 23, 2021, we submitted an IND for SkinTE to the FDA through our subsidiary, PTE-MD, as the first step in the regulatory process for obtaining licensure for SkinTE under Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. The FDA subsequently issued clinical hold correspondence to us identifying certain issues that needed to be addressed before the IND could be approved. We provided responses to the FDA, and on January 14, 2022, the FDA sent correspondence informing us that the clinical hold had been removed. The IND approval enables us to commence the first of two expected pivotal studies needed to support a BLA seeking a chronic cutaneous ulcer indication for SkinTE. The first planned pivotal study is the COVER DFUs Trial, which is a multi-center, randomized controlled trial evaluating SkinTE in the treatment of Wagner 2 DFUs. We plan to enroll up to 100 patients at up to 20 sites in the U.S. in the COVER DFUs Trial, which will compare treatment with SkinTE plus the standard-of-care to the standard-of-care alone. The primary endpoint is the incidence of DFUs closed at 24 weeks. Secondary endpoints include PAR at 4, 8, 12, 16, and 24 weeks, improved quality of life, and new onset of infection of the DFU being evaluated. As we pursue the first study, we plan to engage in discussions with the FDA regarding the design and implementation of the second pivotal study.
We expect to incur significant operating costs in the next three to four calendar years as we pursue the regulatory process for SkinTE with the FDA, conduct clinical trials and studies, and pursue product research, all while operating our business and incurring continuing fixed costs related to the maintenance of our assets and business. We expect to incur significant losses in the future, and those losses could be more severe as a result of unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays, and other unknown events. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending upon the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures for satisfying all the conditions of obtaining FDA licensure for SkinTE.
Testing and Research Services
Beginning in 2017, we developed internally a laboratory and research capability to advance the development of SkinTE and related technologies, which we operate through our subsidiary, Arches. At the beginning of May 2018, we acquired a preclinical research and veterinary sciences business to be used, in part, for preclinical studies on its regenerative tissue products, which we operate through our subsidiary IBEX. Through Arches and IBEX, we also offered research and laboratory testing services to unrelated third parties on a contract basis. As noted above, Arches offered COVID-19 testing from the end of May 2020 to August 2021, when it discontinued the service, and since then Arches has been engaged in supporting our IND and clinical trial effort and has not offered services to outside third parties. IBEX continues to offer pre-clinical research services to third parties, which generates positive cash flow to defray our operating expenses, but we do not believe this positive cash flow will be a significant contributor to defraying our costs associated with obtaining regulatory licensure or approval of SkinTE.
PPP Loan
As described above, PTE-MD entered into a promissory note evidencing an unsecured loan in the amount of $3,576,145 made to PTE-MD under the Paycheck Protection Program. On October 15, 2020, PTE-MD applied to the Lender for forgiveness of the PPP Loan in its entirety (as provided for in the CARES Act) based on PTE-MD’s use of the PPP Loan for payroll costs, rent, and utilities. On October 26, 2020, PTE-MD was advised that the Lender approved the application, and that the Lender was submitting the application to the SBA for a final decision. The SBA subsequently approved PTE-MD’s application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan, and the principal and interest of $3,612,376 was fully paid by the SBA on June 12, 2021.
On September 17, 2021, PTE-MD received notice from the Lender that the SBA is reviewing the PPP Loan. As part of this review, the SBA requested that PTE-MD provide documents that it is required to maintain but may not have been required to submit with its application for the PPP Loan. These documents included an affiliation worksheet showing the relationship between PolarityTE and PTE-MD and affiliated subsidiaries, documents showing the use of the PPP Loan proceeds, documents showing PTE-MD’s calculation of the loan amount it requested in its loan application, our federal tax returns, and documents showing employee compensation information. PTE-MD submitted the documents to the SBA through the Lender on September 28, 2021, and there has been no further communication from the SBA since that date.
Business Effects of COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, clinicians, communities, and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact the timing and cost of pursuing FDA licensure of SkinTE under a BLA is highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. We have engaged and will need to continue to engage CROs for our future clinical trials and the COVID-19 pandemic and response efforts may have an impact on the ability of CROs to timely perform the trials we need for SkinTE.
Recent Developments
On March 16, 2022, we completed a registered direct offering of (i) 3,000.000435 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Series A”); (ii) 2,000.00029 shares of Series B Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.001 per share (“Series B,” and together with the Series A, the “Preferred Stock”); and (iii) warrants to purchase up to 16,393,445 shares of common stock (“Common Warrants”). The shares of Preferred Stock have a stated value of $1,000 per share and are convertible, following the date of the issuance thereof, into an aggregate of 9,836,067 shares of our common stock upon the conversion of Series A and into an aggregate of 6,557,378 shares of our common stock upon the conversion of Series B, at a conversion price of $0.305 per share each. Each Common Warrant has an exercise price of $0.35 per share and will become exercisable six months after the original issuance date and will expire two years following the original issuance. We also issued to designees of the placement agent for the registered direct offering as part of the placement agent’s compensation warrants to purchase up to 819,672 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.38125 per share. We expect to realize net proceeds of approximately $4,485,000 from the offering after deducting offering expenses. On March 17, 2022, the holder of the Series B converted the shares to 6,557,378 shares of our common stock.
The investor in this offering is a holder of warrants to purchase up to 9,090,901 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.20 per share issued on January 14, 2021, and warrants to purchase up to 8,016,033 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $1.20 per share issued on January 25, 2021 (collectively, the “Existing Warrants”). Concurrent with the offering, we entered into a Warrant Amendment Agreement (the “Warrant Amendment Agreement”) with the investor pursuant to which, in consideration for the investor’s purchase of $5 million of securities in the offering (the “Purchase Commitment”), we agreed to reduce the exercise price of the Existing Warrants to $0.35 per share, effective upon the consummation of the offering, and confirmation by the placement agent that the investor satisfied the Purchase Commitment. Pursuant to the Warrant Amendment Agreement, the Existing Warrants will not be exercisable at the adjusted price until the date that is six months after the consummation of this offering. Except for these amendments, no other changes have been made to the Existing Warrants. We are currently assessing the impact of the Existing Warrant exercise price reduction to our consolidated financial statements.
On March 30, 2021, we entered into a sales agreement (“Sales Agreement”) with an investment banking firm to sell shares of common stock having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million, from time to time, through an “at the market” equity offering program under which the investment banking firm would act as sales agent. By written notice given by us to the investment banking company on February 28, 2022, we exercised our right to terminate the Sales Agreement and the “at the market” equity offering program. As of the date of termination, no common stock had been sold under the Sales Agreement. Upon such termination we were obligated to make a one-time payment to the investment banking firm of $400,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $19.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and working capital of approximately $17.7 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had $25.5 million in cash and cash equivalents, and working capital of approximately $22.7 million.
We believe cash and cash equivalents on our balance sheet will fund our business activities into the fourth calendar quarter of 2022. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $22.6 million, or an average of $1.9 million per month, compared to $37.8 million of cash used in operating activities, or an average of $3.2 million per month, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As noted above, we are focused primarily on the advancement of our IND and subsequent BLA to attain a license to manufacture and distribute SkinTE. To that end, in June 2021, we engaged a CRO to provide services for the COVER DFUs Trial at a cost of approximately $6.5 million consisting of $3.1 million of service fees and $3.4 million of estimated costs. In July 2021, we prepaid 10% of the total cost of the original work order, or $0.5 million, which will be applied to payment of the final invoice under the work order. Over the approximately three-year term of the DFU Trial the service provider will submit to us for payment invoices on a monthly basis for units of work stated in the work order that are completed and billable expenses incurred. Our expectation is that the second clinical trial will be similar to the COVER DFUs Trial with respect to size, length of time to complete, and cost. In the course of advancing our IND and subsequent BLA, we may propose additional clinical trials to advance our application or broaden the therapeutic indications of use for SkinTE. Clinical trials are the major expense we see in the near and long term, and while we are pursuing clinical trials, we will continue to incur the costs of maintaining our business. In addition to clinical trials, our most significant uses of cash to maintain our business going forward are expected to be compensation, costs of occupying, operating, and maintaining our facilities, and the costs associated with maintaining our status as a publicly traded company listed on Nasdaq.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the gross profit on sales of SkinTE was $2.6 million, which partially contributed to covering our operating costs for the period. As discussed above in this Annual Report, we ceased our SkinTE sales activity at the end of May 2021, so SkinTE sales will not contribute to defraying our operating costs in 2022. To mitigate the effect of this lost revenue, we eliminated some staff and resources that supported the SkinTE commercial effort, but we did not see the benefit of these cost reductions until the fourth quarter of 2021 because of severance and other costs associated with winding down our SkinTE commercial activity. In 2022 our plan is to preserve the facilities, equipment, and staff we need to advance the COVER DFUs Trial and other work necessary for advancing the process for obtaining regulatory approval of SkinTE.
During 2021, we engaged in discussions with certain third parties regarding potential M&A and strategic initiatives. In the fourth quarter of 2021 we recognized $1.2 million one-time costs for professional services associated with such M&A and strategic initiatives and estimate we will recognize an additional $1.4 million of such costs in the first quarter of 2022.
As of the date of this Annual Report we do not expect that our cash and cash equivalents of $19.4 million as of December 31, 2021, would be sufficient to fund our current business plan including related operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements beyond the fourth calendar quarter of 2022. Accordingly, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern, as we do not believe that our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our business plan for at least twelve months from the date of issuance of our annual financial statements. We plan to address this condition by raising additional capital to finance our operations. Although we have been successful in raising capital in the past, financing may not be available on terms favorable to us, if at all, so we may not be successful in obtaining additional financing. Therefore, it is not considered probable, as defined in applicable accounting standards, that our plan to raise additional capital will alleviate the substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
To enhance our ability to do future financings, on February 11, 2022, we filed a registration statement on Form S-3 to register sales of our securities after our current registration statement on Form S-3 expires with the filing of this Annual Report. Pursuant to General Instruction I.B.6 of Form S-3, after this Annual Report and the new Form S-3 registration statement is effective the aggregate market value of securities sold by us during the period of 12 calendar months immediately prior to, and including, the sale is limited to one-third of the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by our non-affiliates so long as the aggregate market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $75.0 million. In the event that subsequent to the effective date of the new Form S-3 registration statement the aggregate market value of our outstanding common stock held by non-affiliates equals or exceeds $75.0 million, then the one-third limitation on sales shall not apply to additional sales.
Our actual capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the cost and timing of advancing our IND and subsequent BLA for SkinTE, the cost and timing of clinical trials, the cost of establishing and maintaining our facilities in compliance with cGMP and cGTP (current good tissue practices) regulations, and the cost and timing of advancing our product development initiatives related to SkinTE. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support its operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially.
We will need to raise additional capital in the future to fund our effort to obtain FDA approval of SkinTE and maintain our operations. Any additional equity financing including financings involving convertible securities, if able to be obtained, may be highly dilutive, on unfavorable terms, or otherwise disadvantageous, to existing stockholders, and debt financing, if available, may involve restrictive covenants or require us to grant a security interest in our assets. If we elect to pursue collaborative arrangements, the terms of such arrangements may require us to relinquish rights to certain of our technologies, products, or marketing territories. Our failure to raise additional capital when needed, and on acceptable terms, would require us to reduce our operating expenses and would limit our ability to continue operations, any of which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, and results of operation.
Results of Operations
Changes in Polarity’s Operations
There have been significant changes in our operations affecting Polarity’s results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to year ended December 31, 2020.
SkinTE was registered and listed with the FDA in August 2017 based on our determination that SkinTE should be regulated solely under Section 361 of the Public Health Service Act and Part 1271 of Title 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations (i.e., as a so-called 361 HCT/P) and that, as a result, no premarket review or approval by the FDA was required. We proceeded to develop sales and manufacturing capabilities for SkinTE and focused on advancing commercialization of SkinTE. We began a regional commercial rollout of SkinTE in October 2018, and while SkinTE was marketed it was used in complex wounds, such as diabetic foot ulcers penetrating to tendon, capsule, and bone classified, Stage 3 and 4 pressure injuries, and acute wounds. Following informal, voluntary discussions with the FDA, we were advised by the FDA in April 2020 that its preliminary assessment is that SkinTE does not meet the requirements to be regulated solely as a 361 HCT/P. Rather, based on the FDA’s preliminary assessment, SkinTE should be regulated under Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. We re-evaluated our regulatory approach and determined it was prudent to submit an IND for SkinTE and an eventual BLA rather than engage in a protracted dispute with the FDA. Accordingly, we ceased commercial sales of SkinTE at the end of May 2021.
On July 23, 2021, we submitted an IND for SkinTE to the FDA through our subsidiary, PTE-MD, as the first step in the regulatory process for obtaining licensure for SkinTE under Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. The FDA subsequently issued clinical hold correspondence to us identifying certain issues that needed to be addressed before the IND could be approved. We provided responses to the FDA, and on January 14, 2022, the FDA sent correspondence informing us that the clinical hold had been removed. The IND approval enables us to commence the first of two expected pivotal studies needed to support a BLA seeking a chronic cutaneous ulcer indication for SkinTE. We ceased selling SkinTE at the end of May 2021, when the period of enforcement discretion previously announced by the FDA with respect to its IND and premarket approval requirements for 361 HCT/Ps came to an end, and we do not expect to be able to commercialize SkinTE until our BLA is approved, which we believe will take at least three to four years.
Arches began offering COVID-19 testing services in May 2020 under 30-day renewable testing agreements with multiple nursing home and pharmacy facilities in the state of New York controlled by a single company, which substantially added to our services net revenues in the last seven months of 2020 and first three months of 2021. When the New York nursing homes and pharmacies adopted on-site employee testing at the end of March 2021, our COVID-19 testing revenues declined substantially, and in August 2021, we decided to cease COVID-19 testing. Arches focused on supporting our IND and clinical trial efforts for the remainder of 2021, and we expect it will continue in that role in 2022 and not provide research services to third parties.
The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant adverse effect on the preclinical research services offered by IBEX in 2020, but there was a resurgence in that business in 2021. The increase in revenues from IBEX services helped to offset the loss of COVID-19 testing revenues in the last nine months of 2021. As a result, revenues from our services business were unchanged in 2021 compared to 2020 and we expect services revenues will be less in 2022 than 2021 since Arches will not be a contributor to services revenues in 2022.
In March 2022, the Company reached a non-binding understanding with an unrelated third party that contemplates the sale of IBEX and the real property used in the operation of IBEX. The potential sale is subject to a number of contingencies. Even though the proposed sale may not materialize, we are exploring our options with respect to IBEX, which is likely to result in curtailed operation of the business or some other disposition in 2022. Under the circumstance, we believe IBEX may not generate services revenues through the remainder of 2022 that would help defray our operating costs.
As a result of the foregoing developments, we made a number of changes to our operations that impacted our results of operations. These included reductions in its work force in 2021 and 2020, and reducing the services and infrastructure needed to support a larger work force and commercial sales effort.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
Net Revenues. Net revenues decreased $0.7 million, or 7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to year ended December 31, 2020.
Products net revenues of $3.1 million in 2021 were 18% less products net revenues in 2020 due to the cessation of commercial sales of SkinTE at the end of May 2021.
The mix of business activity generating services net revenues changed from a majority of service revenues generated by COVID-19 testing in 2020, to a majority of service revenues generated by pre-clinical research services in 2021. Service revenues generated by our pre-clinical research services business in the year ended December 31, 2021, were substantially higher than in 2020, as this business activity experienced a strong recovery from the poor results in 2020, which we believe was caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Our COVID-19 testing services were a significant contributor to overall services revenues only in the first three months of 2021, which was offset by the increases from revenues from our pre-clinical research services business. As a result of these developments net revenues from services remained essentially unchanged in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
Cost of Revenues. The amount for cost of revenues remained essentially unchanged for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to year ended December 31, 2020. There was a change, however, in the mix of cost of revenues amounts between products and services. Due to the cessation of SkinTE sales activity at the end of May 2021, products cost of revenues decreased by 58% from $1.1 million in 2020 to $0.4 million in 2021. This decrease was largely offset by an increase in services cost of revenues in the amount of $0.5 million. Services cost of revenues increased from $3.4 million in 2020 to $3.9 million in 2021 due to an increase in revenues and resulting cost of sales in our pre-clinical research services, which is a lower margin business than the COVID -19 testing services that was the major component of our services revenues in 2020.
Operating Costs and Expenses. Operating costs and expenses decreased $12.9 million, or 25%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The reduction in operating costs and expenses is attributable to reductions in general and administrative expenses, sales and marketing expenses, and restructuring and other charges that were partially offset by increases in research and development expenses.
Research and development expenses increased 23% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The substantial increase in 2021 is primarily attributable to an increase in lab supply costs and consulting services for work on the CMC elements of our IND; re-allocation of costs for manufacturing supplies and compensation following the cessation of SkinTE sales from products cost of goods, general and administrative expenses, and sales and marketing expenses to research and development costs; the costs in our pre-IND clinical trials that we concluded during 2021; and, costs incurred in connection with the planning and initial payments required for the clinical trial we are about to begin under the IND for SkinTE.
We effectuated a reduction in force for our commercial operations in 2021. Consequently, there were reductions in cash compensation, stock compensation, consulting fees, and travel expense. As we reduced and then ended our commercial sales of SkinTE, we also reduced expenses related to a larger operation by terminating our lease for the Utah corporate office in September 2020 and ceasing operations at our manufacturing node in Georgia in the fourth quarter of 2020, from which we recognized the benefits in 2021. Furthermore, with the cessation of SkinTE sales we re-allocated manufacturing supplies and compensation from general and administrative expenses to research and development costs. These reductions were partially offset by executive and employee bonus compensation paid or accrued in 2021 at levels higher than bonus compensation paid or accrued in 2020 and professional fees incurred in connection with our pursuit of a strategic transaction that did not materialize. The cost cutting measures and re-allocation of costs described above are the primary causes of a 26% decrease in general and administrative expense period over period for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
When we reduced the commercial sales team and related commercial activities, we also took steps to reduce staff and consultants in sales and marketing. With the cessation of SkinTE sales several employees who supported sales and marketing moved into new roles in research and development, so their compensation was allocated to research and development. Consequently, there were significant reductions in cash compensation, stock compensation, consulting fees, and travel expense, which resulted in a 68% decrease in sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
We realized restructuring and other charges as a result of the transition to a clinical stage company, much of which were recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020. In connection with reducing our commercial sales activity in 2020 we incurred severance charges of $1.1 million. We abandoned operations at the manufacturing node in Augusta, Georgia, which resulted in the recognition of a charge in the amount of $1.2 million consisting of equipment, leasehold improvements, and a right of use asset. In 2020 we also decided to abandon equipment in addition to the development of a vivarium research facility at our Salt Lake City location resulting in a charge of $1.5 million. By contrast, during the 12-month period ended December 31, 2021, we recognized an impairment of property and equipment in the amount of $0.4 million and severance charges of $0.6 million, which were offset by a $0.3 million gain on the termination of Polarity’s Augusta node lease. Consequently, there was an 82% decrease in restructuring and other charges for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
We recognized an impairment of goodwill and intangible assets pertaining to IBEX for $0.6 million based on management’s judgment regarding the likelihood that IBEX will continue to be a meaningful contributor to the operations of the Company through the remainder of 2022.
Operating Loss and Net Loss. Operating loss decreased $12.3 million, or 27%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Net loss decreased $12.7 million, or 30%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Warrants issued in connection with financings we completed in 2021 and 2020 are classified as liabilities and remeasured each period until settled, classified as equity or expiration. As a result of the periodic remeasurement, we recorded a gain for change in fair value of common stock warrant liability of $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a gain of $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For additional information on the change in fair value of common stock warrant liability please see Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report.
We issued common stock purchase warrants in January 2021, as an inducement to holders of warrants issued in December 2020 to exercise those December warrants. As a result, we recognized an inducement loss of $5.2 million. There was no similar action taken in 2020.
When the PPP Loan was forgiven in June 2021, we recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt in the amount of $3.6 million. This gain together with the positive change in fair value of common stock warrant liability was offset by the inducement loss of $5.2 million recognized in January 2021, which, primarily accounts for the difference of $3.5 million between our operating loss and net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Revenue Recognition. With respect to revenue recognition in contract services provided by IBEX, revenues generally consist of a single performance obligation that IBEX satisfies over time using an input method based on costs incurred to date relative to the total costs expected to be required to satisfy the performance obligation. Our management believes that this method provides a faithful depiction of the transfer of services over the term of the performance obligation based on the remaining services needed to satisfy the obligation. This requires that our services personnel at IBEX make reasonable estimates of the extent of progress toward completion of the contract and, as a result, unbilled receivables and deferred revenue are recognized based on payment timing and work completed.
Stock-Based Compensation. We measure all stock-based compensation to employees and non-employees using a fair value method. For stock options with graded vesting, we recognize compensation expense over the service period for each separately vesting tranche of the award as though the award were in substance, multiple awards based on the fair value on the date of grant. The fair value for options issued is estimated at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The risk-free rate is derived from the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant commensurate with the expected term of the option. The volatility factor is determined based on our historical stock prices. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur. The fair value of restricted stock grants is measured based on the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant and amortized to compensation expense over the vesting period of, generally, six months to three years.
Common Stock Warrant Liability. The fair value of the common stock warrant liability is estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model, which involves simulated future stock price amounts over the remaining life of the commitment. The fair value estimate is affected by our stock price as well as estimated change of control considerations.