Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Pine Technology Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Recent Developments
Terminated Business Combination Agreement
On December 7, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub and Tomorrow.io.
On March 6, 2022, the Parties to the Merger Agreement entered into the Termination Agreement pursuant to which, due to market conditions, the parties agreed to terminate the Merger Agreement effective as of such date, after taking several factors into consideration. Pursuant to the Termination Agreement, Tomorrow.io will pay us $1,500,000 upon the earliest to occur of (a) 120 days from the date of the Termination Agreement, (b) two business days after the initial closing of Tomorrow.io’s Next Financing and (c) immediately prior to the consummation of a Change of Control.
As a result of the Termination Agreement, the Merger Agreement is of no further force and effect, and certain agreements entered into in connection with the Merger Agreement, including, but not limited to, the Parent Support Agreement, dated as of December 7, 2021, by and among PTAC, Tomorrow.io and Sponsor, the Voting and Support Agreements, dated as of December 7, 2021, by and among PTAC, Merger Sub, Tomorrow.io and certain Tomorrow.io stockholders, and the Subscription Agreements, dated December 7, 2021, by and among PTAC with its sponsor and certain other investors, will either be terminated or no longer be effective, as applicable, in accordance with their respective terms.
We intend to continue to pursue the consummation of a business combination with an appropriate target.
The foregoing description of the Termination Agreement does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, which is filed herewith as Exhibit 2.1, and the Termination Agreement, which is filed herewith as Exhibit 10.15, each of which is incorporated by reference herein.
For more information about the Terminated Business Combination Agreement and other recent developments, please see “Item 1. Business - Recent Developments.”
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our IPO and identifying a target company for our initial business combination, and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Tomorrow.io, which has subsequently been terminated. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,661,915, which consists of interest income on amounts held in the Trust Account of $75,817 and change in the fair value of the warrant liability of $1,771,678, offset by formation and operating costs of $2,309,331, offering expenses related to warrant issuance of $844,080 and excess of fair value over cash received for Private Placement Warrants of $355,999.
For the quarter ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $ $8,397,715, which was largely attributable to a $6,908,333 increase in the fair value of the warrant liability, as well as operating costs of $1,509,511 consisting primarily of the costs related to the initial business combination. We had interest income on amounts held in the Trust Account of $20,129.
For the period from December 30, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,940, which consists of formation and operating costs of $1,940.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 15, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 34,500,000 units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 5,933,333 Private Placement Warrants to the sponsor at a price of $1.50 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $8,900,000.
Following the IPO, the exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $345,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $19,478,776 in transaction costs, including $6,900,000 of underwriting fees, $12,075,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $503,776 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the trust account of $345,075,817 (including approximately $75,817 of interest income) consisting of U.S. government securities with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the trust account to pay our tax obligations.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,486,542. Net loss of $1,661,915 was affected by interest earned on cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $75,817, a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,771,678, excess of fair value over cash received for Private Placement Warrants of $355,999 and offering costs allocated to warrants of $844,080. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $822,789 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from December 30, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was nil. Net loss of $1,940 was offset by changes in current assets and liabilities of $1,940.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $313,382. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We anticipate that the $313,382 outside of the Trust Account as of December 31, 2021 will not be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the Trust Account, and any additional Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5 to our financial statements) from the Company’s Sponsor, an affiliate of the Company’s Sponsor or certain of the Company’s directors and officers (which is described in Note 5 to our financial statements), for identifying and evaluating target businesses, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structuring, negotiating and completing a business combination. If we are unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or the date we are required to liquidate. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the initial stockholder or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants identical to the Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender.
On December 6, 2021, we issued a promissory note in the principal amount of $350,000 to our sponsor. Such promissory note bears interest at 0.33% per annum and is repayable in full at the earlier of (i) March 15, 2023 or (ii) the date on which we consummate an initial business combination as contemplated by our amended and restated certificate of incorporation. If we do not consummate a business combination, we may use a portion of any funds held outside the trust account to repay the Note; however, no proceeds from the trust account may be used for such repayment. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance under the Note amounted to an aggregate of $350,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, administrative and support services to the Company. We began incurring these fees on March 11, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters of the PTAC IPO are entitled to a deferred fee of $12,075,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
On December 6, 2021, we issued a promissory note in the principal amount of $350,000 (the “Note”) to our sponsor. Such promissory note bears interest at 0.33% per annum and is repayable in full at the earlier of (i) March 15, 2023 or (ii) the date on which we consummate an initial business combination as contemplated by our amended and restated certificate of incorporation.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A Common Stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A Common Stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our audited balance sheet.
Net Income per Share of Common Stock
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted income per share is the same as basic income per share for the period presented.
The Company’s statement of operations applies the two-class method in calculating net income per share. Basic and diluted net income per common share for Class A common stock and Class B common stock is calculated by dividing net income attributable to the Company by the weighted average number of shares of Class A common stock and Class B common stock outstanding, allocated proportionally to each class of common stock.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We account for our 17,433,333 warrants (comprising 11,500,000 public included as part of our units sold in our initial public offering (the “public warrants”) and 5,933,333 private placement warrants sold to our sponsor in a private placement which took place concurrently with our initial public offering (the “Private Placement Warrants”)) as derivative warrant liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of public warrants issued by the Company in connection with its initial public offering was initially measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model, and then subsequently measured at the public trading price. The fair value of Private Placement Warrants has been estimated using a Modified Black-Scholes model at each measurement date.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.