ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion compares the Company’s financial condition at December 31, 2021 to its financial condition at December 31, 2020 and the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto appearing in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements are statements that include, without limitation, projections, predictions, expectations, or beliefs about future events or results that are not statements of historical fact. Such forward-looking statements are based on various assumptions as of the time they are made, and are inherently subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors, some of which cannot be predicted or quantified, that may cause actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are often accompanied by words that convey projected future events or outcomes such as “expect,” “believe,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “will,” “may,” “view,” “opportunity,” “potential,” or words of similar meaning or other statements concerning opinions or judgment of the Company and its management about future events. Although the Company believes that its expectations with respect to forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions within the bounds of its existing knowledge of its business and operations, there can be no assurance that actual results, performance, or achievements of, or trends affecting, the Company will not differ materially from any projected future results, performance, achievements or trends expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Actual future results, performance, achievements or trends may differ materially from historical results or those anticipated depending on a variety of factors, including, but not limited to:
● the risk that the cost savings, any revenue synergies and other anticipated benefits of the proposed merger with OCFC may not be realized or may take longer than anticipated to be realized, including as a result of the impact of, or problems arising from, the integration of the two companies or as a result of the condition of the economy and competitive factors in areas where OCFC and the Company do business;
● deposit attrition, operating costs, customer losses and other disruptions to the parties’ businesses as a result of the announcement and pendency of the proposed merger, and diversion of management’s attention from ongoing business operations and opportunities;
● the occurrence of any event, change or other circumstances that could give rise to the right of one or both of the parties to terminate the merger agreement;
● the risk that the integration of OCFC and the Company’s operations will be materially delayed or will be more costly or difficult than expected or that OCFC and the Company are otherwise unable to successfully integrate their businesses;
● the outcome of any legal proceedings instituted against OCFC and/or the Company;
● the failure to obtain required governmental approvals (and the risk that such governmental approvals may result in the imposition of conditions that could adversely affect the combined company or the expected benefits of the proposed transaction);
● reputational risk and potential adverse reactions of OCFC and/or the Company’s customers, suppliers, employees or other business partners, including those resulting from the announcement or completion of the proposed merger;
● the failure of any of the closing conditions in the merger agreement to be satisfied on a timely basis or at all;
● changes in interest rates, such as volatility in yields on U.S. Treasury bonds and increases or volatility in mortgage rates;
● general business conditions, as well as conditions within the financial markets, including the impact thereon of geopolitical conflicts such as the military conflict between Russian and Ukraine;
● general economic conditions, in the United States generally and particularly in the markets in which the Company operates and which its loans are concentrated, including the effects of declines in real estate values, an increase in unemployment levels and slowdowns in economic growth, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
● the effect of steps the Company takes in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the severity and duration of the pandemic and the distribution and efficacy of vaccines, the pace of recovery when the pandemic subsides and the heightened impact it has on many of the risks described herein;
● legislative or regulatory changes and requirements, including further legislative and regulatory changes related to the COVID-19 pandemic;
● monetary and fiscal policies of the U.S. Government, including policies of the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Reserve, and the effect of these policies on interest rates and business in our markets;
● changes in the value of securities held in the Company’s investment portfolios;
● changes in the quality or composition of the loan portfolios and the value of the collateral securing those loans;
● changes in the level of net charge-offs on loans and the adequacy of our allowance for credit losses;
● demand for loan products;
● deposit flows;
● the strength of the Company’s counterparties;
● competition from both banks and non-banks;
● demand for financial services in the Company’s market area;
● reliance on third parties for key services;
● changes in the commercial and residential real estate markets;
● cyber threats, attacks or events;
● expansion of Delmarva’s and Virginia Partners’ product offerings;
● changes in accounting principles, policies and guidelines, and elections by the Company thereunder;
● potential claims, damages, and fines related to litigation or government actions, including litigation or actions arising from the Company’s participation in and administration of programs related to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
● other factors, many of which are beyond the control of the Company.
These factors should not be considered exhaustive and should be read together with other cautionary statements that are included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including those discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” All of the forward-looking statements made in this Annual Report are expressly qualified by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this Annual Report. The actual results or developments anticipated may not be realized or, even if substantially realized, they may not have the expected consequences to or effects on the Company or its businesses or operations. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made and the Company does not undertake any obligation to update, revise, or clarify these forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
Partners Bancorp, a bank holding corporation, through its wholly owned subsidiaries, The Bank of Delmarva (“Delmarva”) and Virginia Partners Bank (“Virginia Partners”), each of which are commercial banking corporations, engages in general commercial banking operations, with twenty branches throughout Wicomico, Charles, Anne Arundel, and Worcester Counties in Maryland, Sussex County in Delaware, Camden and Burlington Counties in New Jersey, the cities of Fredericksburg and Reston, Virginia, and Spotsylvania County, Virginia.
The Company derives the majority of its income from interest received on our loans and investment securities. The primary source of funding for making these loans and purchasing investment securities are deposits and secondarily, borrowings. Consequently, one of the key measures of the Company’s success is the amount of net interest income, or the difference between the income on interest earning assets, such as loans and investment securities, and the expense on interest bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. The resulting ratio of that difference as a percentage of average interest earning assets represents the net interest margin. Another key measure is the spread between the yield earned on interest earning assets and the rate paid on interest bearing liabilities, which is called the net interest spread. In addition to earning interest on loans and investment securities, the Company earns income through fees and other charges to customers. Also included is a discussion of the various components of this noninterest income, as well as of noninterest expense.
There are risks inherent in all loans, so the Company maintains an allowance for credit losses to absorb probable losses on existing loans that may become uncollectible. The Company maintains this allowance for credit losses by charging a provision for credit losses as needed against our operating earnings for each period. The Company has included a detailed discussion of this process, as well as several tables describing its allowance for credit losses.
The Company plans to continue to grow organically, including potential expansion into new market areas, such as its recent expansion into the Greater Washington market. The Company believes its current financial condition, coupled with its scalable operational capabilities, will allow it to act upon growth opportunities in the current banking environment. The Company’s financial performance generally, and in particular the ability of its borrowers to repay their loans, the value of collateral securing those loans, as well as demand for loans and other products and services the Company offers, is highly dependent on the business environment in the Company’s primary markets where the Company operates and in the United States as a whole.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has severely disrupted supply chains and adversely affected production, demand, sales and employee productivity across a range of industries, dramatically increased unemployment in the Company’s areas of operation and nationally, and previously resulted in orders directing the closing or limited operation of certain businesses and restrictions on public gatherings. These events affected the Company’s operations during 2020 and 2021, and are expected to impact the Company’s financial results continuing on into 2022. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, the impact on the Company’s customers, employees and vendors and the nature and effect of past and future federal and state governmental and private sector responses to the pandemic, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted.
In connection with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, both Delmarva and Virginia Partners continue to follow their pandemic response plans, which were enacted in February 2020. To date, management believes that the plans have been implemented successfully. As of December 31, 2021, both Delmarva and Virginia Partners branch operations were operating under normal lobby and drive-thru hours. In addition, the majority of Delmarva’s and Virginia Partners’ employees, with a few exceptions, have shifted from remote work to returning to the office on either a full-time or hybrid basis. Delmarva and Virginia Partners continue to take necessary precautions in order to protect their staffs, customers and their families as well as their communities, and to limit the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Future developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted and new information may emerge concerning the severity of the outbreak and the actions to contain the outbreak or treat its impact, among others. Other national health concerns, including the outbreak of other contagious diseases or pandemics may adversely affect the Company in the future. Please refer to the “Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses” section of this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” for more information related to payment deferrals, concentrations in higher risk industries, and the impact on the allowance for credit losses.
The following discussion and analysis also identifies significant factors that have affected the Company's financial position and operating results during the periods included in the consolidated financial statements accompanying this report. You are encouraged to read this management's discussion and analysis in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the other statistical information included in this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Certain critical accounting policies affect significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the Company's consolidated financial statements. These significant accounting policies are described in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The accounting principles the Company follows and the methods of applying these principles conform to U.S. GAAP and general banking industry practices. The Company's most critical accounting policy relates to the determination of the allowance for credit losses, which reflects the estimated losses resulting from the inability of borrowers to make loan payments. The determination of the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses involves significant judgment and complexity and is based on many factors. If the financial condition of our borrowers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, the estimates would be updated and additional provisions for credit losses may be required. See “Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses” and Note 1 and Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Another of the Company’s critical accounting policies, with the acquisitions of Liberty in 2018 and Virginia Partners in 2019, relates to the valuation of goodwill and intangible assets. The Company accounted for the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic No. 805, which requires the use of the acquisition method of accounting. Under this method, assets acquired, including intangible assets, and liabilities assumed, are recorded at their fair value. Determination of fair value involves estimates based on internal valuations of discounted cash flow analyses performed, third party valuations, or other valuation techniques that involve subjective assumptions. Additionally, the term of the useful lives and appropriate amortization periods of intangible assets is subjective. Resulting goodwill from the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange, which totaled approximately $5.2 million and $4.4 million, respectively, under the acquisition method of accounting represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized, but is evaluated for impairment annually or more frequently if deemed necessary. If the fair value of an asset exceeds the carrying amount of the asset, no charge to goodwill is made. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the asset, goodwill will be adjusted through a charge to earnings, which is limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. In evaluating the goodwill on its consolidated balance sheet for impairment after the consummation date of the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange, the Company will first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our acquired assets is less than the carrying amount of the acquired assets, as allowed under ASU 2017-04. After making the assessment based on several factors, which will include, but is not limited to, the current economic environment, the economic outlook in our markets, our financial performance and common stock value as compared to our peers, we will determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value of our assets is greater than their carrying amount and, accordingly, will determine whether impairment of goodwill should be recorded as a charge to earnings in years subsequent to the Liberty Merger and the Share Exchange. This assessment was performed during the fourth quarter of 2021, and resulted in no impairment of goodwill. Depending on the severity of the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and their impact on the Company, management may determine that goodwill is required to be evaluated for impairment due to the presence of a triggering event, which may have a negative impact on the Company’s results of operations.
In addition to the Company’s policies related to the valuation of goodwill, intangible assets and other acquisition accounting adjustments, ongoing accounting for acquired loans is considered a critical accounting policy. Acquired loans are classified as either purchased credit impaired (“PCI “) loans or purchased performing loans and are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition. PCI loans are those for which there is evidence of credit deterioration since origination and for which it is probable at the date of acquisition that the Company will not collect all contractually required principal and interest payments. The difference between contractually required payments at acquisition and the cash flows expected to be collected at acquisition is referred to as the “nonaccretable difference.” Any excess of cash flows expected at acquisition over the estimated fair value is referred to as the “accretable yield” and is recognized as interest income over the remaining life of the loan when there is a reasonable expectation about the amount and timing of such cash flows. Periodically, we evaluate our estimate of cash flows expected to be collected on PCI loans. Estimates of cash flows for PCI loans require significant judgment. Subsequent decreases to the expected cash flows will generally result in a provision for credit losses resulting in an increase to the allowance for credit losses. Subsequent significant increases in cash flows may result in a reversal of post-acquisition provision for credit losses or a transfer from nonaccretable difference to accretable yield that increases interest income over the remaining life of the loan, or pool(s) of loans. The Company accounts for purchased performing loans using the contractual cash flows method of recognizing discount accretion based on the acquired loans’ contractual cash flows. Purchased performing loans are recorded at fair value, including a credit discount. The fair value discount is accreted as an adjustment to yield over the estimated lives of the loans. There is no allowance for credit losses established at the acquisition date for purchased performing loans, but a provision for credit losses may be required for any deterioration in these loans in future periods. The Company evaluates purchased performing loans quarterly for deterioration and records any required additional provision for credit losses.
Another critical accounting policy relates to deferred tax assets and liabilities. The Company records deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Future tax benefits, such as net operating loss carry forwards available from the Liberty acquisition, are recognized to the extent that realization of such benefits is more likely than not. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the assets and liabilities are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income tax expense in the period that includes the enactment date. In the event the future tax consequences of differences between the financial reporting bases and the tax bases of our assets and liabilities results in deferred tax assets, an evaluation of the probability of being able to realize the future benefits indicated by such assets is required. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that a portion or the full amount of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the ability to realize the deferred tax assets, management considers the scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies. Such a deferred tax liability will only be recognized when it becomes apparent that those temporary differences will reverse in the foreseeable future. A tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than fifty (50) percent more likely of being realized on examination. For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded.
Results of Operations
Net income attributable to the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $7.4 million, or $0.42 per basic and diluted share, as compared to $5.7 million, or $0.32 per basic and diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2020, a $1.7 million or 30.7% increase.
The Company’s results of operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were directly impacted by the following:
Positive Impacts:
● An increase in net interest income due primarily to lower rates paid on average interest-bearing deposit balances, a decrease in average borrowings balances, and an increase in average loan balances, which were partially offset by lower loan yields earned and an increase in average interest-bearing deposit balances. Net interest income was positively impacted due to higher net loan fees earned related to the forgiveness of loans originated and funded under the PPP of the SBA; and
● A significantly lower provision for credit losses due to the current economic environment and the milder impact of the COVID-19 pandemic compared to December 31, 2020.
Negative Impacts:
● A lower net interest margin (tax equivalent basis);
● Lower gains on sales and calls of investment securities;
● Reduced operating results from Virginia Partners’ majority owned subsidiary JMC, partially offset by higher mortgage division fees at Delmarva;
● Higher losses on other real estate owned due to valuation adjustments and lower gains on sales;
● Expenses associated with Virginia Partners’ new key hires and expansion into the Greater Washington market, including opening its new full-service branch and commercial banking office in Reston, Virginia during the third quarter of 2021, and Delmarva opening its new information technology and training center late in the fourth quarter of 2020 and its twelfth full-service branch at 26th Street in Ocean City, Maryland during the second quarter of 2021; and
● Expenses associated with the Company’s pending merger with OCFC, including $896 thousand in stock-based compensation expense related to the accelerated vesting of restricted stock awards, which accelerated vesting was subject to the prior approval of the Company and was not contingent on the actual merger closing, and $979 thousand in merger related expenses, all of which were recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021.
As previously disclosed, on November 4, 2021, the Company and OCFC announced that they have entered into a definitive agreement and plan of merger pursuant to which the Company will merge into OCFC, with OCFC surviving, and following which Virginia Partners and Delmarva will each successively merge with and into OceanFirst Bank, N.A., with OceanFirst Bank surviving each bank merger. The mergers are subject to receiving the requisite approval of the Company’s stockholders, which was received on March 9, 2022, receipt of all required regulatory approvals and fulfillment of other customary closing conditions.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s return on average assets, return on average equity and efficiency ratio were 0.46%, 5.43% and 76.97%, respectively, as compared to 0.40%, 4.24% and 71.96%, respectively, for the same period in 2020.
The increase in net income attributable to the Company for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was driven by an increase in net interest income and a lower provision for credit losses, and was partially offset by a decrease in noninterest income and higher noninterest expenses and federal and state income taxes.
Financial Condition
Total assets as of December 31, 2021 were $1.64 billion, an increase of $130.8 million, or 8.6%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change were increases in cash and cash equivalents and total loans held for investment. Changes in key balance sheet components as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 were as follows:
● Interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions as of December 31, 2021 were $297.9 million, an increase of $79.2 million, or 36.2%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change were total deposit growth outpacing total loan growth, a decrease in investment securities available for sale, at fair value, and the Company repositioning its excess liquidity in order to earn higher amounts of interest income, which were partially offset by a decrease in long-term borrowings with the Federal Home Loan Bank and other borrowings;
● Federal funds sold as of December 31, 2021 were $28.0 million, a decrease of $22.3 million, or 44.3%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change were the aforementioned items noted in the analysis of interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions;
● Investment securities available for sale, at fair value as of December 31, 2021 were $122.0 million, a decrease of $2.9 million, or 2.3%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change were higher yielding investment securities being called, accelerated prepayments on mortgage-backed investment securities in the low interest rate environment and a decrease in unrealized gains on the investment securities available for sale portfolio;
● Loans, net of unamortized discounts on acquired loans of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2021 were $1.12 billion, an increase of $81.7 million, or 7.9%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change were the origination and funding of approximately $30.9 million in loans under round two of the PPP, which was partially offset by forgiveness payments received of approximately $65.0 million under rounds one and two of the PPP, and an increase in organic growth, including growth of approximately $50.2 million in loans related to Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $8.2 million in loans under round two of the PPP were still outstanding;
● Total deposits as of December 31, 2021 were $1.44 billion, an increase of $174.7 million, or 13.8%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change were organic growth as a result of our continued focus on total relationship banking and Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market, customers seeking the liquidity and safety of deposit accounts in light of continuing economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, and the funding of loans under round two of the PPP, the proceeds of which were deposited directly into the operating accounts of these customers at the Company;
● Total borrowings as of December 31, 2021 were $49.2 million, a decrease of $50.2 million, or 50.5%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change was a decrease in long-term borrowings with the Federal Home Loan Bank resulting from maturities and payoffs of borrowings that were not replaced, the early redemption of $2.0 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in early July 2021, and a decrease in borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which the loans under the PPP originated by the Company had previously been pledged as collateral. During the first quarter of 2021, the Company used a portion of its excess cash and cash equivalents to repay all borrowings that were previously outstanding under the PPP Liquidity Facility; and
● Total stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2021 was $141.4 million, an increase of $4.7 million, or 3.4%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change was the net income attributable to the Company for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards, which were partially offset by the decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, cash dividends paid to shareholders and the repurchase of shares of the Company’s common stock under the Company’s Board of Directors approved stock purchase plan.
Delmarva's Tier 1 leverage capital ratio was 8.1% at both December 31, 2021 and 2020. At both December 31, 2021 and 2020, Delmarva's Tier 1 risk-weighted capital and total risk-weighted capital ratios were 11.6% and 12.9%, respectively.
Virginia Partners’ Tier 1 leverage capital ratio was 8.5% at December 31, 2021 as compared to 9.5% at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2021, Virginia Partners’ Tier 1 risk-weighted capital and total risk-weighted capital ratios were 11.3% and 12.0%, respectively, as compared to Tier 1 risk-weighted capital and total risk-weighted capital ratios of 13.1% and 13.5%, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, all of the capital ratios of Delmarva and Virginia Partners continue to exceed regulatory requirements, with total risk-based capital substantially above well-capitalized regulatory requirements.
See “Capital” below for additional information about Delmarva’s and Virginia Partners’ capital ratios and requirements.
At December 31, 2021, nonperforming assets totaled $9.8 million, an increase from December 31, 2020 balances of $7.6 million. Most of this increase was due to an increase in nonaccrual loans, which totaled $9.0 million at December 31, 2021 compared with a balance of $4.9 million at December 31, 2020. There were no loans past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest at the end of 2021, compared to one loan past due 90 days or more and still accruing interest at December 31, 2020 with a balance of $2 thousand. Other real estate owned as of December 31, 2021 was $837 thousand, as compared to $2.7 million at December 31, 2020. Nonperforming loans as a percentage of total assets was 0.5% at December 31, 2021 and 0.3% at December 31, 2020. Nonperforming assets to total assets as of December 31, 2021 was 0.6% compared to 0.5% at December 31, 2020. Loans classified as Troubled Debt Restructurings (“TDRs’) totaled $7.9 million at December 31, 2021 and $6.7 million at December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.2 million during the year. This increase was mainly due to the addition of one relationship with an aggregate balance of $2.9 million.
Net charge-offs were 0.08% of average total loans for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 0.10% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The allowance for credit losses to total loans ratio was 1.31% at December 31, 2021, compared to 1.28% at December 31, 2020. In addition to the allowance for credit losses, as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company had $2.3 million and $4.0 million, respectively, in unamortized discounts on acquired loans related to the acquisitions of Liberty and Virginia Partners. This discount is amortized over the life of the remaining loans.
Summary of Return on Equity and Assets
Earnings Analysis
The Company's primary source of revenue is interest income and fees, which it earns by lending and investing the funds which are held on deposit. Because loans generally earn higher rates of interest than investment securities, the Company seeks to deploy as much of its deposit funds as possible in the form of loans to individuals, businesses, and other organizations. To ensure sufficient liquidity, the Company also maintains a portion of its deposits in cash and cash equivalents, government securities, interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions, and overnight loans of excess reserves (known as “Federal Funds Sold”) to correspondent banks. The revenue which the Company earns (prior to deducting its overhead expenses) is essentially a function of the amount of the Company's loans and deposits, as well as the profit margin (“interest spread”) and fee income which can be generated on these amounts.
Net income attributable to the Company was $7.4 million and $5.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as reported in its audited consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Company's consolidated financial statements and the notes to the consolidated financial statements included at Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following is a summary of the results of operations and financial condition of the Company at and for the periods and at the dates indicated, respectively:
Interest Income and Expense - Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Interest Income and Net Interest Margin
The largest component of net income for the Company is net interest income, which is the difference between the income earned on assets, such as loans and investment securities, and interest paid on liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, used to support such assets. Net interest income is determined by the rates earned on the Company's interest-earning assets and the rates paid on its interest-bearing liabilities, the relative amounts of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, and the degree of mismatch and the maturity and repricing characteristics of its interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities.
Net interest income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 increased by $2.6 million, or 6.0%, when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The Company's net interest margin (tax equivalent basis) decreased to 3.02%, representing a decrease of 15 basis points for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in the net interest margin (tax equivalent basis) was primarily due to a decrease in the yields earned on average loans and investment securities, and higher average balances of interest-bearing liabilities. These margin pressures were offset by higher net loan fees earned related to the forgiveness of loans originated and funded under the PPP, increases in average loan and investment securities balances, and lower rates paid on average interest-bearing liabilities. The Company’s net interest margin (tax equivalent basis) was also negatively impacted by higher average balances of cash and due from banks, interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions and federal funds sold, which are lower yielding interest-earning assets. Total interest income decreased by $743 thousand, or 1.3%, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 while total interest expense decreased by $3.4 million, or 27.5%, both as compared to the same period in 2020. The most significant factors impacting net interest income during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were as follows:
Positive Impacts:
● Increases in average loan balances, primarily due to organic loan growth and loans originated and funded under the PPP, and higher net loan fees earned related to the forgiveness of loans originated and funded under the PPP, partially offset by lower loan yields;
● Increases in average investment securities balances, primarily due to management of the investment securities portfolio in light of the Company's liquidity needs, partially offset by lower investment securities yields;
● Decrease in the rate paid on average interest-bearing deposit balances, primarily due to lower rates paid on average money market and time deposits, partially offset by increases in average interest-bearing deposit balances, primarily due to organic deposit growth; and
● Decrease in average borrowings balances, primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of Federal Home Loan Bank advances resulting from maturities and payoffs of borrowings that were not replaced, a decrease in average borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which the loans under the PPP originated by the Company were previously pledged as collateral, the early redemption of $2.0 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in early July 2021, which were partially offset by the issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in late June 2020, and higher rates paid. The increase in average rates paid was primarily due to the issuance of subordinated notes payable being a higher cost interest-bearing liability and the decreases in the average balances of Federal Home Loan Bank advances and borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility, which were both lower cost interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by the early redemption of subordinated notes payable, which was a higher cost interest-bearing liability.
Negative Impacts:
● Increases in average cash and due from banks, interest bearing deposits in other financial institutions and federal funds sold, primarily due to deposit growth outpacing loan growth, and lower yields on each.
Loans
Average loan balances increased by $45.4 million, or 4.3%, and average yields earned decreased by 0.18% to 4.85% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in average loan balances was primarily due to organic loan growth, including average growth of approximately $24.7 million in loans related to Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market, and loans originated and funded under the PPP, which were partially offset by the forgiveness of loans originated and funded under the PPP. Organic loan growth continued to be negatively impacted by higher pay-offs and tempered loan demand due to the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease in average yields earned was primarily due to pay-offs of higher yielding fixed rate loans, repricing of variable rate loans, and lower average yields on new loan originations, including loans originated under the PPP at an interest rate of 1%, which were partially offset by higher net loan fees earned related to the forgiveness of loans originated and funded under the PPP. Total average loans were 70.5% of total average interest-earning assets for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to 75.4% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Investment securities
Average total investment securities balances increased by $1.7 million, or 1.3%, and average yields earned decreased by 0.62% to 1.89% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to management of the investment securities portfolio in light of the Company's liquidity needs and lower interest rates over the comparable period. In addition, the decrease in average yields earned was driven by accelerated prepayments on mortgage-backed investment securities in the low interest rate environment. These prepayments have caused the premiums paid on these investment securities to be amortized into expense on an accelerated basis thereby reducing income and yield earned. Total average investment securities were 8.4% of total average interest-earning assets for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared to 9.3% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Interest-bearing deposits
Average total interest-bearing deposit balances increased by $101.3 million, or 12.5%, and average rates paid decreased by 0.44% to 0.73% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to organic deposit growth, including average growth of approximately $13.1 million in deposits related to Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market, and a decrease in the average rate paid on money market and time deposits due to the decline in interest rates beginning late in the first quarter of 2020.
Borrowings
Average total borrowings decreased by $76.7 million, or 56.7%, and average rates paid increased by 1.61% to 3.62% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in average total borrowings balances was primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of Federal Home Loan Bank advances resulting from maturities and payoffs of borrowings that were not replaced, a decrease in average borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which the loans under the PPP originated by the Company were previously pledged as collateral, and the early redemption of $2.0 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in early July 2021, which were partially offset by the issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in late June 2020. The increase in average rates paid was primarily due to the issuance of subordinated notes payable, which is a higher cost interest-bearing liability, and the decreases in the average balances of Federal Home Loan Bank advances and borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility, which were both lower cost interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by the early redemption of subordinated notes payable, which was a higher cost interest-bearing liability.
Interest earned on assets and interest paid on liabilities is significantly influenced by market factors, specifically interest rate targets established by the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Open Markets Committee (“FOMC”) lowered Federal Funds target rates for the first time in 11 years on July 31, 2019 and then again in September 2019 and October 2019, for a combined decrease of 75 basis points during 2019. In response to market volatility related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the FOMC again lowered Federal Funds target rates twice in March 2020, for a combined decrease of 150 basis points. The FOMC’s current Federal Funds target rate range is currently 0% to 0.25%. As a consequence, long-term interest rates have decreased. While there have been indications that FOMC plans to raise interest rates in 2022, the Company anticipates that the current interest rate environment will continue to put downward pressure on the Company’s net interest margin. In general, the Company believes interest rate increases lead to improved net interest margins whereas interest rate decreases result in correspondingly lower net interest margins.
The following table depicts, for the periods indicated, certain information related to the average balance sheet and average yields earned on assets and average costs paid on liabilities for the Company. Such yields and costs are derived by dividing income or expense by the average balance of the corresponding assets or liabilities. Average balances have been derived from daily averages.
(1) Yields on securities available-for-sale have been calculated on the basis of historical cost and do not give effect to changes in the fair value of those securities, which is reflected as a component of shareholder's equity.
(2) Presented on a taxable-equivalent basis using the statutory income tax rate of 21.0% for 2021 and 2020. Taxable equivalent adjustments of $229 thousand and $9 thousand are included in the calculation of tax exempt income for investment interest income and loan interest income, respectively for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $322 thousand and $10 thousand respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(3) Loans placed on nonaccrual are included in average balances.
(4) Yields do not include the average balance of the fair value adjustment for pools of non-credit impaired loans acquired or discounts on credit impaired loans acquired.
The level of net interest income is affected primarily by variations in the volume and mix of these interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in interest rates. The following table shows the effect that these factors had on the interest earned from the Company's interest-earning assets and interest paid on its interest-bearing liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 versus 2020.
Rate and Volume Analysis
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Versus December 31, 2020
(Dollars in Thousands)
(1) Nonaccrual loans are included in average balances and do not have a material effect on the average yield.
Interest Sensitivity. The Company monitors and manages the pricing and maturity of its assets and liabilities in order to diminish the potential adverse impact that changes in interest rates could have on its net interest income. The Company also performs asset/liability modeling to assess the impact varying interest rates and balance sheet mix assumptions will have on net interest income. Interest rate sensitivity can be managed by repricing assets or liabilities, selling investment securities available-for-sale, replacing an asset or liability at maturity, or adjusting the interest rate during the life of an asset or liability. Managing the amount of assets and liabilities repricing in the same time interval helps to hedge the risk and minimize the impact on net interest income of rising or falling interest rates. The Company evaluates interest sensitivity risk and then formulates guidelines regarding asset generation and repricing, funding sources and pricing, and off-balance sheet commitments in order to decrease interest rate sensitivity risk.
At December 31, 2021, the Company was asset sensitive within the one-year time frame when looking at a repricing gap analysis. The cumulative gap, in an unchanged interest rate environment, as a percentage of total assets up to one year is 27.0%. A positive gap indicates more assets than liabilities are repricing within the indicated time frame. Management believes there is more upside potential than downside risk and, based on the current and projected interest rate environment, management expects to see net interest income rise in the future.
Provision and Allowance for Credit Losses
The Company has developed policies and procedures for evaluating the overall quality of its credit portfolio and for timely identifying potential problem loans. Management's judgment as to the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses is based upon a number of assumptions about future events which it believes to be reasonable, but which may not prove to be accurate. Thus, there can be no assurance that loan charge-offs in future periods will not exceed the allowance for credit losses or that additional increases in the allowance for credit losses will not be required.
The Company's allowance for credit losses consists of two parts. The first part is determined in accordance with authoritative guidance issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) regarding the allowance for credit losses. The Company's determination of this part of the allowance for credit losses is based upon quantitative and qualitative factors. A loan loss history based upon the prior three years is utilized in determining the appropriate allowance for credit losses. Historical loss factors are determined by criticized and uncriticized loans by loan type. These historical loss factors are applied to the loans by loan type to determine an indicated allowance for credit losses. The historical loss factors may also be modified based upon other qualitative factors including, but not limited to, local and national economic conditions, trends of delinquent loans, changes in lending policies and underwriting standards, concentrations, and management's knowledge of the loan portfolio.
The second part of the allowance for credit losses is determined in accordance with guidance issued by the FASB regarding impaired loans. A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value, and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all of the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower's prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan by loan basis. Impaired loans not deemed collateral dependent are analyzed according to the ultimate repayment source, whether that is cash flow from the borrower, guarantor or some other source of repayment. Impaired loans are deemed collateral dependent if in the Company's opinion the ultimate source of repayment will be generated from the liquidation of collateral.
The sum of the two parts constitutes management's best estimate of an appropriate allowance for credit losses. When the estimated allowance for credit losses is determined, it is presented to the Company's Board of Directors for review and approval on a quarterly basis.
At December 31, 2021, the Company's allowance for credit losses was $14.7 million, or 1.31% of total outstanding loans. At December 31, 2020, the allowance for credit losses was $13.2 million, or 1.28% of total outstanding loans. The Company's provision for credit losses was $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in the provision for credit losses during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period of 2020, was primarily due to a reduction of qualitative adjustment factors that had previously been increased in the allowance for credit losses related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the uncertainty in the economic environment and the reversal of specific reserves on purchased credit impaired loans acquired in the Virginia Partners acquisition due to improved performance, which were partially offset by the deterioration in asset quality and increased specific reserves of two loan relationships, the deterioration in asset quality and the establishment of a specific reserve on one loan relationship that has been individually evaluated for impairment, an increase in historical loss rates, loans acquired in the Virginia Partners acquisition that have converted from acquired to originated status, and organic loan growth. The provision for credit losses during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as well as the allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2021, represents management’s best estimate of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the ability of the Company’s borrowers to repay their loans. Management continues to carefully assess the exposure of the Company’s loan portfolio to COVID-19 pandemic related factors, economic trends and their potential effect on asset quality. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s delinquencies and nonperforming assets had not been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, all of the loan balances that were approved by the Company, on a consolidated basis, for loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only have either resumed regular payments or have been paid off.
The Company discontinues accrual of interest on loans when management believes, after considering economic and business conditions and collection efforts that a borrower's financial condition is such that the collection of interest is doubtful. Generally, the Company will place a delinquent loan in nonaccrual status when the loan becomes 90 days or more past due. At the time a loan is placed in nonaccrual status, all interest which has been accrued on the loan but remains unpaid is reversed and deducted from earnings as a reduction of reported interest income. No additional interest is accrued on the loan balance until the collection of both principal and interest becomes reasonably certain.
The following tables illustrate the Company's past due and nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Past Due and Nonaccrual Loans
(Dollars in Thousands)
At December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total nonaccrual loans at December 31, 2021 were $9.0 million, which reflects an increase of $4.1 million from $4.9 million at December 31, 2020. Management believes the relationships on nonaccrual were adequately reserved at December 31, 2021. TDR’s not past due or on nonaccrual at December 31, 2021 amounted to $3.9 million, as compared to $4.9 million at December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to four loan relationships that no longer met the definition of a TDR and pay-downs of principal loan balances during 2021. Total TDR’s increased $1.2 million to $7.9 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $6.7 million at December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to one loan relationship that was classified as a TDR during 2021, partially offset by four loan relationships that no longer met the definition of a TDR, two loan relationships that were charged-off, and two loan relationships that were paid off.
Nonperforming assets, defined as nonaccrual loans, loans past due 90 days or more and accruing, and other real estate owned, net (“OREO”), at December 31, 2021 were $9.8 million compared to $7.6 million at December 31, 2020. The Company's ratio of nonperforming assets to total assets was 0.60% at December 31, 2021 compared to 0.50% at December 31, 2020. As noted above, there was an increase in nonaccrual loans during the year ended December 31, 2021. OREO, net decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021 by $1.8 million. There were three properties that were sold at a gain of $122 thousand during 2021, this was offset by valuation adjustments and other expenses of $292 thousand that were recorded during 2021.
It is likely that the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic disruption related to it will continue to negatively impact the Company’s financial position and results of operations during the year ending December 31, 2022.
The following tables provide additional information on the Company's nonperforming assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Nonperforming Assets
(Dollars in thousands)
Nonperforming Loans by Type
(Dollars in thousands)
The following table provides data related to loan balances and the allowance for credit losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Allowance for Credit Losses Data
(Dollars in Thousands)
At December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table represents the activity of the allowance for credit losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 by loan type:
Allowance for Credit Losses and Recorded Investments in Financing Receivables
(Dollars in Thousands)
At December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides information related to the allocation of the allowance for credit losses by loan category, the related loan balance for each category, and the percentage of loan balance to total loans by category:
Allocation of the Allowance for Credit Losses
At December 31, 2021 and 2020
(Dollars in thousands)
Additional information related to net charge-offs (recoveries) is presented in the tables below.
In March 2020, the five federal bank regulatory agencies and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors issued joint guidance with respect to loan modifications for borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic (the “Joint Guidance”). The Joint Guidance encouraged banks, savings associations, and credit unions to make loan modifications for borrowers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and assured those financial institutions that they will not (i) receive supervisory criticism for such prudent loan modifications and (ii) be required by examiners to automatically categorize COVID-19-related loan modifications as TDRs. The federal banking regulators confirmed with FASB that short-term loan modifications made on a good faith basis in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to borrowers who were current (i.e., less than 30 days past due on contractual payments) prior to any loan modification are not TDRs.
In addition, Section 4013 of the CARES Act provided banks, savings associations, and credit unions with the ability to make loan modifications related to the COVID-19 pandemic without categorizing the loans as a TDR or conducting the analysis to make the determination, which was intended to streamline the loan modification process. Any such suspension is effective for the term of the loan modification; however, the suspension is only permitted for loan modifications made during the effective period and only for those loans that were not more than thirty (30) days past due as of December 31, 2019.
In addition, in an effort to support the Company’s borrowers in their times of need, the Company has granted loan payment deferrals to certain borrowers, who were current on their payments prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, on a short-term basis of three to six months. At the peak, which occurred during the second quarter of 2020, the Company, on a consolidated basis, had approved loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only for 548 loans totaling $286.6 million, which represented approximately 28.8% of total loan balances outstanding. As of December 31, 2021, all of the loan balances that were approved by the Company, on a consolidated basis, for loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only have either resumed regular payments or have been paid off. As of December 31, 2021, on a consolidated basis, there were no loans outstanding with respect to which the Company has granted loan payment deferrals or payments of interest only.
The Company continues to closely monitor credit risk and its exposure to increased loan losses resulting from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on its borrowers. The Company has identified nine specific higher risk industries for credit exposure monitoring during this crisis.
The table below identifies these higher risk industries and the Company’s exposure to them as of December 31, 2021:
As of December 31, 2021, there were no loans within these higher risk industries with respect to which the Company has granted loan payment deferrals.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest Income. The Company's primary source of noninterest income is service charges on deposit accounts, mortgage banking income and other income. Sources of other noninterest income include ATM and credit card fees, debit card income, safe deposit box income, earnings on bank owned life insurance policies and investment fees and commissions.
Noninterest income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $170 thousand, or 2.0%, when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Key changes in the components of noninterest income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, are as follows:
● Service charges on deposit accounts decreased by $38 thousand, or 4.5%, due primarily to decreases in nonsufficient fund fees as a result of the significant increase in deposit balances, which was partially offset by increases in overdraft fees as a result of the easing of restrictions and the lifting of lockdowns in the Company’s markets of operation and Virginia Partners no longer automatically waiving overdraft fees which was previously done in an effort to provide all necessary financial support and services to its customers and communities, both as related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as compared to the same period of 2020;
● Gains on sales and calls of investment securities decreased by $574 thousand, or 95.4%, due primarily to Delmarva recording $2 thousand in gains on sales or calls of investment securities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to recording $187 thousand in gains on sales and calls of investment securities during the same period of 2020. In addition, Virginia Partners recorded gains of $25 thousand on the sales and calls of investment securities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to recording $414 thousand in gains on sales and calls of investment securities during the same period of 2020;
● Mortgage banking income decreased by $283 thousand, or 7.0%, due primarily to Virginia Partners’ majority owned subsidiary JMC having a lower volume of loan closings as compared to the same period in 2020;
● Gains (losses) on sales of other assets increased by $2 thousand due primarily to Delmarva selling its VISA credit card portfolio during the first quarter of 2021, as compared to Delmarva recording a loss of less than $1 thousand on the disposal of information technology assets during the third quarter of 2020; and
● Other income increased by $723 thousand, or 24.1%, due primarily to higher mortgage division fees at Delmarva, increases in debit card income, merchant card and ATM fees, and Delmarva recording higher earnings on bank owned life insurance policies due to additional purchases made in 2021, which were partially offset by Virginia Partners recording lower fees from its participation in a loan hedging program with a correspondent bank.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense includes all expenses with the exception of those paid for interest on deposits and borrowings. Significant expense items included in this component are salaries and employee benefits, premises and equipment and other operating expenses.
Noninterest expense during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 increased by $4.9 million, or 13.1%, when compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Key changes in the components of noninterest expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, are as follows:
● Salaries and employee benefits increased by $3.0 million, or 15.0%, primarily due to increases related to staffing changes, including expenses associated with Virginia Partners’ new key hires and expansion into the Greater Washington market and Delmarva opening its new full-service branch at 26th Street in Ocean City, Maryland, merit increases, stock-based compensation expense and benefit costs. In connection with its pending merger with OCFC, during the fourth quarter of 2021 the Company recorded $896 thousand in stock-based compensation expense related to the accelerated vesting of restricted stock awards, which accelerated vesting was subject to the prior approval of the Company and was not contingent on the actual merger closing. In addition, due to the decrease in mortgage banking income from Virginia Partners’ majority owned subsidiary JMC, salaries and employee benefits decreased due to a decrease in commissions expense paid;
● Premises and equipment increased by $533 thousand, or 11.6%, primarily due to increases related to Delmarva opening its new information technology and training center late in the fourth quarter of 2020 and its new full-service branch at 26th Street in Ocean City, Maryland during the second quarter of 2021, Virginia Partners opening its new full-service branch and commercial banking office in Reston, Virginia during the third quarter of 2021, expenses associated with Delmarva’s core conversion that was completed in the third quarter of 2021, and software amortization associated with Virginia Partners’ core conversion that was completed in the fourth quarter of 2020, which were partially offset by lower expenses related to building security at Virginia Partners;
● Amortization of core deposit intangible decreased by $114 thousand, or 15.9%, primarily due to lower amortization related to the $2.7 million and $1.5 million, respectively, in core deposit intangibles recognized in the Virginia Partners and Liberty acquisitions;
● Losses on other real estate owned increased by $69 thousand, or 68.1%, primarily due to higher valuation adjustments being recorded on properties and lower gains on the sales of properties during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020, and lower expenses related to other real estate owned;
● Merger related expenses increased by $971 thousand, or 12,951.0%, primarily due to legal fees, investment banking fees and other costs associated with the pending merger with OCFC; and
● Other operating expenses increased by $421 thousand, or 3.6%, primarily due to higher expenses related to FDIC insurance assessments, internet banking charges, director fees, core conversion, printing and supplies, travel and entertainment, consulting, telephone and data circuits, other losses, debit/credit/merchant card transactions, accounting, and Virginia Partners state franchise tax, which were partially offset by lower expenses related to data and item processing.
The following table sets forth the primary components of other operating expenses for the periods indicated:
Other Operating Expenses
(Dollars in Thousands)
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes was $2.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the provision for income taxes of $1.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $525 thousand or 30.5%. This increase was due primarily to higher consolidated income before taxes, which was partially offset by higher earnings on tax-exempt income, primarily bank owned life insurance policies. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company’s effective tax rate was approximately 22.2% as compared to 23.3% for the same period in 2020.
Virginia Partners is not subject to Virginia state income tax, but instead pays Virginia franchise tax. The Virginia franchise tax paid by Virginia Partners is recorded in the “Other operating expenses” line item on the Consolidated Statements of Income for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financial Condition
Interest Earning Assets
Loans. Loans typically provide higher yields than the other types of interest earning assets, and thus one of the Company's goals is to increase loan balances. Management attempts to control and counterbalance the inherent credit and liquidity risks associated with the higher loan yields without sacrificing asset quality to achieve its asset mix goals. Total gross loans, excluding unamortized discounts on acquired loans, averaged $1.09 billion and $1.04 billion during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table shows the composition of the loan portfolio by category:
Composition of Loan Portfolio by Category
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the repricing characteristics and sensitivity to interest rate changes of the Company's loan portfolio, including unamortized discounts on acquired loans at December 31, 2021.
Loan Maturities and Interest Rate Sensitivity
At December 31, 2021
(Dollars in thousands)
At December 31, 2021, real estate mortgage loans included $287.4 million of owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans, and $313.8 million of other non-farm, non-residential loans, which is 29.3% and 32.0% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. By comparison, at December 31, 2020, real estate mortgage loans included $254.7 million of owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans, and $263.5 million of other non-farm, non-residential loans, which is 29.0% and 30.0% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. This represents an increase at December 31, 2021 of $32.7 million and $50.3 million, or 12.8% and 19.1%, in owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans and other non-farm, non-residential loans, respectively.
At December 31, 2021, real estate mortgage loans included $108.0 million of construction and land development loans, and $24.4 million of multi-family residential loans, which is 11.0% and 2.5% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. By comparison, at December 31, 2020, real estate mortgage loans included $74.7 million of construction and land development loans, and $28.6 million of multi-family residential loans, which is 8.5% and 3.4% of real estate mortgage loans, respectively. This represents an increase at December 31, 2021 of $33.2 million, or 44.4%, in construction and land development loans, and a decrease of $4.2 million, or 14.6%, in multi-family residential loans, respectively.
Commercial real estate loans, excluding owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential loans, were 267.9% of total risk-based capital at December 31, 2021, as compared to 234.0% at December 31, 2020. Construction and land development loans were 64.8% of total risk-based capital at December 31, 2021, as compared to 47.7% at December 31, 2020.
At December 31, 2021, real estate mortgage loans included home equity loans of $30.4 million and residential real estate loans of $201.2 million, compared to $34.2 million and $199.3 million at December 31, 2020, respectively. Home equity loans decreased $3.8 million, or 11.2%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, while residential real estate loans increased $1.9 million, or 0.9%, during the year ended December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, commercial loans were $130.9 million, compared to $152.8 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $21.9 million, or 14.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2021.
The overall increase in loans from the year ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 was due primarily to the origination and funding of approximately $30.9 million in loans under round two of the PPP, which was partially offset by forgiveness payments received of approximately $65.0 million under rounds one and two of the PPP, and an increase in organic growth, including growth of approximately $50.2 million in loans related to Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market.
Beginning late in the first quarter of 2020, both Delmarva and Virginia Partners began assisting their customers in obtaining loans under the PPP in order to further assist their communities. Delmarva has provided access for customers and noncustomers to the program, allowing individuals or businesses visiting their website to access the SBA loan application and complete the process through a third party vendor. Loans processed through Delmarva’s website are funded by other banks or outside funding sources. During round one of this program, Virginia Partners, an SBA approved lender, directly originated and funded almost 700 loans totaling approximately $64.2 million, all of which were previously pledged as collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2020 and continuing through the fourth quarter of 2021, Virginia Partners received forgiveness payments from the SBA related to all of these loans. As of December 31, 2021,Virginia Partners had no loans outstanding under round one of this program. Beginning early in the first quarter of 2021, both Delmarva and Virginia Partners began assisting their customers in obtaining loans under round two of this program in an identical manner as was done by each under round one of the program. As of December 31, 2021, Virginia Partners has directly originated and funded over 430 loans totaling approximately $30.9 million, none of which have been pledged as collateral to the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility. As of December 31, 2021, Virginia Partners had approximately $8.2 million in loans still outstanding under round two of this program. Aggregate fees, net of costs to originate, from the SBA of approximately $416 thousand will continue to be recognized in interest income over the life of these loans. Upon forgiveness of these loans, the remaining aggregate fees, net of costs to originate, will be recognized in interest income on an accelerated basis.
Investment Securities. The investment securities portfolio is a significant component of the Company's total interest-earning assets. Total investment securities averaged $129.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $128.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This represented 8.4% and 9.3% of total average interest-earning assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was primarily due to management of the investment securities portfolio in light of the Company’s liquidity needs.
The Company classifies all of its investment securities as available for sale. This classification requires that investment securities be recorded at their fair value with any difference between the fair value and amortized cost (the purchase price adjusted by any discount accretion or premium amortization) reported as a component of stockholders’ equity (accumulated other comprehensive income), net of deferred taxes. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, investment securities available for sale, at fair value totaled $122.0 million and $124.9 million, respectively. Investment securities available for sale, at fair value decreased by $2.9 million, or 2.3%, during the year ended December 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily due to higher yielding investment securities being called, accelerated prepayments on mortgage-backed investment securities in the low interest rate environment and a decrease in unrealized gains on the investment securities available for sale portfolio. The Company attempts to maintain an investment securities portfolio of high quality, highly liquid investments with returns competitive with short-term U.S. Treasury or agency obligations. This objective is particularly important as the Company focuses on growing its loan portfolio. The Company primarily invests in securities of U.S. Government agencies, municipals, and corporate obligations. At December 31, 2021 and 2020 there were no issuers, other than the U.S. Government and its agencies, whose securities owned by the Company had a book or fair value exceeding 10% of the Company's stockholders' equity.
The following table summarizes the amortized cost and fair value of investment securities available for sale for the dates indicated:
Amortized Cost and Fair Value of Investment Securities
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth the fair value and weighted average yields by maturity category of the investment securities available for sale portfolio as of December 31, 2021. Weighted-average yields have been computed on a fully taxable-equivalent basis using a tax rate of 21%. Mortgage-backed securities are included in maturity categories based on their stated maturity date. Expected maturities may differ from contractual maturities because issuers may have the right to call or prepay obligations.
Investment Maturity and Weighted Average Yields
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021
The following table shows, at carrying value and amortized cost, the scheduled maturities of investment securities available for sale held at December 31, 2021.
Maturities of Investments
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021
In addition, the Company holds stock in various correspondent banks as well as the Federal Reserve Bank. The balance of these securities was $4.9 million and $5.4 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $575 thousand, or 10.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Due to increases in interest rates and ongoing volatility in the securities markets, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the net unrealized gains in the Company’s investment securities available for sale portfolio decreased by approximately $2.6 million, or 84.4%, to $479 thousand at December 31, 2021.
Subsequent interest rate fluctuations could have an adverse effect on our investment securities available for sale portfolio by increasing reinvestment risk and reducing our ability to achieve our targeted investment returns.
Interest Bearing Liabilities
Deposits. Average total deposits increased from $1.15 billion to $1.39 billion, an increase of $239.2 million, or 20.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 over the average total deposits for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to organic deposit growth, including average growth of approximately $44.8 million in deposits related to Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market. At December 31, 2021, total deposits were $1.44 billion as compared to $1.27 billion at December 31, 2020, an increase of $174.7 million, or 13.8%. This increase was primarily driven by organic growth as a result of our continued focus on total relationship banking and Virginia Partners’ recent expansion into the Greater Washington market, customers seeking the liquidity and safety of deposit accounts in light of continuing economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, and the funding of loans under round two of the PPP, the proceeds of which were deposited directly into the operating accounts of these customers at the Company. Non-interest bearing demand deposits increased to $493.9 million at December 31, 2021, a $103.4 million, or 26.5%, increase from $390.5 million in non-interest bearing demand deposits at December 31, 2020, due primarily to the aforementioned items above.
The following table sets forth the deposits of the Company by category for the period indicated:
Deposits by Category
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020
The Company's loan-to-deposit ratio was 77.4% at December 31, 2021 as compared to 81.7% at December 31, 2020. Core deposits, which exclude certificates of deposit of $250 thousand or more, provide a relatively stable funding source for the Company's loan portfolio and other interest earning assets. The Company's core deposits were $1.36 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $226.1 million, or 19.9%, from $1.13 billion at December 31, 2020, and excluded $82.1 million and $133.5 million in certificates of deposit of $250 thousand or more as of those dates, respectively. Management anticipates that a stable base of deposits will be the Company's primary source of funding to meet both its short-term and long-term liquidity needs in the future, and, therefore, feels that presenting core deposits provides valuable information to investors.
The following table provides a summary of the Company's maturity distribution for certificates of deposit at the dates indicated:
Maturities of Certificates of Deposit
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021
The following table provides a summary of the Company's maturity distribution for certificates of deposit of greater than $250,000 at the dates indicated:
Maturities of Certificates of Deposit Greater than $250,000
(Dollars in Thousands)
As of December 31, 2021
Borrowings. Borrowings at December 31, 2021 and 2020 consist primarily of long-term borrowings with the Federal Home Loan Bank (“FHLB”), subordinated notes payable, net, and other borrowings.
At December 31, 2021, long-term borrowings with the FHLB were $26.3 million as compared to $33.0 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $6.7 million, or 20.2%. This decrease was primarily due to a maturity that was not replaced and scheduled principal curtailments. These borrowings are collateralized by a blanket lien on the first mortgage loans in the amount of the outstanding borrowings, FHLB capital stock, and amounts on deposit with the FHLB.
At December 31, 2021, subordinated notes payable, net, were $22.2 million as compared to $24.1 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.9 million, or 8.0%. This decrease was primarily due to the Company’s early redemption of $2.0 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in early July 2021.
At December 31, 2021, other borrowings were $755 thousand as compared to $42.4 million at December 31, 2020, a decrease of $41.6 million, or 98.2%. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which the loans under the PPP originated by the Company had previously been pledged as collateral. During the first quarter of 2021, the Company used a portion of its excess cash and cash equivalents to repay all borrowings that were previously outstanding under the PPP Liquidity Facility. In addition, Virginia Partners majority owned subsidiary, JMC, has a warehouse line of credit with another financial institution in the amount of $3.0 million, of which $120 thousand and $142 thousand were outstanding as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
See Note 8 - Borrowings and Notes Payable of the audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 for additional information on the Company’s subordinated notes payable, net, and JMC’s warehouse line of credit.
Average total borrowings decreased by $76.7 million, or 56.7%, and average rates paid increased by 1.61% to 3.62% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in average total borrowings balances was primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of Federal Home Loan Bank advances resulting from maturities and payoffs of borrowings that were not replaced, a decrease in average borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility in which the loans under the PPP originated by the Company were previously pledged as collateral, and the early redemption of $2.0 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in early July 2021, which were partially offset by the issuance of $18.1 million in subordinated notes payable, net, in late June 2020. The increase in average rates paid was primarily due to the issuance of subordinated notes payable, which is a higher cost interest-bearing liability, and the decreases in the average balances of Federal Home Loan Bank advances and borrowings at the Federal Reserve Bank Discount Window under the PPP Liquidity Facility, which were both lower cost interest-bearing liabilities, partially offset by the early redemption of subordinated notes payable, which was a higher cost interest-bearing liability.
Capital
Total stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2021 was $141.4 million, an increase of $4.7 million, or 3.4%, from December 31, 2020. Key drivers of this change was the net income attributable to the Company for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and stock-based compensation expense related to restricted stock awards, which were partially offset by the decrease in accumulated other comprehensive income, net of tax, cash dividends paid to shareholders and the repurchase of shares of the Company’s common stock under the Company’s Board of Directors approved stock purchase plan.
The Federal Reserve and other bank regulatory agencies require bank holding companies and financial institutions to maintain capital at adequate levels based on a percentage of assets and off-balance sheet exposures, adjusted for risk weights ranging from 0% to 150%. The following table presents actual and required capital ratios as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 for Delmarva and Virginia Partners under Basel III Capital Rules. The minimum required capital amounts presented include the minimum required capital levels as of December 31, 2021 based on the phase-in provisions of the Basel III Capital Rules and the minimum required capital levels as of January 1, 2019 when the Basel III Capital Rules were fully phased-in. Capital levels required for an institution to be considered well capitalized are based upon prompt corrective action regulations, as amended to reflect the changes under the Basel III Capital Rules. A more in depth discussion of regulatory capital requirements is included in Note 16 of the consolidated financial statements included at Item 8 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Capital Components
At December 31, 2021 and 2020
(Dollars in Thousands)
Liquidity Management
Liquidity management involves monitoring the Company's sources and uses of funds in order to meet its day-to-day cash flow requirements while maximizing profits. Liquidity represents the ability of a company to convert assets into cash or cash equivalents without significant loss and to raise additional funds by increasing liabilities. Liquidity management is made more complicated because different balance sheet components are subject to varying degrees of management control. For example, the timing of maturities of the available for sale investment securities portfolio is very predictable and subject to a high degree of control at the time investment decisions are made; however, net deposit inflows and outflows are far less predictable and are not subject to the same degree of control. Asset liquidity is provided by cash and assets which are readily marketable, which can be pledged, or which will mature in the near future. Liability liquidity is provided by access to core funding sources, principally the ability to generate customer deposits in the Company's market area. The Company's Federal Funds Sold position, which includes funds in due from banks and interest-bearing deposits with banks, averaged $60.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and totaled $28.0 million at December 31, 2021, as compared to an average of $40.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and a year-end position of $50.3 million at December 31, 2020. Also, the Company has available advances from the FHLB. Advances available are generally based upon the amount of qualified first mortgage loans which can be used for collateral. At December 31, 2021, advances available totaled approximately $409.0 million of which $26.3 million had been drawn, or used for letters of credit. Management regularly reviews the liquidity position of the Company and has implemented internal policies which establish guidelines for sources of asset-based liquidity and limit the total amount of purchased funds used to support the balance sheet and funding from non-core sources. Subject to certain aggregation rules, FDIC deposit insurance covers the funds in deposit accounts up to at least $250 thousand.