ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This annual report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts, and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to the Risk Factors section of the Company’s final prospectus for its Initial Public Offering filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on October 26, 2020 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (“Business Combination”). The registration statement for the Company’s IPO was declared effective by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 10, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On February 16, 2021, the Company consummated the IPO of 22,500,000 units (the “Units”) at a price of $10.00 per Unit, for total gross proceeds of $225,000,000. On February 24, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full, and the closing of the issuance and sale of the additional 3,375,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) occurred on February 24, 2021. The issuance by the Company of the Over-Allotment Units at a price of $10.00 per unit resulted in total gross proceeds of $33,750,000. Each Unit consists of one shares of common stock, $0.0001 par value, and one redeemable warrant entitling its holder to purchase one share of common stock at a price of $11.50 per share.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company consummated the sale of 600,000 units (the “Private Units”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit. On February 24, 2021, simultaneously with the issuance and sale of the Over-Allotment Units, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 67,500 Private Units (the “Over-Allotment Private Units” and, together with the IPO Private Placement, the “Private Placements”), generating gross proceeds of $6,675,000.
Since completing the Company’s IPO, the Company has reviewed, and continues to review, a number of opportunities to enter into a Business Combination with an operating business, but the Company is not able to determine at this time whether it will complete a Business Combination with any of the target businesses that it has reviewed or with any other target business. The Company intends to effectuate its Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of its IPO and the proceeds of the Private Placements, its capital stock, debt, or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $1,277,454. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $1,596,618 of formation and operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had investment income of $25,592 on our amounts held in the trust account. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we also recognized a $293,572 gain from the change in the fair value of the warrant liability.
For the period from October 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,126, which consisted solely of formation costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern Considerations
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $7,708 in cash and a negative working capital of $643,361 (including unbilled legal costs related to the business combination of $527,872). In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s initial stockholders, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company working capital loans (see Note 5). There are currently no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
In addition, in May 2021, the Company received a commitment letter from the Sponsor whereby the Sponsor committed to fund any working capital shortfalls through the earlier of an initial Business Combination or the Company’s liquidation. The loans would be issued as required and each loan would be evidenced by a promissory note, up to an aggregate of $300,000. In August 2021, the Company received a new commitment letter from the Sponsor to increase such loan amount up to $500,000. The loans will be non-interest bearing, unsecured and payable upon the consummation of the Company’s initial Business Combination or at the holder’s discretion, convertible into warrants of the Company at a price of $1.50 per warrant.
Effective as of November 4, 2021, upon approval of the Board of Directors, the Company entered into an Expense Advancement Agreement with Goal Acquisitions Sponsor, LLC (the “Funding Party”). Pursuant to the Expense Advancement Agreement, the Funding Party has agreed to advance to the Company from time to time, upon request by the Company, a maximum of $1,500,000 in the aggregate, in each instance issued pursuant to the terms of the form of promissory note, as may be necessary to fund the Company’s expenses relating to the investigation and selection of a target business and other working capital requirements prior to completion of any potential Business Combination.
Pursuant to the terms of the Expense Advancement Agreement, if the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company will repay all outstanding loaned amounts. No interest accrues on the unpaid principal balance of any Promissory Note. The Funding Party cannot seek repayment from the trust account for amounts owed under the Agreement. All loans from the Funding Party are convertible into warrants to purchase shares of common stock (the “Conversion Warrants”), at the option of the Funding Party. The number of Conversion Warrants granted will be equal to the portion of the principal amount of the Promissory Note being converted, divided by $1.50 (as adjusted for any stock dividend, stock split, stock combination, reclassification or similar transaction related to the Company’s common stock occurring after the date of the Expense Advancement Agreement), rounded up to the nearest whole number of shares. The Conversion Warrants shall be identical to those warrants that were issued in a private placement that closed concurrently with the Company’s initial public offering. The holders of Conversion Warrants or shares of common stock underlying the Conversion Warrants are entitled to certain demand and piggyback registration rights pursuant to the terms of the Expense Advancement Agreement. All previously outstanding commitments from the Sponsor have been consolidated under the Expense Advancement Agreement, effective November 4, 2021.
Until consummation of its Business Combination, the Company will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional Working Capital Loans for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or its affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into units of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the Private Units. To date, the Company had no borrowings under the working capital loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if the estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because we may become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete a Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
The Company is within 12 months of its mandatory liquidation as of the time of filing this annual report. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the mandatory liquidation raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern until the earlier of the consummation of the Business Combination or the date the Company is required to liquidate, February 16, 2023.
These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Common stock subject to possible redemption
The Company accounts for its common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 25,875,000 and no shares of common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet, respectively.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Stock
The Company has one class of common stock, common stock sold in the IPO is subject to possible redemption. The 25,875,000 common stock underlying the outstanding warrants were excluded from diluted earnings per common stock for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per Common Stock is the same as basic net loss per Common Stock for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 for the Company and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company”, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.