ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The information set forth below should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contain forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, assumptions, estimates and projections. These forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those indicated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, entitled “Business,” under “Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, entitled “Risk Factors.” References in this discussion and analysis to “us,” “we,” “our,” or our “Company” refer to Pulmatrix, Inc., a Delaware corporation.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on the discovery and development of novel inhaled therapeutic products intended to prevent and treat respiratory diseases and infections with significant unmet medical needs.
We design and develop inhaled therapeutic products based on our proprietary dry powder delivery technology, iSPERSE™ (inhaled Small Particles Easily Respirable and Emitted), which enables delivery of small or large molecule drugs to the lungs by inhalation for local or systemic applications. The iSPERSE™ powders are engineered to be small, dense particles with highly efficient dispersibility and delivery to airways. iSPERSE™ powders can be used with an array of dry powder inhaler technologies and can be formulated with a broad range of drug substances including small molecules and biologics. We believe the iSPERSE™ dry powder technology offers enhanced drug loading and delivery efficiency that outperforms traditional lactose-blend inhaled dry powder therapies.
We believe the advantages of using the iSPERSE™ technology include reduced total inhaled powder mass, enhanced dosing efficiency, reduced cost of goods and improved efficacy, safety and tolerability profiles. Our goal is to develop breakthrough therapeutic products that are safe, convenient, and more effective than the existing therapeutic products for respiratory and other diseases where iSPERSE™ properties are advantageous.
Our current pipeline is aligned to this goal as we develop iSPERSE™-based therapeutic candidates which target the prevention and treatment of a range of diseases. These therapeutic candidates include Pulmazole for the treatment of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (“ABPA”) in patients with asthma, and in patients with cystic fibrosis (“CF”), PUR1800 for the treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (“AECOPD”), and PUR3100 for the treatment of acute migraine. Each program is enabled by its unique iSPERSE™ formulation designed to achieve specific therapeutic objectives.
We intend to capitalize on our iSPERSE™ technology platform and our expertise in inhaled therapeutics to identify new product candidates for the prevention and treatment of diseases with significant unmet medical needs and to build our product pipeline beyond our existing candidates. In order to advance our clinical trials for our therapeutic candidates for respiratory and neurological diseases and leverage the iSPERSE™ platform to enable delivery of partnered compounds, we intend to form strategic alliances with third parties, including pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies or academic or private research institutes.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years based on our drug development plans. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● resume Pulmazole clinical trials focused on the development of an inhaled anti-fungal therapy to prevent and treat allergic/hypersensitivity response to fungus in the lungs of patients with asthma and CF;
● continue to advance PUR1800, focusing on the development of an inhaled kinase inhibitor for treatment of AECOPD;
● initiate and complete clinical studies for PUR3100, an orally inhaled dihydroergotamine (“DHE”) including planned Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical studies for the treatment of acute migraine;
● seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
● capitalize on our proprietary iSPERSE™ technology and our expertise in inhaled therapeutics and particle engineering to identify new product candidates for prevention and treatment of diseases with significant unmet medical needs;
● invest in protecting and expanding our intellectual property portfolio and file for additional patents to strengthen our intellectual property rights; and
● hire personnel to support our product development, commercialization and administrative efforts.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We will not generate product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical developments and obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates. Additionally, we currently utilize third-party contract research organizations (“CROs”) to carry out our clinical development activities and third-party contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) to carry out our clinical manufacturing activities as we do not yet have a commercial organization. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our internal commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings, licensing arrangements, collaborations with third parties, non-dilutive grants or other sources, potentially including collaborative commercial arrangements. Likewise, we intend to seek to limit our commercialization costs by partnering with other companies with complementary capabilities or larger infrastructure including sales and marketing.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
Recent Developments
Pulmazole
On April 15, 2019, we entered into a Development and Commercialization Agreement (the “Cipla Agreement”) with Cipla Technologies LLC (“Cipla”) for the co-development and commercialization, on a worldwide, except for the Cipla Territory defined below, exclusive basis, of Pulmazole, our inhaled iSPERSE™ drug delivery system (the “Product”) enabled formulation of the antifungal drug, itraconazole, which is only available as an oral drug, for the treatment of all pulmonary indications, including ABPA in patients with asthma. We entered into an amendment to the Cipla Agreement on November 8, 2021 (the “Amendment”), and all references to the Cipla Agreement herein refer to the Agreement as amended.
The Cipla Agreement will remain in effect in perpetuity, unless otherwise earlier terminated in accordance with its terms. In the event of circumstances affecting the continuity of development of the Product in line with the Cipla Agreement or certain development milestones are not achieved within a specified timeframe discussed in greater detail below, the joint steering committee (“JSC”) will evaluate the cause and effect and make a recommendation as to the most optimal option available to Cipla and us. In such events, the parties are not obligated to follow the recommendation of the JSC and, either party may elect to terminate (a “Terminating Party”) its obligation to fund additional costs and expenses for the development and/or commercialization of the Product. If the non-Terminating Party wishes to continue the development of the Product, it will have the right to purchase the rights of the Terminating Party in the Product at its fair market value. If both Cipla and we abandon the development program, Cipla and we shall make commercially reasonable efforts to monetize the Product and development program in connection with the Pulmonary Indications. Cipla and we will equally share the proceeds.
We and Cipla will each be responsible for 60% and 40%, respectively, of our overhead costs and the time spent by our employees and consultants on development of the Product (“Direct Costs”), provided, that Cipla will reimburse us an amount equal to 10% of aggregate Direct Costs upon the achievement of certain development milestones set forth in the table below. We will continue to share all other development costs with Cipla that are not Direct Costs, such as the cost of clinical research organizations, manufacturing costs and other third-party costs, on a 50/50 basis.
Pursuant to the Cipla Agreement, (i) all development and commercialization activities with respect to the Product in India, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Nepal, Iran, Yemen, Myanmar and Algeria (such countries, the “Cipla Territory”) will be conducted exclusively by Cipla at Cipla’s sole cost and expense, and (ii) Cipla shall be entitled to all profits from the sale of the Product in the Cipla Territory, except that if Cipla successfully transfers manufacturing of the Product for the Cipla Territory to a manufacturing site determined by Cipla, we will become entitled to a royalty equal to 2% of net sales in the Cipla Territory.
In partnership with Cipla, we initiated a Phase 2 clinical study in 2019, entitled: “A Randomized, Double-Blind, Multicenter, Placebo-Controlled, Phase 2 Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Pharmacokinetics of Itraconazole Administered as a Dry Powder for Inhalation (PUR1900) in Adult Asthmatic Patients with ABPA. This clinical study was terminated in July 2020 due to the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on patient enrollment and clinical study conduct.
Following termination of the Phase 2 clinical study, Pulmatrix conducted a Type C meeting with the FDA on January 27, 2021, in order to discuss the program overall development plan and the current Phase 2b clinical study design. The Phase 2b clinical study design includes a 16-week dosing regimen with an 8-week follow up and is intended to explore potential efficacy endpoints, whereas the terminated Phase 2 clinical study had comprised only a 4-week dosing regimen with safety and tolerability as its primary endpoint. The longer dosing regimen of the new Phase 2b clinical study is supported by the 6-month inhalation toxicology study in dogs completed in April 2020. The new development plan, including the planned Phase 2b clinical study, was approved on November 8, 2021.
In addition to the terms of the Cipla Agreement described above, if any of the below development milestones are not met by the date that is nine months after the applicable deadline for achieving such development milestone, either party may elect to terminate its obligation to fund additional development costs, in which case either (i) the non-Terminating Party can acquire the rights of the Terminating Party for fair market value or (ii) the parties will monetize the Product. The table below sets forth the development milestones.
Phase 2b Development Plan - Development Milestones
Development Milestone
Milestone Date
25% of patients enrolled in Phase 2b clinical study are dosed
June 30, 2023
Company delivers summary of key efficacy and safety data to include FEV1, IgE, ACQ-6, number of subjects withdrawn, any severe adverse events related to the medication and an overall summary table of adverse events (“Topline Results”) to the JSC.
June 30, 2024
Phase 3 Development Plan - Development Milestones
Development Milestone
Milestone Date
25% of patients enrolled in Phase 3 clinical study dosed
To be proposed by JSC
Company delivers Topline Results to the JSC
To be proposed by JSC
The Prescription Drug User Fee Act (the “PDUFA”)
To be proposed by JSC
PUR1800
We completed the Phase 1b safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of PUR1800 for patients with stable moderate-severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (“COPD”). Topline data was delivered in the first quarter of 2022.
The clinical study, performed at the Medicines Evaluation Unit in Manchester, UK, was a randomized, three-way crossover double-blind study with 14 days of daily dosing which included placebo and one of two doses of PUR1800, and included a 28 day follow up period after each treatment period. A total of 18 adults with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (“COPD”) were enrolled. Safety and tolerability as well as systemic PK were evaluated.
PUR1800 was well-tolerated and there were no observed safety signals. The preliminary PK data indicate that PUR1800 results in low and consistent systemic exposure when administered via oral inhalation. The complete datasets will be analyzed and we expect to submit study results at a relevant medical conference later this year. This topline data, along with the results from chronic toxicology studies, support the continued development of PUR1800 for the treatment of AECOPD and other inflammatory respiratory disease.
Toxicology studies in rats and dogs, with durations of six and nine months respectively, are complete. The data from both studies demonstrated that PUR1800 is safe and well tolerated with chronic dosing, with little to no progression of findings from 28-day studies. We believe that this indicates potential for chronic dosing of PUR1800, enabling Pulmatrix to explore PUR1800 therapy for chronic respiratory disease such as steroid resistant asthma, COPD, or idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. While the program is currently in development for treatment of acute exacerbation of AECOPD, these positive toxicology study results could expand potential indications and value of the program.
All rights to our kinase inhibitor portfolio, including PUR1800 and PUR5700, reverted to us upon the termination of our License, Development and Commercialization Agreement (the “JJEI License Agreement”), dated December 26, 2019, with Johnson & Johnson Enterprise Innovation, Inc. (“JJEI”). JJEI notified us that they were terminating the JJEI License Agreement in April 2021, and the effective date of the termination was July 6, 2021.
PUR3100
In 2020, Pulmatrix developed PUR3100, the iSPERSE™ formulation of DHE, for the treatment of acute migraine. Over 38 million people suffer from migraine in the United States. Currently DHE is only available as intravenous infusion or intranasal delivery. If approved for commercialization, PUR3100 should be the first orally inhaled DHE treatment for acute migraine and be an alternative to other acute therapies, such as oral and intravenous triptans that currently represent the majority of the annual migraine prescriptions in the United States. Given the oral inhaled route of delivery, PUR3100 is anticipated to provide a rapid onset of migraine symptom relief with a favorable tolerability profile.
Two 14-day GLP toxicology studies have been conducted to support initial single dose clinical studies have been completed.
We intend to complete an additional 14-day GLP-toxicology study in rats to fully characterize local toxicity in the lung to enable species selection for a single species chronic toxicology study to support longer-term clinical dosing.
We submitted pre-IND questions to the FDA for which we have received written responses that have confirmed and/or clarified several manufacturing, nonclinical, and clinical aspects of the PUR3100 development program. After consideration of the responses, we have updated the initial clinical study from a 2-part Phase 1/Phase 2 clinical study to a Phase 1 double-blind matching placebo (double-dummy) study in which healthy volunteers will be randomized to receive either 1 of 3 doses of PUR3100 or IV DHE and a two dose Phase 2 efficacy clinical study in migraine patients. The Phase 1 clinical study is intended to assess not only safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of PUR3100 in humans, but also provide preliminary bioavailability data to support the use of the 505(b)(2) pathway for marketing authorization. The FDA also confirmed that long-term safety should be assessed in a minimum of one hundred patients for six months of dosing and fifty patients for twelve months of dosing. The FDA also confirmed that it will be necessary to perform a safety study administering PUR3100 to otherwise healthy patients with asthma before a NDA is submitted for PUR3100.
We further conducted a Type C meeting with the FDA to add additional clarification around some of the written responses in relation to the overall nonclinical and clinical program. Pulmatrix has concluded that conducting the Phase 1 clinical study in Australia allows us to generate the most comprehensive dataset for inclusion in an IND for Phase 2 in the United States, while also providing the most cost and time efficient path to Phase 1 data in 2022. We anticipate initiating patient dosing for the Phase 1 clinical study in Australia in the third quarter of 2022, with top-line data anticipated in fourth quarter of 2022. Following the Australia Phase 1 clinical study completion, we plan to open an IND and conduct a randomized placebo-controlled Phase 2 clinical study in patients with migraine to assess the safety and effectiveness of two doses of PUR3100, in which the selection of the two doses has been informed by the initial Phase 1 clinical study. We anticipate that this Phase 2 clinical study will initiate patient dosing in second quarter of 2023 with top-line data in late fourth quarter of 2023.
Financial Overview
To date, we have not generated any product sales. The 2021 and 2020 revenue was generated by the collaboration agreement and license agreement with Cipla on our Pulmazole program, the JJEI License Agreement for our PUR1800 kinase inhibitor, and immaterial royalties recorded from the Sensory Cloud Agreement. Effective as of July 6, 2021, the JJEI License Agreement was terminated and all revenues pursuant to the agreement were recognized as of that date.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the research and development of our preclinical and clinical candidates, and include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with CROs or CMOs, and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical activities;
● the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials and lab supplies;
● facility, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of our facility, insurance and other supplies;
● costs associated with preclinical activities and clinical regulatory operations; and
● consulting and professional fees associated with research and development activities
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. We recognize costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We utilize a combination of internal and external efforts to advance product development from early-stage work to clinical trial manufacturing and clinical trial support. External efforts include work with consultants and substantial work at CROs and CMOs. We support an internal research and development team and facility for our pipeline programs. To move these programs forward along our development timelines, a large portion (approximately 80%) of our staff are research and development employees. In addition, we maintain an approximately 22,000 square foot office and research and development facility which includes capital equipment for the manufacture and characterization our iSPERSE™ powders for our pipeline programs. As we identify opportunities for iSPERSE™ in respiratory indications, we anticipate additional head count, capital, and development costs will be incurred to support these programs. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, however, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of these or other current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rates and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each product candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries, benefits and related costs such as share-based compensation for personnel and consultants in executive, finance, business development, corporate communications and human resource functions, facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, patent filing fees and legal fees. Other general and administrative expenses include travel expenses, expenses related to being a publicly traded company and professional fees for consulting, auditing and tax services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as they relate to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission requirements, director and officer liability insurance, investor relations costs and other costs associated with being a public company. Additionally, if and when we believe a regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in staffing and related expenses as a result of our preparation for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of our product candidates.
Impairment of Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but evaluated for potential impairment. There was no goodwill impairment made in 2020. Given our common stock value decline during 2021 and based on a quantitative assessment, we determined that goodwill was impaired, and a full impairment charge of $3.6 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued expenses and share-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
Our principal sources of revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were derived from our collaboration arrangement and license agreements that relate to the development and commercialization of Pulmazole under the Cipla Agreement and our license, development and commercialization arrangement under the JJEI Agreement.
At inception, we determine whether contracts are within the scope of ASC 606 or other topics, including ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”). For contracts that are within the scope of ASC 808, the Company evaluates whether the counterparty is a customer for any of the units of account (i.e., distinct goods and services) in the contract. For units of account where the counterparty is considered a customer, the Company applies ASC 606 to those unit(s) of account, including recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure guidance. To date, the Company has determined it is appropriate to apply ASC 606 to all contracts and units of account for contracts within the scope of ASC 808.
For contracts and units of account that are determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services. To achieve this core principle, we apply the following five steps (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation. The Company only applies the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the Company will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified at contract inception based on the goods and services that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods and services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised goods and services are both capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised goods and services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. At the inception of each contract that includes research or development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being achieved and estimates the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. We evaluate factors such as the scientific, clinical, regulatory, commercial, and other risks that must be overcome to achieve the particular milestone in making this assessment. There is considerable judgment involved in determining whether it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur. At the end of each reporting period, we reevaluate the probability of achievement of all milestones subject to constraint and, if necessary, adjust the estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
If the license to the Company’s intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other promises or performance obligations identified in the arrangement, the Company recognizes revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. In assessing whether a promise or performance obligation is distinct from the other promises, the Company considers factors such as the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. In addition, the Company considers whether the counterparty can benefit from a promise for its intended purpose without the receipt of the remaining promise, whether the value of the promise is dependent on the unsatisfied promise, whether there are other vendors that could provide the remaining promise, and whether it is separately identifiable from the remaining promise. For licenses that are combined with other promises, the Company utilizes judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. The Company evaluates the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjusts the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. The measure of progress, and thereby periods over which revenue should be recognized, are subject to estimates by management and may change over the course of the research and development and licensing agreement. Such a change could have a material impact on the amount of revenue the Company records in future periods.
The promises under the Company’s arrangements may include research and development services to be performed by the Company on behalf of the counterparty. Payments or reimbursements from customers resulting from the Company’s research and development efforts are recognized as the services are performed and presented on a gross basis because the Company is the principal for such efforts. The Company uses an input method, according to the ratio of costs incurred to the total costs expected to be incurred in the future to satisfy the performance obligation. In management’s judgment, this input method is the best measure of the transfer of control of the performance obligation. Amounts received prior to revenue recognition are recorded as deferred revenue. Amounts expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as current portion of deferred revenue in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Amounts not expected to be recognized as revenue within the 12 months following the balance sheet date are classified as deferred revenue, net of current portion. Reimbursements from and payments to the counterparty that are the result of a collaborative relationship, instead of a customer relationship, such as co-development activities, are recognized as the services are performed and presented as a reduction to research and development expense. To date, the Company has determined that all arrangements which include research and development services have been transacted with customers and recognized on a gross basis using ASC 606.
For contracts that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments upon first commercial sales and milestone payments based on a level of sales, which are the result of a customer-vendor relationship and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied or partially satisfied.
If an arrangement is determined to contain customer options that allow the customer to acquire additional goods or services, the goods and services underlying the customer options that are not determined to be material rights are not considered to be performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement, as they are contingent upon option exercise. The Company evaluates the customer options for material rights, or options to acquire additional goods or services for free or at a discount. If the customer options are determined to represent a material right, the material right is recognized as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. The Company allocates the transaction price to material rights based on the relative standalone selling price, which is determined based on the identified discount and the probability that the customer will exercise the option. Amounts allocated to a material right are not recognized as revenue until, at the earliest, the option is exercised.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include salaries, benefits, bonus, share-based compensation, license fees, milestone payments due under license agreements, costs paid to third-party contractors to perform research, conduct clinical trials, and develop drug materials and delivery devices; and associated overhead and facilities costs. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of research and development expenses and include costs associated with third-party contractors, CROs and CMOs. Invoicing from third-party contractors for services performed can lag several months. We accrue the costs of services rendered in connection with third-party contractor activities based on our estimate of fees and costs associated with the contract that were rendered during the period and they are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs that are paid in advance of performance are capitalized as prepaid expenses and amortized over the service period as the services are provided.
Leases
At the inception of an arrangement, we determine whether the arrangement is, or contains a lease, based on the unique facts and circumstances present. Most leases with a term greater than one year are recognized on the balance sheet as right-of-use assets, lease liabilities and long-term lease liabilities. We have elected not to recognize on the balance sheet leases with terms of one year or less. Options to renew a lease are not included in our initial lease term assessment unless there is reasonable certainty that we will renew. We evaluate our plans to renew any material lease on a quarterly basis.
Operating lease liabilities and their corresponding right-of-use assets are recorded based on the present value of lease payments over the expected remaining lease term. However, certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset may be required for items, such as incentives received. The interest rate implicit in lease contracts is typically not readily determinable. As a result, we utilize our incremental borrowing rates, which are the rates incurred to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. Changes to the Company’s estimate of our incremental borrowing rate could have a material impact on the recorded right-of-use asset and lease liabilities recorded on our balance sheet.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the difference between the consideration transferred and the fair value of the net assets acquired, and liabilities assumed under the acquisition method of accounting for push-down accounting. Goodwill is not amortized but is evaluated for impairment within our single reporting unit on an annual basis during the fourth quarter, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below our carrying amount. When performing the impairment assessment, the accounting standard for testing goodwill for impairment permits a company to first assess the qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events and circumstances indicates that it is more likely than not that the goodwill is impaired. If we believe, as a result of the qualitative assessment, that it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill is impaired, we must perform a quantitative analysis to determine if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was considered in our qualitative assessment. Given our common stock value decline during 2021, and based on the quantitative assessment, we determined that goodwill was impaired, and a full impairment charge of $3.6 million was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Revenue - Revenue was $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $7.5 million. The decrease is related to $3.4 million fewer reimbursable pass-through expenses and a $0.9 million decrease in license related revenues due to a pause in the development activities under the Cipla Agreement during 2021, and a $3.2 million decrease in license related revenues under the JJEI License Agreement.
Research and development expenses - Research and development expense was $15.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $15.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.2 million. The decrease was primarily due to decreased spend of $2.5 million on our PUR1800 program and $1.7 million on the Phase 2 Pulmazole clinical trial due to its COVID-19 related termination in 2020, partially offset by increased spend of $3.2 million on pre-clinical and manufacturing costs related to our PUR3100 program, in addition to $0.8 million of operating costs in support of our programs.
General and administrative expenses - General and administrative expense was $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.5 million. The decrease was primarily due to decreased employment costs of $0.5 million.
Impairment of goodwill - In 2021 and 2020, the Company performed an impairment assessment and concluded that during 2021, the carrying amount of the goodwill exceeded its fair value and recorded the resulting impairment charges of $3.6 million. There was no goodwill impairment in 2020 based on management’s impairment assessment.
Warrant inducement expenses - During 2020, we executed a warrant exercise inducement transaction with existing investors who held existing and outstanding warrants that had an exercise price of $27.00 per share. Upon the exercise, warrant holders were able to purchase on a cash basis up to an aggregate of 504,287 shares of common stock. In consideration of the exercise, we issued to the exercise holders new warrants that had a five-year expiry and an exercise price of $35.99 per share. The fair value on the grant date of the new warrants was $9.3 million and was recorded as warrant inducement expense with a corresponding offset to paid-in-capital. There were no similar warrant exercise inducement transactions in 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Through December 31, 2021, we have incurred an accumulated deficit of $254.6 million, primarily as a result of expenses incurred through a combination of research and development activities related to our various product candidates and general and administrative expenses supporting those activities. We have financed our operations since inception primarily through the sale of preferred and common stock, the issuance of convertible promissory notes, term loans, and collaboration and license agreements. Our total cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2021 was $53.8 million.
We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses, and that such losses will increase over the next several years due to development costs associated with our iSPERSE™ pipeline programs. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may raise through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, other third-party funding and other collaborations and strategic alliances.
We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months following the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements.
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
The following table sets forth the major sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $19.7 million, which was primarily the result of a net loss of $20.2 million partially offset by $6.0 million of net non-cash adjustments, and $5.5 million in cash outflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities. Our non-cash adjustments were comprised of $3.6 million of impairment of goodwill, $1.2 million of share-based compensation expense, $1.0 million of amortization of an operating lease right-of-use asset, and $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization. The net cash outflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities were due to decreases of $3.3 million in deferred revenue, $1.1 million in operating lease liabilities, $0.8 million in accrued expenses, and $0.3 million in other operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.5 million, which was primarily the result of a net loss of $19.3 million partially offset by $11.5 million of net non-cash adjustments, and $4.7 million in cash outflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities. Our non-cash adjustments were comprised of $9.3 million in warrant inducement expense, $1.2 million of share-based compensation expense, $0.8 million of amortization of an operating lease right-of-use asset, and $0.2 million of depreciation and amortization. The net cash outflows associated with changes in operating assets and liabilities were due to decreases of $11.0 million in deferred revenue, $0.6 million in operating lease liabilities and $0.5 million in accrued expenses, partially offset by increases of $7.1 million in accounts receivable, $0.2 million in accounts payable, and $0.1 million in other operating assets and liabilities.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 were both due to purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $43.5 million as compared to $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs, of $37.1 million in a registered direct offering, the issuance of preferred stock and common stock warrants, net of issuance costs, of $6.2 million in a registered direct offering and warrant exercises of $0.2 million. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs, of $7.3 million in a registered direct offering and $13.7 million from warrant and stock option exercises.
Financings
Financings
On December 17, 2021, we closed a registered direct offering with certain institutional investors for the issuance and sale of an aggregate of 6,745.008 shares of convertible preferred stock and warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 281,047 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, for gross proceeds of $6.8 million or net proceeds of $6.0 million after placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses. The shares of preferred stock have a stated value of $1,000 per share and are initially convertible into an aggregate of 562,085 shares of common stock at a conversion price of $12.00 per share at any time. The common warrants have an exercise price of $13.99 per share. In addition, we issued the placement agent designees warrants to purchase up to 36,538 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $14.99 per share. Both the common warrants and the placement warrants are exercisable six months following the date issuance and have a five-year term. The shares of preferred stock and common warrants were offered by us pursuant to a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-256502) previously filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on May 26, 2021 and became effective on June 9, 2021.
In May 2021, we entered into an At-The-Market Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with H.C. Wainwright and Co., LLC (“HCW”) to act as our sales agent with respect to the issuance and sale of up to $20,000,000 of our shares of common stock, from time to time in an at-the-market public offering (the “ATM Offering”). Sales of common stock under the Sales Agreement are made pursuant to an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, which was filed with the SEC on May 26, 2021, and subsequently declared effective on June 9, 2021 (File No. 333-256502), and a related prospectus. HCW acts as our sales agent on a commercially reasonable efforts basis, consistent with its normal trading and sales practices and applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations and the rules of The NASDAQ Capital Market. If expressly authorized by us, HCW may also sell our common stock in privately negotiated transactions. There is no specific date on which the ATM Offering will end, there are no minimum sale requirements and there are no arrangements to place any of the proceeds of the ATM Offering in an escrow, trust or similar account. HCW is entitled to compensation at a fixed commission rate of 3.0% of the gross proceeds from the sale of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement. There have been no sales of our common stock as of December 31, 2021 under the Sales Agreement.
On February 16, 2021, we closed on a registered direct offering with certain healthcare-focused institutional investors to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of our common stock at $40.00 per share, for gross proceeds $40.0 million or net proceeds of $37.1 million after placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses. In connection with the offering, 65,003 warrants with a five-year expiry were issued to placement agent designees at an exercise price of $49.99 per share. The shares of common stock were offered by Pulmatrix pursuant to a “shelf” registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-230225) previously filed with the SEC on March 12, 2019 and declared effective by the SEC on March 15, 2019.
In addition to the above registered direct offerings, during the year ended December 31, 2021, warrants issued in 2019 and 2020 were exercised on a cash basis to purchase 7,202 shares of our common stock. We issued 7,202 shares of our common stock for proceeds of $0.2 million.
Financings
On July 9, 2020, we entered into letter agreements with certain existing accredited investors to exercise certain existing and outstanding warrants (“Existing Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 504,287 shares of our common stock at the existing exercise price per share of $27.00. The Existing Warrants were issued in an underwritten public offering pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-230395) and an additional registration statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-230714) filed pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, that was consummated in April 2019. In consideration for the exercise of the Existing Warrants for cash, the exercising holders received new unregistered warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 503,045 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $35.99 per share and with an exercise period of five years from July 14, 2020. The gross proceeds to the Company from the exercise were approximately $13.6 million or net proceeds of $12.5 million after placement agent fees and offering expenses. In addition, we issued 32,785 unregistered warrants to placement agent designees at an exercise price of $44.99 and with an exercise period of five years from July 14, 2020. All warrants issued in the financing were subsequently registered pursuant to a registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-242341) which was declared effective on August 13, 2020.
On April 16, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain institutional investors (the “Purchasers”), pursuant to which on April 20, 2020, we issued and sold in a registered direct offering (the “Offering”) an aggregate of 239,379 shares of our common stock at an offering price of $33.42 per share, for gross proceeds of approximately $8.0 million or net proceeds of $7.3 million after placement agent fees and offering expenses. In a concurrent private placement, we issued to the Purchasers, for each share of common stock purchased in the Offering, a warrant (“Common Warrants”) to purchase one share of common stock. The Common Warrants have an exercise price of $30.99 per share and are exercisable to purchase an aggregate of up to 239,380 shares of common stock. In addition, we issued to the placement agent for the Offering warrants to purchase 15,562 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $41.77 per share. Both the Common Warrants and the placement agent warrants are exercisable immediately upon issuance and terminate on April 20, 2022.
In addition to the warrant exercise inducement and the registered direct offering, during the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued 45,736 shares of common stock, upon the exercise of warrants to purchase 55,860 shares of common stock for proceeds of $1.1 million.
Known Trends, Events and Uncertainties
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations is unknown and will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. These include but are not limited to the duration of the COVID-19 outbreak, new information which may emerge concerning the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and any additional preventative and protective actions that regulators, or our board or management, may determine are needed.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant economic uncertainty and volatility in the credit and capital markets. We may not be able to raise sufficient additional capital and may tailor our drug candidate development program based on the amount of funding we are able to raise in the future. Nevertheless, there is no assurance that these initiatives will be successful.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this report, we are not aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.