Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
All references to “PURE,” “we,” “our,” “us” and the “Company” in this Item 7 refer to PURE Bioscience, Inc. and our wholly owned subsidiary.
The discussion in this section contains forward-looking statements. These statements relate to future events, our future operations or our future financial performance. We have attempted to identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “can,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “potential,” “predict,” “should,” “would” or “will” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology, but their absence does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, which could cause our actual results to differ from those projected in any forward-looking statements we make. Several risks and uncertainties we face are discussed in more detail under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report or in the discussion and analysis below. You should, however, understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all risks and uncertainties and you should not consider the risks and uncertainties identified by us to be a complete set of all potential risks or uncertainties that could materially affect us. You should not place undue reliance on the forward-looking statements we make herein because some or all of them may turn out to be wrong. We undertake no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements contained herein to reflect future events and developments, except as required by law. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are focused on developing and commercializing proprietary antimicrobial products that provide safe and cost-effective solutions to the health and environmental challenges of pathogen and hygienic control. Our technology platform is based on patented stabilized ionic silver, and our initial products contain silver dihydrogen citrate, or SDC. SDC is a broad-spectrum, non-toxic antimicrobial agent, which offers 24-hour residual protection and formulates well with other compounds. As a platform technology, we believe SDC is distinguished from existing products in the marketplace because of its superior efficacy, reduced toxicity, non-causticity and the inability of bacteria to form a resistance to it.
We believe there is a significant market opportunity for our safe, non-toxic, non-caustic and effective SDC-based solutions. We currently offer PURE® Hard Surface as a food contact surface sanitizer and disinfectant to restaurant chains, food processors and food transportation companies. We also offer PURE Control® as a direct food contact processing aid. In addition to our direct sales efforts with PURE Hard Surface and PURE Control, we market and sell our SDC-based products indirectly through third-party distributors supporting various industries.
Financial Overview
This financial overview provides a general description of our revenue and expenses.
Net Product Sales
We contract manufacture and sell SDC-based products for end use, and as a raw material for manufacturing use. We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of the promised goods or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Any amounts received prior to satisfying revenue recognition criteria are recorded as deferred revenue. See “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Revenue Recognition”.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold for product sales includes direct and indirect costs to manufacture products, including materials consumed, manufacturing overhead, shipping costs, salaries, benefits, reserved inventory, and related expenses of operations. Depreciation related to manufacturing is systematically allocated to inventory produced, and expensed through cost of goods sold at the time inventory is sold.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and other related costs for personnel in business development, sales, finance, accounting, information technology, and executive functions. Other selling, general and administrative costs include product marketing, advertising, and trade show costs, as well as public relations and investor relations, facility costs, and legal, accounting and other professional fees.
Research and Development
Our research and development activities are focused on leveraging our technology platform to develop additional proprietary products and applications. Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel and related costs, product registration expenses, and third-party testing. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
Other Income (Expense)
We record interest income, interest expense, the change in derivative liabilities, as well as other non-operating transactions, as other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic led to severe disruptions in general economic activities, as businesses and federal, state, and local governments took broad actions to mitigate this public health crisis. While we have experienced some delays related to final third-party validation of certain of our products and product rollouts by customers using PURE Control, we did not experience a material disruption to our business. In addition, we previously benefited from increased demand from our customers for our PURE Hard Surface product due to a focus on surface disinfecting in response to attempting to prevent COVID-19 transmission. We subsequently experienced an abatement in such demand. Such abatement has not stabilized and we cannot assure you that demand will stabilize in the future. Additionally, we experienced supply chain issues with our various plastic packaging configurations and citric acid. Further, on a go-forward basis, we cannot guarantee the overall economic conditions will not affect our business, as these conditions may significantly negatively impact all aspects of our business. Our business is dependent on the continued health and productivity of our employees, including our sales staff and corporate management team.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic or other health-related pandemics impacts our business, sales, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic or other health-related pandemics has subsided, we may experience significant impacts to our business as a result of its global economic impact, including any economic downturn or recession that has occurred or may occur in the future. See the section titled “Risk Factors - The COVID-19 pandemic or other health-related pandemics could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.”
Results of Operations - Comparison of the Years Ended July 31, 2022 and 2021
Fluctuations in Operating Results
Our results of operations have fluctuated significantly from period to period in the past and are likely to continue to do so in the future. We anticipate that our results of operations will be affected for the foreseeable future by several factors that may contribute to these periodic fluctuations, including fluctuations in the buying patterns of our current or potential customers for which we have no visibility, the mix of product sales including a change in the percentage of higher or lower margin formulations and packaging configurations of our products, the cost of product sales including component costs, our inability for any reason to be able to meet demand, the achievement and timing of research and development and regulatory milestones, unforeseen changes in expenses, including non-cash expenses such as the fair value of equity awards granted and the fair value change of derivative liabilities, the calculation of which includes several variable assumptions, and unforeseen manufacturing or supply issues, among other issues. Due to these fluctuations, we believe that the period-to-period comparisons of our operating results are not a reliable indication of our future performance. As of the date of this filing, we are not aware of any trends in these factors or events or conditions that we believe are reasonably likely to impact our results of operations in the future.
Net Product Sales
Net product sales were $1,813,000 and $3,698,000 for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. During the prior fiscal year we experienced a significant increase in sales due to the COVID-19 pandemic. There was no such increase during the current period. As a result, our comparable fiscal year product revenue decreased by $1,885,000. The decrease was attributable to decreased sales across our distribution network servicing the food processing, transportation and janitorial industry. Our top three customers accounted for $668,000 of net product sales for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022.
For the year ended July 31, 2022, three individual customers accounted for 14%, 13% and 10% of our net product sales. No other individual customer accounted for 10% or more of our net product sales. There were no foreign sales during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022.
For the year ended July 31, 2021, one customer accounted for 11% of our net product sales. No other individual customer accounted for 10% or more of our net product sales. There were no foreign sales during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021.
During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, we recognized $40,000 and $229,000 in royalties from a nonexclusive third-party distributor, respectively.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold was $853,000 and $1,852,000 for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decrease of $999,000 was primarily attributable to decreased product sales.
Gross margin, as a percentage of net product sales, was 53% and 50% for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in gross margin percentage was primarily attributable to the sale of higher margin formulations and packaging configurations of our products during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022 as compared with the prior year.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense was $4,106,000 and $4,047,000 for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase of $59,000 was primarily attributable to increased professional service costs, board of director fees, depreciation and travel and marketing expense. These increases were partially offset by decreased personnel costs, legal fees and share-based compensation.
Share-based compensation expense included in selling, general and administrative expense, was $567,000 and $841,000 for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decrease of $274,000 is primarily due to the prior year vesting of stock options and restricted stock units granted to employees, directors and consultants supporting our selling, general and administrative functions.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense was $319,000 and $339,000 for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decrease of $20,000 was primarily attributable to decreased third-party testing and research supporting our EPA and FDA efforts.
Impairment of intangibles
As of July 31, 2022, management performed its annual impairment test and determined that its forecasted operations could no longer support the $299,000 carrying value of the patents, and as such all amounts were impaired.
Other Income (Expense)
In April 2021, we were funded $239,000 under the Paycheck Protection Program or the PPP through California Bank and Trust. The PPP was established pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act or the CARES Act and is administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022, we received loan forgiveness under the provisions of the CARES Act for the entire $239,000 loan provided to us under the PPP. This amount was recorded as a gain on extinguishment of indebtedness on the Condensed Consolidated Statement of Operations during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of July 31, 2022, we had $3,466,000 in cash and cash equivalents compared with $2,465,000 in cash and cash equivalents as of July 31, 2021. The net increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily attributable to the July 2022 $3.5 million private placement financing. Additionally, as of July 31, 2022, we had $575,000 of current liabilities, including $488,000 in accounts payable, compared with $970,000 of current liabilities, including $593,000 in accounts payable as of July 31, 2021. The net decrease in current liabilities was primarily due to the forgiveness of the PPP loan discussed above.
We have a history of recurring losses, and as of July 31, 2022 we have incurred a cumulative net loss of $129,000,000. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2022, we recorded a net loss of $3,491,000 on recorded net revenue of $1,853,000. In addition, during the year ended July 31, 2022 we used $2,499,000 in operating and investing activities resulting in a cash balance of $3,391,000 as of July 31, 2022. Our history of recurring operating losses, and negative cash flows from operating activities give rise to substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result from our possible inability to continue as a going concern.
Our future capital requirements depend on numerous forward-looking factors. These factors may include, but are not limited to, the following: the acceptance of, and demand for, our products; our success and the success of our partners in selling our products; our success and the success of our partners in obtaining regulatory approvals to sell our products; the costs of further developing our existing products and technologies; the extent to which we invest in new product and technology development; and the costs associated with the continued operation, and any future growth, of our business. The outcome of these and other forward-looking factors will substantially affect our liquidity and capital resources.
Until we can continually generate positive cash flow from operations, we will need to continue to fund our operations with the proceeds of offerings of our equity and debt securities. However, we cannot assure you that additional financing will be available when needed or that, if available, financing will be obtained on terms favorable to us or to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds from the issuance of equity securities, substantial dilution to our existing stockholders would likely result. If we raise additional funds by incurring debt financing, the terms of the debt may involve significant cash payment obligations as well as covenants and specific financial ratios that may restrict our ability to operate our business.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the following accounting policies and estimates are critical to aid you in understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Effective August 1, 2018, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board or the FASB Accounting Standards Codification or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers or Topic 606. Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized at an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to a customer. This principle is applied using the following 5-step process:
1. Identify the contract with the customer
2. Identify the performance obligations in the contract
3. Determine the transaction price
4. Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
5. Recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied
Under Topic 606, we recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of the promised goods or services to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
Our technology platform is based on patented stabilized ionic silver, and our initial products contain silver dihydrogen citrate, or SDC. SDC is a broad-spectrum, non-toxic antimicrobial agent, which offers 24-hour residual protection and formulates well with other compounds. We sell various configurations and dilutions of SDC direct to customers and through distributors. We currently offer PURE® Hard Surface as a food contact surface sanitizer and disinfectant to restaurant chains, food processors and food transportation companies. We also offer PURE Control® as a direct food contact processing aid.
Contract terms for unit price, quantity, shipping and payment are governed by sales agreements and purchase orders which we consider to be a customer’s contract in all cases. The unit price is considered the observable stand-alone selling price for the arrangements. Any promotional or sales discounts are applied evenly to the units sold for purposes of calculating standalone selling price.
Product sales generally consist of a single performance obligation that we satisfy at a point in time. We recognize product revenue when the following events have occurred: (a) we have transferred physical possession of the products, (b) we have a present right to payment, (c) the customer has legal title to the products, and (d) the customer bears significant risks and rewards of ownership of the products.
Our direct customer and distributer sales are invoiced based on received purchase orders. Our payment terms on invoiced direct customer and distributor sales range between 30 and 90 days after we satisfy our performance obligation. The majority of our customers are on 30 day payment terms. We currently offer no right of return on invoiced sales and maintain no allowance for sales returns.
Shipping and handling are treated as activities to fulfill promises to customers and any amounts billed to a customer, if applicable, represent revenues earned for the goods provided. Costs related to such shipping and handling billings are classified as cost of sales.
We do not have significant categories of revenue that may impact how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors.
Variable Consideration
We record revenue from customers in an amount that reflects the transaction price we expect to be entitled to after transferring control of those goods or services. From time to time, we offer sales promotions on our products such as discounts. Variable consideration is estimated at contract inception only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur.
Share-Based Compensation
We grant equity-based awards under share-based compensation plans. We estimate the fair value of share-based payment awards using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. This fair value is then amortized over the requisite service periods of the awards. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions, including price volatility of the underlying stock, risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, and expected life of the option. Share-based compensation expense is based on awards ultimately expected to vest, and therefore is reduced by expected forfeitures. Changes in assumptions used under the Black-Scholes option valuation model could materially affect our net loss and net loss per share.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
In accordance with GAAP, if indicators of impairment exist, we assess the recoverability of the affected long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets can be recovered through undiscounted future operating cash flows. If impairment is indicated, we measure the amount of such impairment by comparing the carrying value of the asset to the fair value of the asset and we record the impairment as a reduction in the carrying value of the related asset and a charge to operating results. Estimating the undiscounted future cash flows associated with long-lived assets requires judgment, and assumptions could differ materially from actual results. As of July 31, 2022, management performed its annual impairment test and determined that its forecasted operations could no longer support the $299,000 carrying value of the patents, and as such all amounts were impaired. There were no patent impairments during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021.
For purposes of testing impairment, we group our long-lived assets at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows independent of other asset groups. Currently, there is only one level of aggregation for our intangible assets. We assess the impairment of long-lived assets, consisting of property, plant, equipment and finite-lived intangible assets primarily consisting of the worldwide patent portfolio of our silver ion technologies, annually, or whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Examples of such events or circumstances include:
● an asset group’s inability to continue to generate income from operations and positive cash flow in future periods;
● loss of legal ownership or title to an asset;
● significant changes in our strategic business objectives and utilization of the asset(s); and
● the impact of significant negative industry or economic trends.
Additionally, on a quarterly basis we review the significant assumptions underlying our impairment assessment to determine that our previous conclusions remain valid. As part of our review, we consider changes in revenue growth rates, operating margins, working capital needs and other expenditures. With the exception of the impairment discussed above we have not identified any asset groups where undiscounted cash flows were not substantially in excess of carrying value.
Recoverability of assets to be held and used in operations is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the future net cash flows expected to be generated by the assets. The factors used to evaluate the future net cash flows, while reasonable, require a high degree of judgment and the results could vary if the actual results are materially different than the forecasts. In addition, we base useful lives and amortization or depreciation expense on our subjective estimate of the period that the assets will generate revenue or otherwise be used by us. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Assets to be disposed of are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less selling costs.
We also periodically review the lives assigned to our intangible assets to ensure that our initial estimates do not exceed any revised estimated periods from which we expect to realize cash flows from the technologies. If a change were to occur in any of the above-mentioned factors or estimates, the likelihood of a material change in our reported results would increase.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included elsewhere in this report.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements.