ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis reflects our consolidated financial statements and other relevant statistical data, and is intended to enhance your understanding of our financial condition and results of operations. You should read the information in this section in conjunction with the business and financial information regarding Provident Bancorp, Inc., including the financial statements, provided in this Annual Report.
COVID-19
Since the distribution of COVID-19 vaccinations began in December 2020, significant progress has been made to combat the spread of the virus and as a result, there has been an uptick in economic activity, particularly those industries that had been most heavily impacted by the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite the progress, COVID-19 has caused significant disruption in the U.S. economy and has adversely impacted a broad range of industries in which the Company’s customers operate, which could impair their ability to fulfill their financial obligations. While it is not possible to know the full extent of these impacts as of the date of this filing, detailed below are potentially material items of which we are aware.
Congress, the President, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the “Federal Reserve”) have taken several actions designed to cushion the economic fallout. Most notably, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), a $2 trillion legislative package, was signed into law at the end of March 2020. The goal of the CARES Act was to prevent a severe economic downturn through various measures, including direct financial aid to American families and economic stimulus to significantly impacted industry sectors. Section 4013 of the CARES Act, “Temporary Relief from Troubled Debt Restructurings,” provides banks the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under U.S. GAAP related to troubled debt restructurings (“TDR”) for a limited period of time to account for the effects of COVID-19. Additionally, the Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act (the “Economic Aid Act”) was enacted on December 27, 2020, providing for a second round of Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans. Also on December 27, 2020, the Consolidated Appropriations Act (“CAA”) was signed into law. Section 541 of the CAA extends the provision in Section 4013 of the CARES Act, “Temporary Relief from Troubled Debt Restructurings”, to
January 1, 2022. The Federal Reserve also took actions to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including cutting the federal funds rate 150 basis points and targeting a 0 to 25 basis point rate. However, in response to inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve has announced that it will begin to taper its purchase of mortgage and other bonds and has signaled it will look to begin raising the federal funds rate in 2022. In addition to the general impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, certain provisions of the CARES Act as well as other legislative and regulatory relief efforts are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s operations.
The Economic Aid Act amended the PPP by extending the authority of the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) to guarantee loans and the ability of PPP lenders to disburse PPP loans until March 31, 2021. The PPP Extension Act of 2021, which was enacted on March 30, 2021, extended the PPP application deadline to May 31, 2021, and provided the SBA additional time to process applications through June 30, 2021.
Financial position and results of operations
In keeping with the guidance from regulators, during the height of the pandemic, the Company worked with COVID-19 affected customers to waive fees from a variety of sources and worked with affected borrowers to defer payments, interest and fees. The Company continues to monitor and measure the impact and potential future impact on operations.
Allowance for loan losses
Continued uncertainty regarding the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic effects will continue to affect the accounting for credit losses, which could cause the provision for loan losses to increase. It also is possible that asset quality could worsen and expenses associated with collection efforts and loan charge-offs could increase. The Company participated in both rounds of the PPP, providing loans to small businesses negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. PPP loans are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government; if that should change, the Company could be required to increase its allowance for loan losses through an additional provision for loan losses charged to earnings.
In accordance with guidance issued by federal banking agencies, the Company worked with borrowers that were unable to meet contractual obligations due to the effects of COVID-19 by providing modifications to allow for deferral of interest or principal and interest payments on a case-by-case basis. In order to mitigate the risk associated with these modifications the Company incorporated covenants that require borrowers to submit quarterly financial statements, prohibit them from distributing funds to any owner or stockholder (with the exception of payroll) and also prohibit them from making any payments on debt owed to subordinated debt holders for the duration of their modification. If borrowers are unable to return to their normal payment plan following their modification period, the Company could be required to increase its allowance for loan losses through an additional provision for loan losses charged to earnings.
Valuation
Valuation and fair value measurement challenges may occur. For example, COVID-19 could cause further and sustained decline in the financial markets or the occurrence of what management would deem a valuation triggering event that could result in an impairment charge to earnings, such as our investment securities.
Critical Accounting Policies
A summary of our accounting policies is described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this annual report. Critical accounting estimates are necessary in the application of certain accounting policies and procedures and are particularly susceptible to significant change. Critical accounting policies are defined as those involving significant judgments and assumptions by management that are inherently uncertain and that could have a material impact on the carrying value of certain assets or on income under different assumptions or conditions. Management believes that the most critical accounting policies, which involve the most complex or subjective decisions or assessments, are as follows:
Allowance for Loan Losses.
The allowance for loan losses is a valuation allowance for probable incurred credit losses. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when management believes the un-collectability of a loan balance is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Management estimates the allowance balance required using past loan loss experience, the size and composition of the portfolio, information about specific borrower situations and estimated collateral values, economic conditions, and other factors. Allocations of the allowance may be made for specific loans, but the entire allowance is available for any loan that, in management’s judgment, should be charged off.
The allowance consists of specific and general components. The specific component relates to loans that are individually classified as impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect all amounts due
according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Loans for which the terms have been modified resulting in a concession, and for which the borrower is experiencing financial difficulties, are considered troubled debt restructurings (“TDRs”) and are classified as impaired.
The Company classifies a loan as impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that it will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value, and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed.
Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment. Accordingly, we do not separately identify individual consumer and residential loans for impairment disclosures.
The allocated component relates to loans that are classified as impaired. Impairment is measured on a loan by loan basis for commercial, commercial real estate and construction loans by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. An allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan.
Troubled debt restructurings are individually evaluated for impairment and included in the separately identified impairment disclosures. TDRs are measured at the present value of estimated future cash flows using the loan’s effective rate at inception. If a TDR is considered to be a collateral dependent loan, the loan is reported, net, at the fair value of the collateral. For TDRs that subsequently default, the Company determines the amount of the allowance on that loan in accordance with the accounting policy for the allowance for loan losses on loans individually identified as impaired.
Mortgage warehouse loans are facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of loan closure. Due to their short-term nature, these loans are assessed at a lower credit risk and do not carry the same allocation as traditional loans.
The general component of the allowance for loan losses is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors stratified by all loan segments. Management uses a rolling average of historical losses based on a time frame appropriate to capture relevant loss data for each loan segment. The historical loss factors are adjusted for the following qualitative factors: levels/trends in delinquencies and non-accruals, economic conditions, portfolio trends, portfolio concentrations, loan grading and management’s discretion. The determination of qualitative factors involves significant judgment. There were no changes in our policies or methodology pertaining to the general component of the allowance for loan losses during 2021.
The qualitative factors are determined based on the various risk characteristics of each loan segment. Risk characteristics relevant to each portfolio segment are as follows:
Residential real estate: We generally do not originate loans with a loan-to-value ratio greater than 80% and do not grant subprime loans. Loans with loan to value ratios greater than 80% require the purchase of private mortgage insurance. All loans in this segment are collateralized by owner-occupied residential real estate and repayment is dependent on the credit quality of the individual borrower. The overall health of the economy, including unemployment rates and housing prices, will have an effect on the credit quality in this segment.
Commercial real estate: Loans in this segment are primarily income-producing properties throughout Massachusetts and New Hampshire. The underlying cash flows generated by the properties are adversely impacted by a downturn in the economy as evidenced by increased vacancy rates, which in turn, will have an effect on the credit quality in this segment. Management periodically obtains rent rolls and continually monitors the cash flows of these loans.
Construction and land development: Loans in this segment primarily include speculative and pre-sold real estate development loans for which payment is derived from sale of the property and a conversion of the construction loans to permanent loans for which payment is then derived from cash flows of the property. Credit risk is affected by cost overruns, time to sell at an adequate price, and market conditions.
Mortgage warehouse: Loans in this segment are primarily facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies. The underlying collateral of these loans are residential real estate loans. Loans are originated by the mortgage companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of the loan closure. The primary source of repayment is the cash flow upon the sale of the loans. The credit risk associated with this type of lending is the risk that the mortgage companies are unable to sell the loans.
Commercial: Loans in this segment are made to businesses and are generally secured by assets of the business. Repayment is expected from the cash flows of the business. A weakened economy, and resultant decreased consumer spending, will have an effect on the credit quality in this segment.
Consumer: Loans in this segment are generally unsecured and repayment is dependent on the credit quality of the individual borrower.
An unallocated component can be maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses. The unallocated component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision and uncertainty inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating allocated and general reserves in the portfolio.
Income Taxes. The Company recognizes income taxes under the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are established for the temporary differences between the accounting basis and the tax basis of the Company's assets and liabilities at enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when the amounts related to such temporary differences are realized or settled. A tax valuation allowance is established, as needed, to reduce net deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
A tax position is recognized as a benefit only if it is “more likely than not” that the tax position would be sustained in a tax examination, with a tax examination being presumed to occur. The amount recognized is the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized on examination.
For tax positions not meeting the “more likely than not” test, no tax benefit is recorded. The Company recognizes interest and/or penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
The following tables set forth selected consolidated historical financial and other data of Provident Bancorp, Inc. for the years ended and at the dates indicated. The following is only a summary and you should read it in conjunction with the business and financial information regarding Provident Bancorp, Inc. contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. The information at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, is derived in part from the audited consolidated financial statements that appear in this Annual Report.
___________________
(1) Excludes loans held-for-sale.
(2) Includes retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive income/loss.
(3) Includes the expense related to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017 of $2.0 million
(4) Share amounts related to periods prior to the date of the Conversion (October 16, 2019) have been restated to give the retroactive recognition to the exchange ratio applied in the Conversion (2.0212-to-one)
___________________
(1) Represents the difference between the weighted average yield on average interest-earning assets and the weighted average cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
(2) Represents net interest income as a percent of average interest-earning assets.
(3) Represents noninterest expense divided by the sum of net interest income and noninterest income, excluding gains on securities available-for-sale, net.
(4) Loans are presented before the allowance but include deferred costs/fees.
Comparison of Financial Condition at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Assets. Our total assets increased $223.5 million, or 14.8%, to $1.73 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.51 billion at December 31, 2020. The primary reasons for the increase were increases in net loans, cash and cash equivalents, debt securities available-for-sale, and bank owned life insurance.
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents increased $69.3 million, or 82.7%, to $153.1 million at December 31, 2021 from $83.8 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to an increase in short-term investments of $58.7 million, or 81.5%. Short-term investments were increased as a result of an increase in deposits that exceeded loan growth.
Debt Securities Available-for-Sale. Investments in debt securities available-for-sale increased $4.6 million or 14.3% to $36.8 million at December 31, 2021 from $32.2 million at December 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from purchases of debt securities, partially offset by principal pay downs on government mortgage-backed securities.
Bank Owned Life Insurance. Bank owned life insurance increased $5.9 million, or 16.0%, to $42.6 million at December 31, 2021 from $36.7 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the purchase of additional insurance policies.
Loan Portfolio Analysis. At December 31, 2021, net loans were $1.43 billion, or 82.9% of total assets, compared to $1.31 billion, or 87.3% of total assets, at December 31, 2020. Increases in commercial loans of $160.3 million, or 28.3%, and an increase in construction and land development loans of $13.9 million, or 48.0% were partially offset by decreases in commercial real estate loans of $6.7 million, or 1.5%, residential real estate loans of $32.0 million, or 97.5%, consumer loans of $4.0 million, or 72.6%, and mortgage warehouse of $11.6 million, or 4.4%. Our commercial loan growth was primarily due to an increase in our loans to digital asset companies of $105.4 million, or 703.1% to $120.4 million compared to $15.0 million at December 31, 2020, an increase in enterprise value loans of $54.2 million, or 18.9%, to $340.3 million compared to $286.1 million at December 31, 2020, and an increase in renewable energy loans of $25.1 million, or 67.7%, to $62.3 million compared to $37.2 million at December 31, 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in PPP loans of $29.4 million, or 70.2%, to $12.4 million compared to $41.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Residential real estate loans decreased primarily due to the transfer of the portfolio to loans held for sale. As of December 31, 2021, the Company determined they will no longer originate or service residential real estate loans. As such, the Company valued the portfolio at the lower of cost or market and transferred them to loans held for sale.
The following table sets forth the composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan at the dates indicated, excluding loans held for sale.
___________________
(1) Includes home equity loans and lines of credit
(2) Includes multi-family real estate loans
(3) Includes PPP and digital asset loans
Loan Maturity. The following table sets forth certain information at December 31, 2021 regarding the contractual maturity of our loan portfolio. Demand loans, loans having no stated repayment schedule or maturity, and overdraft loans are reported as being due in one year or less. The table does not include any estimate of prepayments that could significantly shorten the average life of all loans and may cause our actual repayment experience to differ from that shown below.
The following table sets forth our fixed and adjustable-rate loans at December 31, 2021 that are contractually due after December 31, 2022.
Asset Quality
Credit Risk Management. Our strategy for credit risk management focuses on having well-defined credit policies and uniform underwriting criteria and providing prompt attention to potential problem loans. Management of asset quality is accomplished by internal controls, monitoring and reporting of key risk indicators, and both internal and independent third-party loan reviews. The primary objective of our loan review process is to measure borrower performance and assess risk for the purpose of identifying loan weakness in order to minimize loan loss exposure. From the time of loan origination through final repayment, commercial real estate, construction and land development and commercial business loans are assigned a risk rating based on pre-determined criteria and levels of risk. The risk rating is monitored annually for most loans; however, it may change during the life of the loan as appropriate.
When entering a new lending line, we typically seek to manage risks and costs by limiting initial activity. We then decide whether it would be profitable and consistent with our risk tolerance levels to expand the activity, and continually calibrate and adjust our actions to maintain appropriate risk limitations. We typically enter a new lending line based upon the experience of our existing employees, or we may hire an experienced individual or group of individuals to manage new activities.
Internal and independent third-party loan reviews vary by loan type. Depending on the size and complexity of the loan, some loans may warrant detailed individual review, while other loans may have less risk based upon size, or be of a homogeneous nature reducing the need for detailed individual analysis. Assets with these characteristics, such as consumer loans and loans secured by residential real estate, may be reviewed on the basis of risk indicators such as delinquency or credit rating. In cases of significant concern, a total re-evaluation of the loan and associated risks are documented by completing a loan risk assessment and action plan. Some loans may be re-evaluated in terms of their fair market value or net realizable value in order to determine the likelihood of potential loss exposure and, consequently, the adequacy of specific and general loan loss reserves.
When a borrower fails to make a required loan payment, we take a number of steps to have the borrower cure the delinquency and restore the loan to current status, including contacting the borrower by letter and phone at regular intervals. When the borrower is in default, we may commence collection proceedings. If a foreclosure action is instituted and the loan is not brought current, paid in full, or refinanced before the foreclosure sale, the real property securing the loan generally is sold at foreclosure. Management informs the board of directors monthly of the amount of loans delinquent more than 30 days. Management provides detailed information to the board of directors quarterly on loans 60 or more days past due and all loans in foreclosure and repossessed property that we own.
Delinquent Loans. The following tables set forth our loan delinquencies by type and amount at the dates indicated.
Non-performing Assets. Non-performing assets include loans that are 90 or more days past due or on non-accrual status, including troubled debt restructurings on non-accrual status, and real estate and other loan collateral acquired through foreclosure and repossession. Troubled debt restructurings include loans for which either a portion of interest or principal has been forgiven, loans modified at interest rates materially less than current market rates, or the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty. Loans 90 days or greater past due may remain on an accrual basis if adequately collateralized and in the process of collection. At December 31, 2021, we did not have any accruing loans past due 90 days or greater. For non-accrual loans, interest previously accrued but not collected is reversed and charged against income at the time a loan is placed on non-accrual status. Loans are returned to accrual status when all the principal and interest amounts contractually due are brought current and future payments are reasonably assured.
Real estate that we acquire as a result of foreclosure or by deed-in-lieu of foreclosure is classified as foreclosed real estate until it is sold. When property is acquired, it is initially recorded at the lower of cost or fair value less costs to sell at the date of foreclosure. Holding costs and declines in fair value after acquisition of the property result in charges against income.
The following table sets forth information regarding our non-performing assets at the dates indicated.
___________________
(1) Loans are presented before allowance for loan losses, but include deferred loan costs/fees.
The decrease in commercial non-accrual loans at December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was primarily due to workouts of loans in our portfolio.
We have cooperative relationships with the vast majority of our non-performing loan customers. Substantially all non-performing loans are collateralized by business assets or real estate and the repayment is largely dependent on the return of such loans to performing status or the liquidation of the underlying collateral. We pursue the resolution of all non-performing loans through collections, restructures, voluntary liquidation of collateral by the borrower and, where necessary, legal action. When attempts to work with a customer to return a loan to performing status, including restructuring the loan, are unsuccessful, we will initiate appropriate legal action seeking to acquire property by deed in lieu of foreclosure or through foreclosure, or to liquidate business assets.
The following table sets forth the accruing and non-accruing status of troubled debt restructurings at the dates indicated.
Potential Problem Loans. We classify certain commercial real estate, construction and land development, and commercial loans as “special mention”, “substandard”, or “doubtful”, based on criteria consistent with guidelines provided by our banking regulators. Certain potential problem loans represent loans that are currently performing, but for which known information about possible credit problems of the related borrowers causes management to have doubts as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with the present loan repayment terms and which may result in such loans becoming non-performing at some time in the future. Potential problem loans also include non-accrual or restructured loans presented above. We expect the levels of non-performing assets and potential problem loans to fluctuate in response to changing economic and market conditions, and the relative sizes of the respective loan portfolios, along with our degree of success in resolving problem assets.
Other potential problem loans are those loans that are currently performing, but where known information about possible credit problems of the borrowers causes us to have concerns as to the ability of such borrowers to comply with contractual loan repayment terms. At December 31, 2021, other potential problem loans totaled $22.0 million, consisting of 15 troubled debt restructured loans that were accruing interest in accordance with their modified terms.
The Company is working with customers affected by COVID-19. As a result of the current economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 virus, the Company is engaging in more frequent communication with borrowers to better understand their situation and challenges faced.
The Company established a modification program in accordance with applicable regulations to provide economic relief. In working with our borrowers, the Company provided up to six-month payment deferrals. At the completion of the payment deferral, the Company allowed for deferral extensions on an as-needed and case-by-case basis. Under agency guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES Act, these modifications were not classified as troubled debt restructurings and were not considered delinquent. Throughout 2020, there were 287 outstanding loans, totaling $265.6 million, or 19.9% of total loans at December 31, 2020, that had been modified under agency guidance and Section 4013 of the CARES Act. As of December 31, 2021, all loans that were modified under the CARES Act have resumed repayment or have been paid off.
Allowance for Loan Losses. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at levels considered adequate by management to provide for probable loan losses inherent in the loan portfolio as of the consolidated balance sheet reporting dates. The allowance for loan losses is based on management’s assessment of various factors affecting the loan portfolio, including portfolio composition, delinquent and non-accrual loans, national and local business conditions and loss experience and an overall evaluation of the quality of the underlying collateral.
The following table sets forth activity in our allowance for loan losses for the years indicated.
___________________
(1) Loans are presented before the allowance for loan losses but include deferred fees/costs
(2) Allowance to total loans outstanding at end of the year, excluding $12.4 million and $41.8 million in PPP loans, was 1.35% and 1.43% at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There were no outstanding PPP loans at December 31, 2019, 2018 or 2017.
The following tables set forth net (recoveries)/charge-offs to average loans outstanding during the year based on loan categories.
_____________________
(1) Loans are presented before the allowance for loan losses but include deferred fees/costs
Allocation of Allowance for Loan Losses. The following tables set forth the allowance for loan losses allocated by loan category. The allowance for loan losses allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in other categories.
The allowance consists of general, specific, and unallocated components. The general component relates to pools of non-impaired loans and is based on historical loss experience adjusted for qualitative factors. The allocated component relates to loans that are classified as impaired, whereby an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows, collateral value, less estimated selling costs, or observable market price of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan.
An unallocated component may be maintained to cover uncertainties that could affect management’s estimate of probable losses. The unallocated component of the allowance reflects the margin of imprecision inherent in the underlying assumptions used in the methodologies for estimating allocated and general reserves in the portfolio.
We had impaired loans totaling $24.1 million and $25.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Impaired loans totaling $1.9 million and $4.0 million had a valuation allowance of $1.6 million and $2.0 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our average investment in impaired loans was $24.9 million and $26.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding the loan and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record, and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan-by-loan basis for commercial business, commercial real estate and construction and land development loans by either the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s obtainable market price, or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
Large groups of smaller balance homogeneous loans are collectively evaluated for impairment based on payment status. Accordingly, we do not separately identify individual one- to four-family residential and consumer loans for impairment disclosures, unless such loans are subject to a troubled debt restructuring. We periodically agree to modify the contractual terms of loans. When a loan is modified and a concession is made to a borrower experiencing financial difficulty, the modification is considered a troubled debt restructuring. All troubled debt restructurings are initially classified as impaired.
Mortgage warehouse loans are facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of loan closure. Due to their short-term nature, these loans are assessed at a lower credit risk and do not carry the same allocation as traditional loans.
We review residential and commercial loans for impairment based on the fair value of collateral, if collateral-dependent, or the present value of expected cash flows. Management has reviewed the collateral value for all impaired and non-accrual loans that were collateral dependent as of December 31, 2021 and considered any probable loss in determining the allowance for loan losses.
Loans that are partially charged off generally remain on non-accrual status until foreclosure or such time that they are performing in accordance with the terms of the loan and have a sustained payment history of at least six months. The accrual of interest is generally discontinued when the contractual payment of principal or interest has become 90 days past due or management has serious doubts about further collectability of principal or interest, even though the loan is currently performing. Loan losses are charged against the allowance when we believe the uncollectability of a loan balance is confirmed; for collateral-dependent loans, generally when appraised values (as adjusted values, if applicable) less estimated costs to sell, are less than our carrying values.
Although we believe that we use the best information available to establish the allowance for loan losses, future adjustments to the allowance for loan losses may be necessary and our results of operations could be adversely affected if circumstances differ substantially from the assumptions used in making the determinations. Furthermore, while we believe we have established our allowance for loan losses in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, our regulators, in reviewing our loan portfolio, may require us to increase our allowance for loan losses. In addition, because future events affecting borrowers and collateral cannot be predicted with certainty, the existing allowance for loan losses may not be adequate or increases may be necessary should the quality of any loans deteriorate as a result of the factors discussed above. Any material increase in the allowance for loan losses may adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Securities Portfolio
The following table sets forth the composition of our securities portfolio at the dates indicated,
At December 31, 2021, we had no investments in a single company or entity, other than government and government agency securities, that had an aggregate book value in excess of 10% of our equity.
Portfolio Maturities and Yields. The composition and maturities of the investment securities portfolio at December 31, 2021 are summarized in the following table. Certain mortgage-backed securities have adjustable interest rates and will reprice annually within the various maturity ranges. These repricing schedules are not reflected in the table below. Weighted average yields are calculated based on amortized cost and no tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made, as the amount of tax-free interest-earning assets is immaterial.
Each reporting period, we evaluate all securities with a decline in fair value below the amortized cost of the investment to determine whether or not the impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary. Other-than-temporary impairment (“OTTI”) is required to be recognized if (1) we intend to sell the security; (2) it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis; or (3) for debt securities, the present value of expected cash flows is not sufficient to recover the entire amortized cost basis. For impaired debt securities that we intend to sell, or more likely than not will be required to sell, the full amount of the depreciation is recognized as OTTI, resulting in a realized loss that is a charged to earnings through a reduction in our non-interest income. For all other impaired debt securities, credit-related OTTI is recognized through earnings and non-credit related OTTI is recognized in other comprehensive income/loss, net of applicable taxes. We did not recognize any OTTI during the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Deposits
Total deposits increased $222.5 million, or 18.0%, to $1.46 billion at December 31, 2021 from $1.24 billion at December 31, 2020. Our continuing focus on the acquisition and expansion of core deposit relationships, which we define as all deposits except for certificates of deposit, resulted in net growth in these deposits of $340.1 million, or 32.1%, to $1.40 billion at December 31, 2021, or 95.9% of total deposits at that date. Included in the growth of our core deposit relationships is an increase in NOW and demand deposits of $270.4 million, or 48.8%, an increase of $65.8 million, or 18.6%, in money market accounts and an increase of $3.9 million, or 2.6%, in savings accounts. NOW and demand deposits and money market deposits increased primarily due to new and expanded relationships with traditional, digital asset, and banking as a service (“BaaS”) customers. As of December 31, 2021, deposit relationships with digital asset customers increased $68.7 million, or 222.3%, to $99.7 million compared to $30.9 million at December 31, 2020. In 2021, the Company began offering deposit services to BaaS customers. BaaS is an end-to-end solution that allows financial technology companies (“FinTechs”) or other third parties to connect to banks’ systems directly via application programming interfaces so they can build banking offerings on top of the providers’ regulated infrastructure. As of December 31, 2021, deposits with BaaS customers totaled $59.9 million. The increase in savings accounts is primarily caused by increased consumer savings. Certificates of deposit decreased $117.7 million, or 66.0% primarily due to roll-off of brokered certificates of deposit. In addition, the Bank has increased its focus on growing noninterest-bearing deposit balances and as of December 31, 2021 noninterest-bearing deposits represented 42.9% of total deposits compared to 31.0% at December 31, 2020.
The following tables set forth the distribution of total deposits by account type at the dates indicated.
As of December 31, 2021, our certificates of deposit included $20.2 million of brokered certificates of deposit and $16.8 million of QwickRate certificates of deposit. As of December 31, 2021and 2020, all deposits were insured in full through our participation in the Massachusetts Depositors Insurance Fund (“DIF”).
As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate amount of all our certificates of deposit in amounts greater than or equal to $250,000, which excludes all brokered certificates, was approximately $5.1 million. The following table sets forth the maturity of these certificates as of December 31, 2021.
Borrowings
Borrowings were $13.5 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020. All of the borrowings at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were Federal Home Loan Bank long-term advances with an original maturity of more than one year. The weighted average interest rate was 2.11% and 2.12% at December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively.
We had no securities sold under agreements to repurchase during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Shareholders’ Equity
Total shareholders’ equity decreased $2.1 million, or 0.9%, to $233.8 million at December 31, 2021, from $235.9 million at December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the repurchase of 1,272,607 shares of common stock for $19.0 million, $2.6 million from dividends paid, and a decrease in other comprehensive income of $409,000, partially offset by net income of $16.1 million, stock-based compensation expense of $2.5 million and employee stock ownership plan shares earned of $1.4 million.
Average Balance Sheets and Related Yields and Rates
The following tables set forth average balance sheets, average yields and costs, and certain other information for the years indicated. No tax-equivalent yield adjustments have been made, as we consider the amount of tax free interest-earning assets is immaterial. All average balances are daily average balances. Non-accrual loans were included in the computation of average balances. The yields set forth below include the effect of deferred fees, discounts, and premiums that are amortized or accreted to interest income or interest expense.
___________________
(1) Interest earned/paid on loans includes fee income related to SBA loan forgiveness of $2.4 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and mortgage warehouse loan origination fee income of $1.4 million and $759,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. There was no fee income related to SBA loan forgiveness or mortgage warehouse loan originations for the year ended December 31, 2019.
(2) Net interest rate spread represents the difference between the weighted average yield on interest-bearing assets and the weighted average rate of interest-bearing liabilities.
(3) Net interest-earning assets represent total interest-earning assets less total interest-bearing liabilities.
(4) Net interest margin represents net interest income divided by average total interest-earning assets.
‎
Rate/Volume Analysis
The following table sets forth the effects of changing rates and volumes on our net interest income. The rate column shows the effects attributable to changes in rate (changes in rate multiplied by prior volume). The volume column shows the effects attributable to changes in volume (changes in volume multiplied by prior rate). The net column represents the sum of the prior columns. For purposes of this table, changes attributable to changes in both rate and volume that cannot be segregated have been allocated proportionally based on the changes due to rate and the changes due to volume. There are no out-of-period adjustments excluded from the table below.
Comparison of Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
General. Net income increased $4.2 million, or 34.7%, to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $7.0 million, or 12.8%, in net interest and dividend income, an increase in noninterest income of $1.6 million, or 45.8%, a decrease in provision for loan losses of $1.7 million, or 30.6%, a decrease in write downs of other assets and receivables of $2.0 million, or 89.8%, partially offset by an increase in salaries and employee benefits expense of $5.6 million, or 24.2%, and an increase in income tax expense of $1.3 million, or 28.7%.
Interest and Dividend Income. Interest and dividend income increased $4.4 million, or 7.3%, to $64.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was caused by an increase in interest and fees on loans, which increased $4.5 million, or 7.5%, partially offset by a decrease in interest and dividends on securities of $191,000, or 20.9%.
The increase in interest income on loans was due to an increase in average loan balance of $110.4 million, or 9.1%, to $1.32 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $1.21 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was partially offset by a decrease in the yield on loans of seven basis points, to 4.84% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 4.91% for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to lower market interest rates, and the origination of mortgage warehouse loans which typically yield a lower rate than the rest of our portfolio.
The decrease in interest and dividends on securities was due to a decrease in the average balance of debt securities available-for-sale of $3.3 million, or 8.8%, to $34.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $37.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and a 14 basis point decrease in the yield on such securities to 2.08% for 2021 from 2.22% for 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $2.6 million, or 43.2%, to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was caused by decreases in interest expense on deposits and borrowings. Interest expense on deposits decreased $2.1 million, or 40.7%, to $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to a decrease in the cost of interest-bearing deposits of 34 basis points to 0.37% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 0.71% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in the average balance of interest-bearing deposits of $110.4 million, or 15.1%, to $843.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $732.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from an increase in the average balance of money market accounts, which increased $110.9 million, or 37.5%.
Interest expense on borrowings, which consists of advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston and borrowings from the Federal Reserve Bank borrower-in-custody program, decreased $443,000, or 60.9%, to $285,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $728,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to a decrease in the average balance of borrowings of $30.2 million, or 69.1%, to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $43.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased deposits funding loan growth.
Net Interest and Dividend Income. Net interest and dividend income increased $7.0 million, or 12.8%, to $61.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $54.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The growth in net interest and dividend income was primarily the result of an increase in our average interest-earning assets of $228.0 million, or 17.7%, offset by an increase in average interest-bearing liabilities of $80.2 million, or 10.3%, and a decrease in net interest margin of 17 basis points to 4.06%. The decrease in the net interest margin was the result of a combination of factors including a decreasing rate environment, and an increase in short-term investments, which have a lower rate. The net interest margin benefitted from the accretion of fee income related to the forgiveness of the SBA PPP loans. The amount of income recognized from the forgiveness totaled $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, there was $503,000 in SBA PPP fee income remaining to be accreted.
Provision for Loan Losses. The provision for loan losses was $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is a decrease of $1.7 million, or 30.6%. The changes in the provision were based on management’s assessment of economic conditions, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, loan portfolio growth and composition changes, historical charge-off trends, levels of problem loans and other asset quality trends. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the decreased provision was offset by an increase in net charge-offs, which were $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $923,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The provision recorded resulted in an allowance for loan losses of $19.5 million, or 1.34% of total loans at December 31, 2021, compared to $18.5 million, or 1.39% of total loans at December 31, 2020. Allowance for loan losses as a percentage of loans is lower in the current year primarily due to improvements in economic conditions, reduction in warehouse reserves, offset by increases in classified loans. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had increases in provision for loan losses and the related allowance due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Included in total loans was $12.4 million and $41.8 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in PPP loans originated as part of the CARES Act that we believe have no credit risk due to a government guarantee, therefore, we have not provided for losses for these loans. Excluding these loans, the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of total loans was 1.35% and 1.43% as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was $253.8 million and $265.4 million, respectively, in outstanding mortgage warehouse loan balances. Loans in this segment are facility lines to non-bank mortgage origination companies for sale into secondary markets, which is typically within 15 days of loan closure. Due to their short-term nature, these loans are assessed at a lower credit risk and do not carry the same allocation as traditional loans. The allowance for loans losses as a percentage of non-performing loans was 674.14% as of December 31, 2021 compared to 341.72% as of December 31, 2020. Non-performing loans were $2.9 million, or 0.17% of total assets as of December 31, 2021 compared to $5.4 million, or 0.36% of total assets, as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the largest non-performing loan relationships consisted of two commercial relationship totaling $1.8 million. These loan relationships were evaluated for impairment and specific reserves of $1.6 million were allocated as of December 31, 2021.
Noninterest Income. Noninterest income information is as follows.
Customer service fees on deposit accounts increased $501,000, or 37.6%, primarily due to fees generated from cash vault services for our customers who operate Bitcoin ATMs, which totaled $274,000. In addition, 2021 fees reflect higher income compared to 2020 due to fees being waived for customers impacted by COVID-19. Other service charges and fees increased $681,000, or 51.5%, primarily due to increased late fee charges as well as income from loan prepayment penalties related to two commercial loan relationships. The increase in bank owned life insurance income of $386,000, or 47.7%, is primarily due to the receipt of a death benefit payout during the third quarter of 2021 as well as the purchase of additional insurance policies in the second quarter of 2020.
Noninterest Expense. Noninterest expense information is as follows.
Salaries and employee benefits expense increased $5.6 million, or 24.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to stock-based compensation expense for new grants awarded and an increase in staff to support the development and implementation of new technologies and specialty lending products. Also included in salaries and employee benefit expense is a $984,000 expense relating to an agreement entered into on November 1, 2021 between the Bank and the President and Chief Lending Officer in connection with his retirement. Data processing fees increased $325,000 or 32.5%, primarily due to new contracts for deposit services. Directors’ compensation increased $242,000, or 32.3%, primarily due to increase stock-based compensation expense. The increase of $287,000, or 9.7%, in other expense was primarily due to increased costs related to third-party services for both marketing and information technology, as well as increased costs associated with conferences and training which were largely canceled during 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Professional fees increased $215,000, or 11.5%, primarily due to an increase in audit and compliance costs. These increases were offset by a decrease in write downs of other assets and receivables of $2.0 million. In the first quarter of 2020 a write-down of a notes receivable balance was completed after the Company evaluated the collectability and determined that $500,000 was uncollectible and in the third quarter of 2020 a write-down of an SBA receivable balance was completed after the Company evaluated the collectability and determined $1.3 million was uncollectible. In the fourth quarter of 2020 a write-down of other assets was also completed after the Company evaluated the collectability and determined $400,00 was impaired and uncollectible. The decrease in the write-downs was partially offset by a write-down of an SBA receivable in the third quarter of 2021 after the Company evaluated the collectability and determined $195,000 was uncollectible.
Income Tax Provision. We recorded a provision for income taxes of $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting an effective tax rate of 26.9%, compared to $4.6 million, or an effective tax rate of 27.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Management of Market Risk
General. The majority of our assets and liabilities are monetary in nature. Consequently, our most significant form of market risk is interest rate risk. Our assets, consisting primarily of loans, have longer maturities than our liabilities, consisting primarily of deposits. As a result, a principal part of our business strategy is to manage interest rate risk and reduce the exposure of our net interest income to changes in market interest rates. Accordingly, we have established a management-level Asset/Liability Management Committee, which takes initial responsibility for developing an asset/liability management process and related procedures, establishing and monitoring reporting systems and developing asset/liability strategies. On at least a quarterly basis, the Asset/Liability Management Committee reviews asset/liability management with the Investment Asset/Liability Committee that has been established by the board of directors. This committee also reviews any changes in strategies as well as the performance of any specific asset/liability management actions that have been implemented previously. On a quarterly basis, an outside consulting firm provides us with detailed information and analysis as to asset/liability management, including our interest rate risk profile. Ultimate responsibility for effective asset/liability management rests with our board of directors.
We have sought to manage our interest rate risk in order to minimize the exposure of our earnings and capital to changes in interest rates. We have implemented the following strategies to manage our interest rate risk: originating loans with adjustable interest rates; promoting core deposit products; and adjusting the interest rates and maturities of funding sources, as necessary. In addition, we no longer originate single-family residential real estate loans, which often have longer terms and fixed rates. By following these strategies, we believe that we are better positioned to react to changes in market interest rates.
Net Interest Income Simulation. We analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through a net interest income simulation model. Net interest income is the difference between the interest income we earn on our interest-earning assets, such as loans and securities, and the interest we pay on our interest-bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings. We estimate what our net interest income would be for a 12-month period in the current interest rate environment. We then calculate what the net interest income would be for the same period under the assumption that interest rates increase 200 basis points from current market rates and under the assumption that interest rates decrease 100 basis points from current market rates, with changes in interest rates representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve.
The following table presents the estimated changes in net interest income of BankProv, calculated on a bank-only basis, that would result from changes in market interest rates over twelve-month periods beginning December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Economic Value of Equity Simulation. We also analyze our sensitivity to changes in interest rates through an economic value of equity (“EVE”) model. EVE represents the present value of the expected cash flows from our assets less the present value of the expected cash flows arising from our liabilities adjusted for the value of off-balance sheet contracts. The EVE ratio represents the dollar amount of our EVE divided by the present value of our total assets for a given interest rate scenario. EVE attempts to quantify our economic value using a discounted cash flow methodology while the EVE ratio reflects that value as a form of capital ratio. We estimate what our EVE would be as of a specific date. We then calculate what EVE would be as of the same date throughout a series of interest rate scenarios representing immediate and permanent, parallel shifts in the yield curve. We currently calculate EVE under the assumptions that interest rates increase 100, 200, 300 and 400 basis points from current market rates, and under the assumption that interest rates decrease 100 basis points from current market rates.
The following table presents the estimated changes in EVE of BankProv, calculated on a bank-only basis, that would result from changes in market interest rates as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes require making certain assumptions that may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. In this regard, the tables presented above assume that the composition of our interest-sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and assume that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the tables provide an indication of our interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurements are not intended to and do not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on our net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability to meet current and future financial obligations of a short-term nature. Our primary sources of funds consist of deposit inflows, loan repayments and maturities and sales of securities. While maturities and scheduled amortization of loans and securities are predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by general interest rates, economic conditions and competition.
We regularly review the need to adjust our investments in liquid assets based upon our assessment of: (1) expected loan demand, (2) expected deposit flows, (3) yields available on interest-earning deposits and securities, and (4) the objectives of our asset/liability management program. Excess liquid assets are invested generally in interest-earning deposits and short- and intermediate-term securities.
Our most liquid assets are cash and cash equivalents. The levels of these assets are dependent on our operating, financing, lending and investing activities during any given period. At December 31, 2021, cash and cash equivalents totaled $153.1 million. Debt securities classified as available-for-sale, which provide additional sources of liquidity, totaled $36.8 million at December 31, 2021. Warehouse loans that have a short-term duration also provide additional sources of liquidity. The balance that meets the definition of a liquid assets totaled $222.9 million as of December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, we had a borrowing capacity of $141.3 million with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston, of which $13.5 million in advances were outstanding. At December 31, 2021, we also had an available line of credit with the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s borrower-in-custody program of $194.1 million, none of which was outstanding as of that date.
We have no material commitments or demands that are likely to affect our liquidity other than as set forth below. In the event loan demand were to increase faster than expected, or any unforeseen demand or commitment were to occur, we could access our borrowing capacity with the Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston or obtain additional funds through brokered certificates of deposit.
We are a party to financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, which involve elements of credit and interest rate risk in excess of the amount recognized in the consolidated balance sheets. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $16.4 million and $31.9 million in loan commitments outstanding, respectively. In addition to commitments to originate loans, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $307.5 million and $202.0 million in unadvanced funds to borrowers, respectively. We also had $1.3 and $1.7 million in outstanding letters of credit at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
A significant decrease in deposits could result in the Company having to seek other sources of funds, including brokered certificates of deposit, QwickRate deposits, and Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston advances. Depending on market conditions, we may be required to pay higher rates on such deposits or other borrowings than we currently pay. We believe, however, based on past experience that a significant portion of our deposits will remain with us. We have the ability to attract and retain deposits by adjusting the interest rates offered.
Non-core deposits, or volatile deposits, are accounts where full banking services are not utilized or there is significant volatility expected. The Company has identified $44.0 million in volatile deposits as of December 31, 2021.
The Company maintains access to multiple sources of liquidity. We have utilized wholesale funding markets and have remained open but with rates that have been volatile. If funding costs are elevated for an extended period of time, it could have an adverse effect on the Company’s net interest margin. If an extended recession causes large numbers of the Company’ deposit customers to withdraw their funds, the Company might become more reliant on volatile or more expensive sources of funding.
BankProv is subject to various regulatory capital requirements administered by Massachusetts Commissioner of Banks, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. At December 31, 2021, BankProv exceeded all applicable regulatory capital requirements, and was considered “well capitalized” under regulatory guidelines. See Note 12 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recent accounting pronouncements that are applicable to Provident Bancorp, Inc., see Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Effect of Inflation and Changing Prices
The consolidated financial statements and related financial data included in this annual report have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, which require the measurement of financial position and operating results in terms of historical dollars without considering the change in the relative purchasing power of money over time due to inflation. The primary impact of inflation on our operations is reflected in increased operating costs. Unlike most industrial companies, virtually all the assets and liabilities of a financial institution are monetary in nature. As a result, interest rates generally have a more significant impact on a financial institution’s performance than do general levels of inflation. Interest rates do not necessarily move in the same direction or to the same extent as the prices of goods and services.