Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from the forward-looking statements below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Executive Overview
We are a leading global independent advisory firm that provides strategic and financial advice to clients across a range of the most active industry sectors and international markets. We provide advisory services to a wide range of clients globally, including large public multinational corporations, mid-sized public and private companies, individual entrepreneurs, private and institutional investors, creditor committees and government institutions.
We were founded in June 2006 with the opening of offices in New York and London, led by a team of ten seasoned advisory partners who previously held senior management positions at large global investment banks. Our mission is helping clients address complex strategic and financial challenges. The foundation of our Company was rooted in a belief, among other considerations, that clients would increasingly seek out deeply experienced advisors who offer independent strategic thinking and who are not burdened by the complicated conflicts that large investment banking institutions may face due to their various businesses. The 2008 global financial crisis reinforced this hypothesis and contributed to the early growth of our Company. Today, we believe that our independence is even more important. For clients and for us independence means freedom from the distractions that dilute strategic thinking and a willingness and candor to share an honest opinion, even if at times it is contrary to our clients' point of view. We believe that our clients choose to engage us because they value our unbiased perspective and expert advice regarding complex financial and strategic matters.
Our business provides services to multiple industry sectors and geographic markets. We believe that our collaborative partnership and integrated approach combining deep industry insights, significant technical, product and transactional expertise, and rigorous work ethic create a significant opportunity for our Company to realize sustainable growth. We seek to advise clients throughout their evolution, with the full range of our advisory capabilities including, among other things, advice related to mission-critical strategic and financial decisions, M&A execution, capital markets advisory, shareholder and defense advisory, capital raising, capital structure and restructuring, specialized underwriting and research services for the energy and related industries.
Since our inception, we have experienced significant growth in our business, driven by hiring professionals who are highly regarded in their fields of expertise, expanding the scope and geographic reach of our advisory services, deepening and expanding our client relationships and maintaining a firm culture that attracts, develops and retains talented people. In addition to our hiring and internal development of individual professionals, in November 2016, we completed the TPH Business Combination with TPH, an independent advisory firm, focused on the energy industry. As of December 31, 2021, we serve our clients with 422 advisory professionals, including 60 advisory partners (which numbers include two advisory partners who retired from the Company in January 2022), based in ten offices, located in five countries around the world.
We generate and recognize revenues when earned, primarily from providing advisory services on transactions that are subject to individually negotiated engagement letters, which set forth our fees.
Upfront fees are recognized over the estimated period that the related services are performed. Transaction-related fees are recognized when or as services for a transaction are provided and specified conditions or certain milestones have been achieved, which are often outside of our control. Underwriting revenues are recognized when the offering is deemed complete. As a result, revenues and net income in any period may not be indicative of full year results or the results of any other period and may vary significantly from year to year and quarter to quarter. The performance of our business depends on the ability of our professionals to build relationships with clients over many years by providing trusted advice and exceptional transaction execution.
On June 24, 2021, Perella Weinberg Partners consummated the Business Combination whereby (i) FTIV acquired certain partnership interests in PWP OpCo, (ii) PWP OpCo became jointly-owned by Perella Weinberg Partners, Professional Partners and certain existing partners of PWP OpCo, and (iii) PWP OpCo serves as the Company’s operating partnership as part of an umbrella limited partnership C-corporation (Up-C) structure. The Business Combination was structured as a reverse recapitalization. The historical operations of PWP OpCo are deemed to be those of the Company. Thus, the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K reflect (i) the historical operating results of PWP OpCo prior to the Business Combination and (ii) the combined results of the Company following the Business Combination. The Company shareholders are entitled to receive a portion of PWP OpCo’s economics through their ownership interests in shares of Class A common stock of Perella Weinberg Partners, which holds PWP OpCo Class A partnership units. The non-controlling interest owners of PWP OpCo receive a portion of its economics through their ownership of PWP OpCo units. See Note 3-Business Combination and Note 11-Stockholders' Equity in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for additional discussion related to the transaction.
Business Environment and Outlook
Worldwide announced M&A volumes in 2021 increased significantly as compared to 2020. While the overall level of mergers and acquisitions globally declined in 2020, heavily influenced by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, M&A activity began to recover in the third quarter of 2020, accelerated in the fourth quarter of 2020, and continued to reflect a strong performance for 2021.
The level of M&A advisory dialogue remains strong across all our industries and geographies of focus and among our large cap, middle market and sponsor clients. As companies continue to focus on strategic growth and capital deployment, we expect these considerations and the overall business environment will keep activity elevated in the medium term. However, we also see various factors which we believe could make our markets more volatile and 2022 a less active year in M&A than 2021 including rising interest rates and inflation, shifting U.S. anti-trust policy, potential tax law changes, geopolitical developments, international hostilities and other factors.
More broadly, our core advisory services benefit from changes which impact our client base and lead them to consider business combinations, acquisitions and divestitures, capital raises and restructurings. These changes can include a broad range of economic factors in global or local markets, technological advancements which alter the competitive landscape, regulatory and political policies, globalization, changing consumer preferences, commodity and financial market movements, among many other factors.
As our team of advisory professionals expands and continues to gain traction, and as we continue to expand our advisory services, we expect our sector-focused global team collaboration will deepen and continue to resonate with clients. We expect to continue to experience growing global demand for independent advice.
Economic and global financial conditions can materially affect our operational and financial performance. See “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for a discussion of some of the factors that can affect our performance.
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of our results of operations for the respective periods indicated.
Revenues
We operate in a highly competitive environment. Each revenue-generating engagement is separately solicited, awarded and negotiated, and there are limited long-term sources of revenue in the form of recurring retainers. Therefore, our fee-paying client engagements are not predictable, and high levels of revenues in one quarter are not necessarily predictive of continued high levels of revenues in future periods. To develop new business, our professionals maintain an active business dialogue with a large number of existing and potential clients. We expect to add new clients each year as our advisory professionals continue to expand their relationships, as we hire senior advisory professionals who bring their client relationships and as we receive introductions from our relationship network of senior executives, board members, attorneys and other third parties. We also lose clients each year as a result of the sale or merger of clients, changes in clients' senior management, competition from other financial services firms and other reasons.
In many cases, revenue is not recognized until the successful completion of an underlying transaction. Complications that may terminate or delay a transaction include failure to agree upon final terms with the counterparty, failure to obtain regulatory consents, failure to obtain board or stockholder approvals, failure to secure financing, adverse market conditions or unexpected operating or financial problems related to either party to the transaction (or their customer base). While transactions typically close within a 12-month period post-announcement of such transaction, they can occasionally extend longer. Such delays often occur with larger transactions and can contribute to unpredictability in the timing of such revenues. In other circumstances, we often do not receive the same level of advisory fees that would have been received if the transaction had been completed, and in some cases we may receive no advisory fee despite the fact that we may have devoted considerable time and resources to the transaction. Other barriers to the completion of a restructuring transaction may specifically include a lack of anticipated bidders for the assets or securities of our client, the inability of our client to restructure its operations, the absence of court approval in a bankruptcy proceeding, or a failure to reach agreement with a client's creditors. In these circumstances, our advisory fees are generally limited to monthly retainer fees (if any). In the case of bankruptcy engagements, fees are subject to approval by the applicable court. In most cases, even if a transaction is not successfully completed, we are reimbursed for certain out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the engagement.
We do not present our revenue by the type of advice we provide because of the complexity of the transactions on which we may earn revenue and our holistic approach to client service. For example, (i) a restructuring engagement may evolve to require a sale of all or a portion of the client, (ii) M&A assignments can develop from relationships established on prior restructuring engagements, (iii) capital markets expertise can be instrumental on both M&A and restructuring assignments, and (iv) capital markets revenue can be generated through the provision of capital markets advisory work, capital raising assignments or the issuance of focused equity research services. We dedicate the resources and expertise needed on any given assignment regardless of product lines and focus on achieving the desired outcome for our clients. Such an approach does not lend itself to tracking the type of advisory service offered in each instance.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues were $801.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with $519.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of 54%. The increase in revenues can be attributed to both an increase in the number of advisory clients and the average fee size per client as M&A activity increased year over year, partially offset by a reduction in restructuring and liability management fees as compared to the prior year.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we earned revenues from 232 and 175 advisory clients, respectively. The number of advisory clients who paid fees equal to or greater than $1.0 million increased to 142 advisory clients for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 99 advisory clients for the year ended December 31, 2020. The average fee size increased to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Revenues were $519.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared with $533.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing a decrease of 3%. The decrease in revenues was primarily driven by a decline in mergers and acquisitions activity during the start of COVID-19 pandemic, offset partially by an increase in capital structure and restructuring activity.
For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we earned revenues from 175 and 179 advisory clients, respectively. The number of advisory clients who paid fees equal to or greater than $1 million decreased to 99 advisory clients for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 100 advisory clients for the year ended December 31, 2019. The average fee size remained unchanged from 2019 to 2020 at $2.9 million.
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth information relating to our operating expenses:
Our operating expenses are classified as (i) total compensation and benefits expenses including equity-based compensation and (ii) non-compensation expenses. Headcount is the primary driver of the level of our operating expenses. Compensation and benefits expenses account for the majority of our operating expenses. Compensation expenses also include expense associated with hiring which has been a significant focus of the Company in all of the historical periods described herein. Non-compensation expenses, which include the costs of professional fees, travel and related expenses, technology and infrastructure, rent and occupancy, depreciation and amortization, and general, administrative and other expenses generally have been less significant in comparison with compensation and benefits expenses.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating expenses were $735.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and represented 92% of revenues, compared with $533.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represented 103% of revenues. The increase in operating expenses was primarily driven by an increase in total compensation and benefits expenses, which were $600.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $399.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Non-compensation expenses were $134.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and represented 17% of revenues, compared to $134.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represented 26% of revenues.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Operating expenses were $533.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and represented 103% of revenues, compared with $688.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, which represented 129% of revenues. The decrease in operating expenses was driven by a decrease in both total compensation and benefits and non-compensation expense from the prior year. Total compensation and benefits was $399.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $543.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Non-compensation expense was $134.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing 26% of revenue compared to $145.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, representing 27% of revenue.
Compensation and Benefits Expenses
Our compensation and benefits expenses are determined by management based on revenues earned, the competitiveness of the prevailing labor market and anticipated compensation requirements for our employees, the level of recruitment of new partners, the amount of compensation expense amortized for equity awards and other relevant factors. Such factors can fluctuate, including headcount, and as a result, our compensation expenses may fluctuate materially in any particular period. Accordingly, the amount of compensation expenses recognized in any particular period may not be consistent with prior periods or indicative of future periods.
Our compensation expenses consist of base salary, benefits, payroll taxes, annual incentive compensation payable as cash bonus awards, deferred compensation awards, profit sharing arrangements and amortization of equity-based compensation awards. Compensation expenses also include signing bonuses and compensation paid pursuant to guarantees for new hires. These amounts have historically been significant. Base salary and benefits are paid ratably throughout the year. Depending on the plan, deferred compensation and profit-sharing awards vest immediately, at future dates, or upon the occurrence of certain events. Cash bonuses, which are accrued each quarter, are discretionary and dependent upon many factors, including the performance of the Company, and are generally paid during the first quarter of each calendar year with respect to prior year performance.
Equity awards are measured at fair value on the grant date and recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. The awards are subject to a service vesting condition, and in some cases a market-based performance vesting condition, and vest ratably on a graded vesting schedule of up to five years. The awards are recorded within equity as they are expensed. The vesting of certain equity-based awards granted by Professional Partners to partners providing services to PWP OpCo prior to the Business Combination and the various Professional Partners value capital units (“VCUs”) and alignment capital units (“ACUs”) (collectively, the “Professional Partners Awards”) issued in connection with the Business Combination have no economic impact on, and do not dilute, PWP shareholders relative to Professional Partners. The awards do not change the economic allocations between Professional Partners and PWP shareholders, nor do they change the Professional Partners' interest in PWP OpCo. As a result, all of the compensation expense and corresponding capital contribution associated with the Professional Partners Awards is allocated to non-controlling interests on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2021, the Company granted incentive compensation awards in accordance with the Perella Weinberg Partners 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan (the “PWP Incentive Plan” or “Incentive Plan”). The Company uses shares of PWP Class A common stock to satisfy vested awards under the plan. The vesting of these awards for employees are recorded as equity-based compensation expense and awards for non-employees are recorded as professional fees at PWP OpCo for U.S. GAAP accounting purposes. The accounting for this equity-based compensation expense, and potentially other factors as well, may cause the Company to experience operating losses in future periods.
We intend to compensate our personnel competitively in order to continue building our business and growing our Company. Certain awards were granted in conjunction with the Business Combination and directly related to this transaction milestone event. These awards were outside the Company's normal and recurring compensation processes. Total future amortization which will be recognized over the next five years before accounting for forfeitures is $97.2 million for restricted stock units out of the Transaction Pool Share Reserve (as defined below) consisting of (a) performance restricted stock units (“PSUs”) that only vest upon the achievement of both service and market conditions and (b) restricted stock units (“RSUs”) that vest upon the achievement of service conditions and $76.6 million for PSUs out of the aggregate number of shares of Class A common stock reserved for issuance under the PWP Incentive Plan for general purposes to certain executives that vest upon the achievement of both service and market conditions granted in conjunction with the Business Combination.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, total compensation and benefits expenses of $600.7 million represented 75% of revenues, compared with $399.1 million of compensation-related expenses, which represented 77% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. Included in total compensation-related expense was $96.3 million and $24.8 million amortization of equity awards for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in total compensation and benefit expenses was due to a larger bonus accrual associated with the increase in revenue despite a lower compensation margin as well as increased equity-based compensation due principally to awards granted in connection with the Business Combination.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, total compensation-related expenses of $399.1 million represented 77% of revenues, compared with $543.1 million of compensation-related expenses, which represented 102% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019. Included in total compensation-related expense was $24.8 million and $193.3 million amortization of equity awards for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in compensation expenses was due to equity-based compensation awards granted by Professional Partners in connection with the TPH Business Combination fully vesting in 2019, which had no economic impact on PWP OpCo. This decrease was offset in part by certain severance expenses incurred in connection with a restructuring in the spring of 2020 and increased bonus compensation, including public company transaction-related incentive compensation.
Non-Compensation Expenses
Our non-compensation expenses include the costs of professional fees, travel and related expenses, technology and infrastructure, rent and occupancy, depreciation and amortization and general, administrative and other expenses including certain co-advisory fees and expenses reimbursed by our clients. Any expenses reimbursed by clients and the co-advisory fees are also presented within revenues on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Historically, our non-compensation expenses associated with business development have increased as we have increased our headcount. These costs include costs such as travel and related expenses. Growth in our headcount has increased rent and occupancy expenses as well as professional fees related to recruiting expenses, while geographic expansion has increased regulatory expenses. This trend may continue as we expand into new sectors, geographies and products to serve our clients' growing needs, domestically and internationally. Additionally, travel and related expenses may increase as COVID-19 pandemic related travel restrictions ease.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-compensation expenses of $134.4 million represented 17% of revenues, compared with $134.4 million, which represented 26% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Non-compensation expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included a $1.0 million decrease in professional fees. This reduction is largely due to elevated professional fees during the year ended December 31, 2020 as previously deferred offering costs of $14.8 million were expensed due to the termination of a public company transaction process in May 2020. Excluding this write-off, professional fees during the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $13.8 million, including approximately $9.6 million increase in consulting fees and approximately $3.8 million increase in recruiting expenses. Non-compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 also included a $1.9 million increase in general and administrative and other expense primarily driven by increased public company costs such as directors and officers insurance and a $1.1 million increase in technology and infrastructure expenses related to certain new initiatives which were partially offset by a $1.6 million decrease in rent and occupancy expenses as a result of a lease modification whereby the Company vacated a portion of the Houston office space.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-compensation expenses of $134.4 million represented 26% of revenues, compared with $145.3 million, which represented 27% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in non-compensation expenses was largely due to lower travel and related expenses offset partially by an increase in professional fees. Travel and related expenses decreased by approximately $13.9 million, or 71%, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related work-from-home policies. Professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $3.6 million higher than the previous year; however, they included the write-off of approximately $14.8 million in previously deferred offering costs as a result of the delay of the Company's pursuit of becoming a public company. This write-off was largely offset by lower executive search fees due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as lower legal and consulting fees. Legal and consulting fees were lower as a number of projects, including the PWP Separation, were completed in 2019.
Non-Operating Income (Expenses)
Non-operating income (expenses) includes the impact of income and expense items that we consider to be non-operational in nature, including related party income, interest expense, change in the fair value of warrant liabilities, loss on debt extinguishment and other income (expense).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-operating income (expenses) was $43.6 million of expense compared to $6.3 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. The most significant component and change from the prior year period was the $39.4 million loss on debt extinguishment which was related to the redemption of the $150.0 million aggregate principal of PWP’s 7.0% Subordinated Unsecured Convertible Notes due 2026 (the “Convertible Notes”) concurrent with the Business Combination. The loss is composed of the $10.9 million premium and $28.5 million of unamortized debt discount and issuance costs. Additionally, the increase in non-operating expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 was also driven by the change in the fair value of warrant liabilities. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in interest expense related to the repayment of all indebtedness in connection with the Business Combination
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
Prior to the Business Combination, the Company operated as a partnership, and therefore, was generally not subject to U.S. federal and state corporate income taxes. Subsequent to the Business Combination, PWP is a corporation and is subject to U.S. federal and state corporate income taxes on its proportionate share of taxable income generated by the operating partnership, PWP OpCo, as well as any standalone income (or loss) generated at the PWP parent-entity level.
The Company's income tax provision and the corresponding annual effective tax rate are based on projected U.S. GAAP income and the currently enacted statutory tax rates in the various jurisdictions in which the Company operates. For interim reporting, the Company estimates the annual effective tax rate based on projected income for the full year and records a quarterly tax provision in accordance with the annual effective tax rate.
The Company's effective tax rate is dependent on many factors, including the estimated amount of income subject to tax. Consequently, the effective tax rate can vary from period to period. The Company's overall effective tax rate in each of the periods described above varies from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily because (i) the Company was not subject to U.S. federal corporate income taxes prior to the Business Combination, (ii) a portion of compensation expense is non-deductible, both prior to the Business Combination and for the subsequent period (iii) the Company has recorded unrecognized tax benefits related to a potential double inclusion of income on its foreign tax returns and (iv) a portion of the Company's income is allocated to non-controlling interests held in PWP OpCo in which the majority of any tax liability on such income is borne by the holders of such non-controlling interests and reported outside of the consolidated financial statements.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The Company’s income tax expense and effective tax rate were $18.9 million and 82.5%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to income tax expense and effective tax rate of $3.5 million and (16.5)%, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The Company's income tax expense and effective tax rate were $3.5 million and (16.5%), respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to income tax expense and effective tax rate of $2.4 million and (1.5%), respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cash Flows
Our operating cash flows are primarily influenced by the amount and timing of receipt of advisory fees, which generally have net terms of 30 days, and the payment of operating expenses, including payments of incentive compensation to our employees. We pay a significant portion of incentive compensation during the first quarter of each calendar year with respect to the prior year's results. Our investing and financing cash flows are primarily influenced by purchases of fixed assets, debt payments and distributions to partners, and during the year ended December 31, 2021, the proceeds and distributions related to the Business Combination.
A summary of our operating, investing and financing cash flows is as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Cash and restricted cash were $504.8 million as of December 31, 2021, an increase of $173.9 million from $330.9 million as of December 31, 2020. Operating activities resulted in a net inflow of $234.9 million largely attributable to changes in working capital and net income generated during the year ended December 31, 2021. Net income included $171.9 million of non-cash charges including a $39.4 million loss on debt extinguishment related to the redemption of the Convertible Notes concurrent with the Business Combination. Investing activities resulted in a net outflow of $2.4 million attributable to the Company’s purchases of fixed assets and the deconsolidation of PFAC Holdings I LLC. Financing activities resulted in a net outflow of $55.0 million primarily related to the transactions associated with the Business Combination, the payoff of all outstanding debt and tax distributions to limited partners of PWP OpCo, the repurchase of Founder Shares held as treasury shares, withholding payments for vesting of incentive awards and the payment of dividends.
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Cash and restricted cash were $330.9 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $64.3 million from $266.6 million as of December 31, 2019. Net cash provided by operating activities was $85.9 million. While the Company reported a net loss of $24.3 million for the year, this net loss included $64.4 million of non-cash charges, largely comprised of equity-based compensation and depreciation and amortization and non-cash operating lease expense. Accounts receivable balances (which includes accrued revenue) decreased by $27.5 million due to a reduction in revenue, combined with timing of collections. Accrued compensation and benefits increased by $19.3 million primarily for discretionary bonuses that are paid annually. Discretionary bonus compensation is correlated with the Company's annual revenue and as such will vary period to period. While revenue decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019, discretionary bonus compensation increased, as a percentage of revenue, and included public company transaction-related incentive compensation and certain severance expenses incurred in connection with a restructuring in the spring of 2020. Investing activities resulted in a net outflow of $5.5 million attributable to purchases of fixed assets. Financing activities resulted in a net outflow of $22.0 million largely as a result of a net $10.0 million paydown of the Revolving Credit Facility and distributions to limited partners of PWP OpCo of $12.0 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2019
Cash and restricted cash were $266.6 million as of December 31, 2019, a decrease of $141.9 million from $408.5 million as of December 31, 2018. The Company reported a net loss of $164.0 million for the year, which included $229.1 million of non-cash charges, largely composed of the equity-based compensation. This was offset by a decrease in accrued compensation and benefits of $148.4 million stemming from lower bonus accrual compared to the prior year due to the decrease in revenue from December 31, 2018 to 2019. Discretionary bonus compensation is correlated with the Company's annual revenue and as such will vary period to period. Investing activities resulted in a net outflow of $7.3 million primarily attributable to purchases of fixed assets. Financing activities resulted in a net outflow of $30.2 million largely as a result of $38.4 million of distributions to limited partners of PWP OpCo, partially offset by $10.0 million net proceeds of the Revolving Credit Facility.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
We regularly monitor our liquidity position, including cash and cash equivalents, working capital assets and liabilities, commitments and other liquidity requirements. Our primary sources of liquidity are our cash balances and net cash generated from operations.
Our current assets are primarily composed of cash, receivables related to fees earned from providing advisory services and due from related parties. Our current liabilities are primarily composed of accounts payable, accrued expenses, accrued and deferred employee compensation and due to related parties. Due from related parties primarily includes amounts due from PWP Capital. We pay a significant portion of our annual incentive compensation, in the form of cash bonuses, during the first quarter of each calendar year with respect to the prior year’s results. Therefore, levels of cash generally decline during the first quarter of each year after our annual incentive compensation has been paid to our employees. Accrued compensation and benefits as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $311.5 million and $213.5 million, respectively. Cash then typically builds over the remainder of the year. The Company makes quarterly partner tax distributions as required under the partnership agreement of PWP OpCo. These distributions totaled $65.9 million, $12.0 million and $38.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Additionally, as a public company, we intend to pay dividends throughout the year and may consider share or warrant repurchases as well. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid $6.0 million in cash dividends and repurchased 1,000,000 shares at a purchase price of $12.00 per share for a total purchase price of $12.0 million, which are being held in treasury stock. The Company has the option to net settle vesting RSUs in order to remit required employee withholding taxes using cash on hand. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid $10.5 million in withholding payments for vested RSUs. Additionally, on February 16, 2022, the Board authorized a $100 million Class A common stock repurchase program, with no expiration date, whereby the Company’s Class A common stock may be repurchased from time to time in open market transactions. The timing and actual number of shares repurchased will depend on a variety of factors, including legal requirements and regulatory restrictions as well as market conditions.
We evaluate our cash needs on a regular basis in light of current market conditions. Cash and cash equivalents include short-term highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. The Company had no cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had cash balances of $502.8 million and $329.1 million, respectively, maintained in U.S. and non-U.S. bank accounts, of which most bank account balances exceeded the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”) and U.K. Financial Services Compensation Scheme (“FSCS”) coverage limits.
Our liquidity is highly dependent upon cash receipts from clients, which generally require the successful completion of transactions. Accounts receivable generally have net terms of 30 days. Accounts receivable was $46.9 million, net of $1.9 million of allowance for credit losses balance as of December 31, 2021. Accounts receivable was $40.8 million, net of $1.0 million of allowance for credit losses balance as of December 31, 2020.
Line of credit
The Company has the Revolving Credit Facility with Cadence Bank. Upon consummation of the Business Combination, the Company repaid all of the outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement, which included $27.7 million principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest. As of the Closing Date, the Credit Agreement was amended such that (i) the maturity was extended from April 1, 2022 to July 1, 2025, (ii) interest accrues at LIBOR plus a fixed rate of 2.00% per annum (with a 0.25% LIBOR floor) with an alternate base rate option equal to Cadence Bank’s prime rate minus 1.00% (with a 3.25% floor), (iii) up to $15.0 million of the Revolving Credit Facility may be used for the issuance of letters of credit, (iv) up to $20.0 million of incremental revolving commitments above the $50.0 million commitment amount may be incurred under the Credit Agreement, and (v) certain financial covenants were amended. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no outstanding balance related to the Revolving Credit Facility and no incremental revolving commitments were incurred. For further information on the Revolving Credit Facility, refer to Note 10-Debt in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Based on current market conditions, we believe that the cash we retain post-transaction, the net cash generated from operations and the available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to meet our operating needs and commitments for the next twelve months; however, if these sources of liquidity are not sufficient, we may seek additional debt or equity financing.
Share Repurchase Program
On February 16, 2022, the Company’s board of directors approved a stock repurchase program under which the Company is authorized to repurchase up to $100.0 million of the Company’s Class A common stock with no requirement to purchase any minimum number of shares. Shares may be repurchased under the new repurchase program through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, block trades, accelerated or other structured share repurchase programs, or other means. The manner, timing, pricing and amount of any transactions will be subject to the Company’s discretion.
Other Commitments
Regulatory Capital
We actively monitor our regulatory capital base. Our principal subsidiaries are subject to regulatory requirements in their respective jurisdictions to ensure general financial soundness and liquidity. This requires, among other things, that we comply with certain minimum capital requirements, record-keeping, reporting procedures, experience and training requirements for employees and certain other requirements and procedures. These regulatory requirements may restrict the flow of funds to and from affiliates. Refer to Note 7-Regulatory Requirements in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information. These regulations differ in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, France and other countries in which we operate a registered broker-dealer or regionally similar construct. The license or regulatory framework under which we operate in each such country is meant to comply with applicable laws and regulations to conduct an advisory business. We believe that we provide each of our subsidiaries with sufficient capital and liquidity, consistent with their business and regulatory requirements to effectively operate in each jurisdiction.
Exchange Rights
In accordance with the PWP OpCo LPA, PWP OpCo unitholders (other than the Company) may exchange these units for (i) shares of Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis or (ii) cash from an offering of shares of Class A common stock with the form of consideration determined by the Company.
The PWP OpCo LPA contains restrictions on the ability to exchange PWP OpCo class A partnership units for shares of Class A common stock or cash from an offering of shares of Class A common stock, for the following periods: (i) PWP OpCo class A partnership units held by Professional Partners will be subject to a restriction for time periods that are fully back-to-back with the lock-up periods contemplated in the amended and restated limited partnership agreement of Professional Partners (generally speaking, such lock-up periods (a) for former Working Partners, the lock up period expired on December 24, 2021; and (b) for Working Partners, will be between three to five years after the Closing), (ii) the restriction on PWP OpCo class A partnership units held by ILPs existing at the time of the Business Combination expired on December 24, 2021, and (iii) any other outstanding PWP OpCo class A partnership units not previously covered by clauses (i) and (ii) above will be subject to such restriction for a period of twelve months to five years after the Closing. PWP GP may waive, and in certain cases has waived, the foregoing restrictions for any single holder with respect to all or a portion of such holder's units, with no obligation to do so for any other holder.
Sponsor Share Surrender and Share Restriction Agreement
Concurrent with the Business Combination Agreement, FTIV, PWP OpCo and certain other parties entered into the Sponsor Share Surrender and Share Restriction Agreement with the Sponsor, which was amended on May 4, 2021. Pursuant to this agreement, if, prior to the fourth anniversary of the Closing, the closing share price is greater than $12.00 per share or $15.00 per share for any 20 trading days out of 30 consecutive trading days (each a “Trigger Date”), then, during the 15 day period following such Trigger Date, the Company shall have the right to purchase from the Sponsor up to an aggregate of 1,000,000 Founder Shares per Trigger Date for a purchase price of $12.00 per share or $15.00 per share, respectively, by providing written notice of such repurchase election to the Sponsor.
On August 9, 2021, the Company repurchased 1,000,000 Founder Shares from the Sponsor at $12.00 per share for a total purchase price of $12.0 million.
Guarantees
PWP OpCo has also unconditionally guaranteed, through a wholly-owned subsidiary, certain loans to limited partners of Professional Partners (“Limited Partners”) with First Republic Bank (the “Program Lender”), whereby PWP OpCo will pay the Program Lender upon the occurrence of a default event. Refer to Note 17-Related Party Transactions and Note 18-Commitments and Contingencies in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information.
Tax Receivable Agreement
In connection with the Business Combination, the Company entered into the TRA with, Professional Partners and certain other persons under which the Company agreed to payments of 85% of the amount of savings, if any, that the Company realizes in U.S. federal, state, local and foreign income taxes as a result of (a) the Business Combination and related transactions, (b) exchanges of interests in PWP OpCo for cash or stock of the Company and certain other transactions and (c) payments made under the TRA. See Note 17-Related Party Transactions in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information as well as the expected timing of payments.
Contractual Obligations
We have various non-cancelable operating leases in connection with the leases of our office spaces and equipment. The related lease agreements, which range from non-cancelable to month-to-month terms, generally provide for fixed monthly rentals and can also include renewal options. See Note 5-Leases in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information as well as the expected timing of payments. Our London and New York office leases expire in December 2022 and September 2023, respectively, and given our significant historical growth, we anticipate expanding our square footage meaningfully in both locations which will increase our contractual obligations, including capital expenditures for leasehold improvements.
In addition, PWP OpCo sponsors certain deferred compensation arrangements whereby portions of compensation related to employees (including Working Partners) providing services to the Company are deferred and paid in later periods. The deferred compensation amounts are charged to expenses over the period that each employee (including Working Partners) is required to provide services in order to vest in the payment. Refer to Note 14-Other Compensation and Benefits in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information.
Market Risk and Credit Risk
Our business is not capital-intensive and we do not invest in derivative instruments. We are not subject to significant market risk (including interest rate risk and commodity price risk) or significant credit risk.
Risks Related to Cash and Cash Equivalents
Our cash and cash equivalents include any short-term highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. Cash is maintained in U.S. and non-U.S. bank accounts. Most U.S. and U.K. account balances exceed the FDIC and FSCS coverage limits. We believe our cash and cash equivalents are not subject to any material interest rate risk, equity price risk, credit risk or other market risk.
Credit Risk
We regularly review our accounts receivable and allowance for credit losses by considering factors such as historical experience, credit quality, age of the accounts receivable, and the current economic conditions that may affect a client’s ability to pay such amounts owed to the Company. We maintain an allowance for credit losses that, in our opinion, provides for an adequate reserve to cover current expected credit losses. Refer to Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K for further information.
Exchange Rate Risk
The Company is exposed to exchange rate risk as a result of entering into transactions that are not denominated in the functional currency of its operating subsidiaries, as well as having foreign subsidiaries with non-U.S. dollar functional currencies. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the net impact of non-functional currency-related transaction gains and losses recorded in Other income (expense) on our Consolidated Statements of Operations was a $0.2 million loss, a $0.2 million loss, and a $0.9 million loss, respectively. In addition, the reported amounts in our consolidated financial statements may be affected by movements in the rate of exchange between the pound sterling, Euro, and Canadian dollar and our reporting currency, the U.S. dollar, resulting in translation gains and losses. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, the net impact of the fluctuation of foreign currencies recorded in Foreign currency translation gain (loss) within our Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) was a $1.5 million loss, $3.5 million gain, a $0.8 million gain, respectively. We have not entered into any transactions to hedge our exposure to these foreign currency fluctuations using derivative instruments or other methods but may do so if we deem appropriate in the future.
As of December 31, 2021, we held balances of $46.9 million of non-U.S. dollar denominated currencies, composed of pound sterling, the Euro, and Canadian dollars.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe that the critical accounting policies included below represent those that are most important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require management's most difficult, subjective and complex judgment.
The preparation of our historical consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our historical consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected in the period for which they are determined to be necessary.
Revenue and Expense Recognition
The services provided under contracts with clients include transaction-related advisory services, fairness opinion services, research and trading services, and underwriting services, each of which are typically identified as a separate performance obligation in contracts that contain more than one type of service. Additionally, the Company is typically reimbursed for certain professional fees and other expenses incurred that are necessary in order to provide services to the client. These fees and related reimbursements are recorded when incurred to the relevant expense item and Revenues, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Company recognizes revenue from providing advisory services when or as its performance obligations are fulfilled. The majority of the Company’s advisory revenue is recognized over time. However, certain performance obligations may be recognized at a point in time if the performance obligation represents a singular objective that does not transfer any notable value until formally completed, such as when issuing fairness opinions. The Company provides its advisory services on an ongoing basis, which, for example, may include evaluating and selecting one of multiple strategies. During such engagements, the Company’s clients continuously benefit from its advice as the Company is providing financial and strategic advice throughout the engagement, and accordingly, over time revenue recognition matches the transfer of such benefits.
Although the Company’s transaction-related advisory services meet the criteria for over time revenue recognition, the fee structures often involve an “all or nothing” consideration amount and the associated fees are predominantly considered variable as they are often based on the ultimate transaction value or the outcome ultimately achieved and/or are susceptible to factors outside of the Company’s influence, such as third-party negotiations, regulatory approval, court approval, and shareholder votes.
Accordingly, a large portion of the fees associated with these services is constrained until substantially all services have been provided, specified conditions have been met and/or certain milestones have been achieved, and it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in a future period.
In some cases, a portion of the variable fees may be deferred based on the services remaining to be completed, if any (e.g., when announcement fees are earned but additional services are expected to be provided until the transaction closes). The determination of when and to what extent to recognize variable fees may require significant judgment, particularly when milestones are met near the end of a reporting period and in cases where additional services are expected to be provided subsequent to the achievement of the milestone. Fixed fees specified in the Company’s contracts, which may include upfront fees and retainers, are recognized on a systematic basis over the estimated period in which the related services are performed.
The Company provides research on the energy and related industries and related equity and commodity markets. The Company’s research clients continuously benefit from the research provided throughout arrangements between the Company and such clients, and accordingly, over time revenue recognition matches the transfer of such benefits. Because fees received for research services, and any associated trading services, are typically at the complete discretion of the client and are based on the value the client perceives in the research services provided, the entire transaction price associated with such services is variable.
Accordingly, because of the broad range of possible outcomes and the inability to predict the value the client will ascribe to such services, the Company fully constrains the revenue associated with research services, and any associated trading services, until the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved, which is typically upon the earlier of receiving an invoice request from the client or receiving payment from the client.
Revenue associated with underwriting services includes management fees, selling concessions and underwriting fees attributable to public and private offerings of equity and debt securities. The nature of the Company’s underwriting services is raising capital on behalf of an issuer and therefore is typically accounted for as a single performance obligation. A separate performance obligation is identified in instances in which the contract with the client includes an over-allotment option. The Company’s underwriting services generally do not meet any of the requirements for revenue to be recognized over time and, therefore, the Company typically recognizes underwriting revenue on the pricing date of the offering, which is when the Company receives the pricing wire communication from the lead underwriter detailing the underwriting fees to which the Company is entitled. Similarly, the performance obligation associated with the over-allotment is satisfied at the point in time at which the option is exercised.
The Company’s role in underwriting commitments is usually as a co-manager or passive bookrunner, rather than as the lead underwriter. Accordingly, the Company estimates its share of transaction related expenses incurred by the underwriting syndicate on the pricing date of the offering and presents these expenses gross within Travel and related expenses in the consolidated statements of operations. Such amounts are adjusted to reflect actual expenses in the period in which the Company receives the final settlement, typically within 90 days following the closing of the transaction.
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract are expensed as incurred as such costs are generally not recoverable. Costs to fulfill contracts consist of out-of-pocket expenses that are part of performing transaction-related advisory services and are typically expensed as incurred as these costs are related to performance obligations that are satisfied over time. The timing of revenue recognition may differ from the timing of payment. The Company records a receivable when revenue is recognized prior to payment and the Company has an unconditional right to payment. The Company records deferred revenue (otherwise known as contract liabilities) when it receives fees from clients that have not yet been earned or when the Company has an unconditional right to consideration before all performance obligations are complete (e.g., receipt of certain announcement, retainer or upfront fees before the performance obligation has been fully satisfied).
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are presented net of allowance for credit losses based on the Company’s assessment of the collectability of client accounts. The Company maintains an allowance for credit losses account that, in management’s opinion, provides for an adequate reserve to cover estimated losses on accounts receivable. The Company determines the adequacy of the allowance by estimating the probability of loss based on the Company’s historical credit loss experience of its client receivables and taking into consideration current market conditions and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of the reported amount. The Company also regularly reviews the age of the receivables, credit worthiness of the client and the current economic conditions that may affect a client’s ability to pay such amounts owed to the Company and as a result may recognize a specific credit loss reserve. Accounts receivable also includes accrued revenue which represents amounts due from clients and recognized as revenue in accordance with the Company’s revenue recognition polices, but unbilled as of the date of the consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
Prior to the Business Combination, PWP operated as a partnership, and therefore, was generally not subject to U.S. federal and state corporate income taxes. Subsequent to the Business Combination, PWP is a corporation and is subject to U.S. federal and state corporate income taxes on its proportionate share of taxable income generated by the operating partnership, PWP OpCo, as well as any standalone income (or loss) generated at the PWP parent-entity level. PWP OpCo is treated as a partnership, and as a result, taxable income (or loss) generated by PWP OpCo flows through to its limited partners, including PWP, and is generally not subject to U.S. federal or state income tax at the partnership level. The Company primarily conducts business through disregarded entities held by PWP OpCo, as well as non-U.S. subsidiaries which generally operate as corporate entities in various non-U.S. jurisdictions. Certain non-U.S. subsidiaries are subject to income taxes in their respective local jurisdictions, and therefore, the related income tax provision is reported in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method of accounting pursuant to ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, using tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period when the change is enacted. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when it is more-likely-than-not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on the amount, timing and character of the Company’s future taxable income. When evaluating the realizability of deferred tax assets, all evidence - both positive and negative - is considered. This evidence includes, but is not limited to, expectations regarding future earnings, future reversals of existing temporary tax differences and tax planning strategies.
The Company analyzes its tax positions for all U.S. federal, state and local tax jurisdictions where it is required to file income tax returns in accordance with the provisions of ASC 740. This standard establishes consistent thresholds for recognizing the benefits of tax return positions in the financial statements as more-likely-than-not to be sustained by the relevant taxing authority upon audit. This standard requires a two-step process in which (i) determination is made whether it is more-likely-than-not that the tax position will be sustained based on the technical merits of the position, and (ii) those tax positions that meet the more-likely-than-not threshold are recognized as the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement with the related tax authority. If upon performance of an assessment pursuant to ASC 740 the Company determines that uncertainties in tax positions exist that do not meet the minimum threshold for recognition of the related tax benefit, a liability is recorded in the consolidated financial statements. The Company recognizes interest and penalties, if any, related to unrecognized tax benefits as Interest expense and General, administrative and other expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.