ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed in Part I, item 1A, “Risk Factors” and in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless we state otherwise or the context otherwise requires, the terms “we,” “us,” “our,” and “PowerSchool” and similar references refer to: (1) on or following the consummation of the IPO and related organizational transactions, to PowerSchool Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries, including PowerSchool Holdings LLC (formerly known as Severin Holdings, LLC) (“Holdings LLC”), and (2) prior to the consummation of the IPO and the related organizational transactions to Holdings LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
We provide a comprehensive suite of solutions that includes the mission-critical system of record used by state Departments of Education, districts and schools, who leverage our solutions to deliver insights and analytics to improve education outcomes. As of December 31, 2021, we serve more than 14,000 customers, including over 90 of the 100 top districts by student enrollment in the U.S., had 30 state-, and province-, or territory-wide contracts in North America, and sell solutions in over 90 countries globally. Our platform is embedded in school workflows and is used by educators, students, administrators and parents on a daily basis.
PowerSchool’s cloud platform is the most comprehensive, integrated, enterprise-scale suite of solutions purpose-built for the K-12 market. Our cloud-based technology platform helps our customers efficiently manage state reporting and related compliance, special education, finance, HR, talent, registration, attendance, funding, learning, instruction, behavior, grading, college and career readiness, assessments and analytics in one unified platform. Through our integrated technology approach, we are positioned to streamline operations, aggregate disparate data sets, and develop insights using predictive modelling and ML. Our ability to transform information into
actionable insights improves the efficiency of school operations, the quality of instruction delivered by teachers, and the pace of student growth, generating a profound effect on K-12 educational outcomes.
We have created a strong competitive moat by investing over the past 20 years to build, maintain and continuously update our K-12 regulatory compliance reporting capabilities that solve state-specific, funding-related regulatory pain points for our customers. This investment is currently supported by a team of approximately 140 individuals in our broader research and development organization of approximately 994 individuals as of December 31, 2021.
Building the PowerSchool Platform
Our focus and strategy on delivering a comprehensive, integrated platform led to years of coordinated efforts to build an expansive suite of core capabilities required by our customers. Starting as the first web-based SIS, we combined our deep domain expertise in K-12 education with over twenty years of innovation and disciplined acquisition activity to become the core K-12 software platform, with a full suite of cloud-based offerings across student information, enrollment, learning management, assessment, special education, finance, HR and talent management.
From 2015 through February 2022, we completed 14 strategic acquisitions to thoughtfully build out our Unified Platform of K-12 software solutions, building upon years of leadership:
•Acquisition of Infosnap in 2015, adding a leading K-12 enrollment solution;
•Acquisition of Interactive Achievement in 2016, establishing our presence in K-12 student assessment and analytics;
•Acquisition of SRB in 2016, enhancing scale in K-12 SIS and ERP solutions in Canada;
•Acquisition of Sungard K-12 in 2017, adding a scaled K-12 ERP solution in the U.S.;
•Acquisition of PeopleAdmin in 2018, adding leading talent management and student assessment and analytics solutions;
•Acquisition of Schoology in 2019, adding the leading K-12 LMS;
•Acquisition of Hoonuit in 2020, adding an advanced data management and analytics solution for K-12;
•Acquisition of Naviance and Intersect in 2021, adding the leading college and career readiness solution for K-12;
•Six other smaller acquisitions, including our most recent acquisition in February 2022 of Kinvolved, Inc..
Our Business Model
We offer our software platform through a cloud-based, SaaS business model under contracts with annual price escalators, and we recognize subscription revenues ratably over annual subscription terms of the contracts. Our SaaS solutions include access to hosted software, software maintenance, product updates and upgrades, and technical and developer support. We sell our SaaS solutions through recurring fee arrangements where revenue is recognized on an annual basis following contract start date, which we refer to as recurring revenue. Our business model provides flexibility and optionality for our customers to purchase and deploy our software platform either through individual add-on solutions, or as a Unified Platform. The majority of new bookings come from our SaaS offerings and are thus recurring in nature, with recurring revenue accounting for more than 85.4% of our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We generally price our SaaS and license agreements at individually negotiated rates with occasional discounts, typically for multi-solution sales or to help districts meet their budget and funding timing constraints. Contracts are typically sold on a three-year basis with one-year rolling renewals and annual price escalators. We typically invoice our customers annually, in advance, for subscription fees and maintenance, while a portion of customers are billed semiannually, quarterly, or monthly. SaaS revenues are recognized over time to appropriately reflect progress towards full completion of our performance obligations.
To help customers go live with our software and achieve success, we offer professional services such as professional consultation, implementation, customization and training services as requested by our customers.
Revenue from these services is primarily classified as non-recurring revenue, with a portion of the revenue consisting of recurring managed services classified as recurring revenue. For our SaaS business, these services generally take less than one year to complete.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Cross-Sell New Solutions to Existing Customers
Many of our customers begin their journey with us by using only a small portion of our overall platform. As customers begin to appreciate the benefits of an integrated software platform across student data, classroom learning, back-office functions and talent management, they increase the number of solutions they buy from us over time. Our future revenue growth is dependent upon our ability to expand our customers’ use of our platform, and our go-to-market efforts are designed to drive cross-sell growth. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including the level of satisfaction with our solutions, competition, pricing, economic conditions and spending by customers on our solutions. We have adopted a customer success strategy and implemented processes across our customer base to drive revenue retention and expansion, which combined with our cross-selling success has resulted in a Net Revenue Retention Rate (as described below) of 106.4% as of December 31, 2021, compared to 108.1% as of December 31, 2020.
Attract New Customers in North America
We believe there is significant opportunity to increase market adoption of our Unified Platform by new customers. Our ability to attract new customers is dependent upon a number of factors including the features and pricing of our competitors’ offerings, the effectiveness of our marketing efforts, the effectiveness of our channel partners in selling, the marketing and deploying of our software solutions, and the growth in demand of cloud-based technology solutions in K-12 education. We intend to expand our customer base by continuing to make significant and targeted investments in direct sales and marketing to attract new customers and to drive broader awareness of our software solutions.
Continue to Expand Into Complementary Adjacencies
From 2015 to February 2022, we have acquired and successfully integrated 14 complementary businesses to enhance our software and technology capabilities. We have a demonstrated track record of driving growth from our acquired assets and delivering positive return on investment. M&A is core to our strategy, and we intend to continue pursuing targeted acquisitions that further complement our portfolio of technology offerings or provide us access to new markets. This adjacency expansion strategy is complementary to our cross-selling strategy, as it both introduces acquired solutions to our existing customers and introduces a base of net new customers to whom we may sell our other solutions. Additionally, we intend to continue providing adjacent solutions by other means, which may include organic development and strategic partnerships. Our position as the leading system of record, engagement and intelligence provides us with a unique vantage point to identify the most critical needs of our customers and most innovative companies within the K-12 education ecosystem. We will continue to carefully evaluate acquisition, partnership, and development opportunities to assess whether they meet our strategic objectives and enhance our platform.
Sustain Innovation and Technology Leadership
Our success is dependent on our ability to sustain innovation and technology leadership to maintain our competitive advantage. We believe that we have built a highly differentiated Unified Platform that will position us to further extend the adoption of our platform and solutions. We intend to continue to invest in building additional solutions, features and functionality that expand our capabilities and facilitate the extension of our Unified Platform to new adjacencies. We also intend to continue to evaluate strategic acquisitions and investments in businesses and technologies to drive solutions and market expansion. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market and sell existing and new solutions to both new and existing customers.
Expand Internationally
We believe there is a significant opportunity to expand usage of our platform outside of North America. As of December 31, 2021, PowerSchool served customers in over 90 countries, primarily American international schools.
We plan to make product, personnel, partnership, and acquisition- related investments to expand geographically. Although these investments may adversely affect our operating results in the near-term, we believe that they will contribute to our long-term growth.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our GAAP financial information, we review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Annualized Recurring Revenue (“ARR”)
ARR represents the annualized value of all recurring contracts as of the end of the period. ARR mitigates fluctuations due to seasonality, contract term, one-time discounts given to help customers meet their budgetary and cash flow needs and the sales mix for recurring and non-recurring revenue. ARR does not have any standardized meaning and is therefore unlikely to be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items. ARR is not a forecast, and the active contracts at the end of a reporting period used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended or renewed by our customers.
We closed the year ended December 31, 2021 with ARR of $538.6 million compared to $426.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
Net Revenue Retention Rate
We believe that our ability to retain and grow recurring revenues from our existing customers over time strengthens the stability and predictability of our revenue base and is reflective of the value we deliver to them through upselling and cross selling our solution portfolio. We assess our performance in this area using a metric we refer to as Net Revenue Retention Rate. For the purposes of calculating Net Revenue Retention Rate, we exclude from our calculation any changes in ARR attributable to Intersect customers, as this product is sold through our channel partnership with EAB and is pursuant to annual revenue minimums, therefore the business will not be managed based on our net revenue retention (“Net Revenue Retention”). We calculate our dollar-based Net Revenue Retention Rate as of the end of a reporting period as follows:
•Denominator. We measure ARR as of the last day of the prior year comparative reporting period.
•Numerator. We measure ARR from renewed and new sale opportunities booked as of the last day of the current reporting period from customers with associated ARR as of the last day of the prior year comparative reporting period.
The quotient obtained from this calculation is our dollar-based net revenue retention rate. Our Net Revenue Retention Rate provides insight into the impact on current year recurring revenues of expanding adoption of our solutions by our existing customers during the current period. Our Net Revenue Retention is subject to adjustments for acquisitions, consolidations, spin-offs and other market activity.
We closed the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021 with a Net Revenue Retention Rate of 106.4%, compared to 108.1% as of December 31, 2020. The most significant drivers of changes in our Net Revenue Retention Rate each year have historically been our propensity to secure contract renewals with annual price escalators and sell new solutions or additional licenses to our existing customer base. Our use of Net Revenue Retention Rate has limitations as an analytical metric, and investors should not consider it in isolation. Net Revenue Retention Rate does not have any standardized meaning and is therefore unlikely to be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We recognize revenue under Accounting Standard Codification Topic 606 (“ASC 606”) and 340-40 (“ASC 340-40”). Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of goods or services in an
amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. See “Critical Accounting Estimates-Revenue Recognition.”
Subscriptions and Support. Subscriptions and support revenues consist primarily of fees from customers accessing our solutions. We expect subscriptions and support revenues to increase because of continued new and existing customer sales efforts and high net retention.
Service. Service revenues consist primarily of fees related to new product implementations, customizations and customer training. We expect service revenues to increase because of continued growth in new product sales, which result in additional implementation and training services.
License and other. License and other revenues consist primarily of one-time perpetual license and partner royalty fees or reseller arrangements. We expect license and other revenues to remain consistent period over period.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of employee compensation costs for employees associated with supporting our subscription, support, success and professional services arrangements and certain third-party expenses. Employee compensation and related costs include cash compensation and benefits to employees, costs of third-party contractors and associated overhead costs. Third-party expenses consist of cloud infrastructure costs, third-party licensing costs, and other expenses directly associated with our customer support. We expect cost of revenues to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to hire personnel, to provide hosting services, technical support, customer success and consulting services to our growing customer base.
Operating Expenses
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs. Research and development expenses also include costs associated with contractors and consultants, equipment and software to support our development and quality assurance teams and overhead expenses. We will continue to invest in innovation and offer our customers new solutions to enhance our existing platform. See the section “Business-Research and Development” for more information.
Selling, general, and administrative. Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation and benefits costs for corporate personnel, such as those in our executive, legal, human resource, facilities, accounting and finance and information technology departments. In addition, general and administrative expenses include third-party professional fees and principal stockholder-related costs, as well as all other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to other departments. We expect our selling, general, and administrative expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis as our business grows. Also, following the completion of the IPO, we expect to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations and professional services.
Acquisition costs. Acquisition costs consist primarily of third-party professional fees incurred in conjunction with acquisitions.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense consists primarily of interest payments on our outstanding borrowings under our First Lien, Second Lien, Incremental Facility, Bridge Loan and Revolving Credit Agreement.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net primarily consists of foreign currency losses.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Discussion of Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
The year-over-year increase in subscriptions and support revenue was driven by renewals and increased sales of our solutions to existing and new customers, as well as revenue from our acquisitions of Hobsons, Inc. (“Hobsons”) and Hoonuit Holdings, LLC (“Hoonuit”) in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The year-over-year increase in service revenue was driven by increased implementation and training related to sales made to existing and new customers, as well as revenue from the Hobsons and Hoonuit acquisitions. The year-over-year increase in license and other revenue was driven primarily by the Hobsons and Hoonuit acquisitions.
Total Cost of Revenue
The year-over-year increase in subscriptions and support cost of revenue was driven by a $10.9 million increase in personnel-related costs from increased staffing, post-IPO stock-based compensation expense and the addition of Hoonuit and Hobsons employees to our workforce, a $8.3 million increase in third party royalties, and a $7.6 million increase in cloud hosting usage. The year-over-year increase in service cost of revenue was driven by a $7.2 million increase in personnel-related costs due to increased staffing, post-IPO stock-based compensation expense and the addition of Hoonuit and Hobsons employees to our workforce, and a $2.7 million increase in third party contractor costs. The year-over-year increase in depreciation and amortization cost of revenue was due to additional amortization expense recognized from the higher balance of capitalized product development costs assets along with a higher intangible asset balance driven by the acquisition of Hoonuit and Hobsons.
Operating Expenses
Research and development. The year-over-year increase in research and development expense was primarily attributable to a $13.6 million increase in personnel-related expenses, due to increased staffing, post-IPO stock-based compensation expense and the addition of Hoonuit and Hobsons employees to our workforce, and a $8.0 million increase in third party expenses.
Selling, general, and administrative. The year-over-year increase in selling, general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a $32.2 million increase in personnel-related expenses due to increased staffing, post-IPO stock-based compensation expense and the addition of Hoonuit and Hobsons employees to our workforce, a $19.9 million increase in third party expenses from the acquisition of Hoonuit and Hobsons along with the introduction of public company costs in 2021, and a $4.7 million increase in sales commissions.
Acquisition costs. The acquisition costs incurred in 2021 were attributable to third-party professional fees incurred in conjunction with the acquisitions of Hobsons as well as Kickboard, Inc. (“Kickboard”), which closed in the fiscal year 2021.
Depreciation and amortization. The year-over-year increase in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to a $9.1 million increase in the amortization expense from the higher balance of intangible assets, assumed as part of the Hobsons, Hoonuit and Kickboard acquisitions.
Interest Expense
The year-over-year decrease in interest expense was primarily driven by the lower balance owed under our credit facilities resulting from the repayment of the outstanding principals of our Bridge Loan, Second Lien Term Loan and Incremental Facility subsequent to our IPO.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
The $12.9 million loss on debt extinguishment for 2021 was due to the write-off of the unamortized issuance costs and discounts from the repayment of the outstanding principals of our Bridge Loan, Second Lien Term Loan and Incremental Facility subsequent to our IPO.
Other Income (Expense) - Net
The year-over-year fluctuation in Other Income (Expense) - Net was primarily due to a $0.7 million favorable fluctuation on the remeasurement of foreign denominated cash and accounts receivable balances, and a decrease in other income of $0.4 million.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Prior to the Organizational Transactions, as described in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, we were treated as a partnership for US federal income tax purposes and not subject to federal income tax. Certain subsidiaries were considered corporations for US federal income tax purposes and we recorded current and deferred taxes. Following the reorganization, the Company is subject to income tax on its share of taxable income or loss allocated from Holdings LLC and records income tax expense accordingly. The period-over-period fluctuation in income tax expense (benefit) for 2021 was primarily due to the completion of the Organizational Transactions and a partial valuation allowance release resulting from the 2021 Hobsons acquisition, which occurred before the Organizational Transactions. The Hobsons acquisition resulted in the recognition of deferred tax liabilities, which could serve as a future source of income against the Company’s existing deferred tax assets, resulting in a release of the related valuation allowance with an offsetting tax benefit.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 to Year Ended December 31, 2019
For a comparison of our historical results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the prospectus filed in connection with our IPO on July 29, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
PowerSchool Holdings, Inc. is a holding company with no operations of our own and, as such, we depend on distributions by our current and future subsidiaries, including Holdings LLC, for cash to fund all of our operations and expenses. The terms of the agreements governing our senior secured credit facilities contain certain negative covenants prohibiting certain of our subsidiaries from making cash dividends or distributions to us or to Holdings LLC unless certain financial tests are met. We currently anticipate that such restrictions will not impact our ability to meet our cash obligations.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $86.5 million, which was held for working capital purposes, as well as the available balance of our Revolving Credit Agreement, described below. Our cash equivalents were comprised of bank deposits and are generally held with large, diverse financial institutions worldwide with high investment-grade credit ratings or financial institutions that meet investment-grade ratings criteria, which we believe mitigates credit risk.
In July 2021, we completed our IPO, pursuant to which we issued and sold 39,473,685 shares of Class A common stock and received $673.2 million in the IPO proceeds. On August 10, 2021, we issued an additional 5,447,581 shares of our Class A common stock and received $92.9 million in the proceeds upon exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares. We used the net proceeds from the IPO and the exercise of the underwriters’ option, along with our cash on hand, to repay in full the outstanding principal balances of our Bridge Loan, Second Lien Term Loan and Incremental Facility, as well as the full outstanding balance under the Revolving Credit Agreement.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, our Revolving Credit Agreement and cash provided by sales of our solutions and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the timing of required tax receivable agreement payments, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced solutions and services offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our solutions. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We also expect our operating cash flows to further improve as we increase our operational efficiency and experience economies of scale, and expect that our sources of cash will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs beyond the next 12 months.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing in the future. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations.
A majority of our customers pay in advance for subscriptions, which is recorded as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is later recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $301.2 million, of which $294.3 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Credit Facilities
On August 1, 2018, we entered into a First Lien with lending institutions for term- loan borrowings totaling $775.0 million and a Second Lien Credit Agreement for term loan borrowings totaling $365.0 million. On November 22, 2019, the Company entered into an incremental loan agreement to the First Lien which provided for $70.0 million of incremental first lien term loans (the “Incremental Facility”). The First Lien also provided for a Revolving Credit Agreement (the “Revolving Credit Agreement”) of $120.0 million, which was increased by $60.0 million to a total of $180.0 million in November 2020, and further increased by $109.0 million to a total of $289.0 million in July 2021. Borrowings under the First Lien are guaranteed by Holdings LLC and certain of its subsidiaries as specified in the guaranty agreements, and are secured by a lien and security interest in substantially all of the assets of existing and future material domestic subsidiaries of Holdings LLC that are loan parties.
On March 3, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Hobsons, Inc. (“Hobsons”) for approximately $318.9 million in cash. We entered into the $320.0 million aggregate principal amount Bridge Loan to fund the acquisition of Hobsons.
The First Lien became repayable in quarterly payments of $1.9 million beginning March 31, 2019 and will remain repayable through July 31, 2025, with all remaining outstanding principal due on July 31, 2025.
Borrowings under the First Lien bear interest at the Adjusted Eurocurrency Rate plus the initial margin 3.25% per annum. The “Eurocurrency Rate” is defined as the LIBOR as administered by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) Benchmark Administration for deposits in dollars. Assuming current interest rates and no changes with respect to our level of indebtedness, we expect to incur interest expense of $23.2 million in 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the First Lien was 3.10%. The principal balances of the Bridge Loan, the Second Lien and the Incremental Facility, as well as all of the outstanding balance of the Revolving Credit
Agreement, were paid in full during the year ended December 31, 2021. Please refer to Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for more information regarding the repayment of our outstanding debt.
Other Contractual Obligations
In addition to repayment of long-term debt, our principal commitments consist of contractual obligations under operating leases for office space, data center facilities, cloud hosting arrangements and other services we purchase as part of our normal operations. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining aggregate minimum purchase commitments under these arrangements was approximately $60.5 million through 2026. As of December 31, 2021, our future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating lease agreements was $17.2 million through 2026.
See Note 12 of our financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities of $143.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to our net loss of $43.1 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $161.8 million and net cash outflows of $24.3 million resulting from changes in our operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $122.6 million, equity-based compensation expense of $25.1 million and loss on extinguishment of debt of $12.9 million. The main drivers of net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities were increases in deferred revenue of $39.2 million due to increases in sales and accounts receivable of $7.3 million due to the timing of collections.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $89.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to our net loss of $46.6 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $107.5 million and net cash outflows of $28.6 million resulting from change in our operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of $101.2 million and management incentive unit-based compensation of $5.6 million. The main drivers of the net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities were increases in deferred revenue of $31.1 million due to increases in sales and accounts receivable of $11.6 million due to the timing of collections.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $373.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the net cash paid for our acquisitions of Hobsons and Kickboard of $333.6 million, investment in capitalized product development costs of $35.9 million and purchases of property and equipment of $4.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $107.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the net cash paid for our acquisition of Hoonuit of $75.8 million, our investment in capitalized product development costs of $28.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $2.8 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $264.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to the net proceeds from our IPO of 766.1 million, net proceeds from our Bridge Loan of $315.2 million and from our Revolving Credit Arrangement of $55.0 million, offset by the full repayments of our Bridge Loan of $320.0 million, Second Lien debt of $365.0 million, Incremental Facility of $68.8 million and First Lien debt of $7.8 million, as well as the outstanding balance of our revolving credit facility of $95.0 million. Additionally, we also paid deferred offering costs in connection with our IPO of $11.8 million and debt issuance costs of $2.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $30.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the proceeds from our revolving credit facility of $101.0 million, offset by repayments of our First Lien debt of $7.8 million and repayment of our revolving credit agreement of $61.0 million.
Impact of Inflation
While inflation may impact our net revenues and costs of revenues, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have not been significant. However, there can be no assurance that our results of operations and financial condition will not be materially impacted by inflation in the future.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, in connection with the completion of our IPO, we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and employees that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and shareholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation.
The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to “opt-in” to this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards on a non-delayed basis.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may
differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual report on form 10-K for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We earn revenue from subscription (“SaaS”) offerings, perpetual software licenses, maintenance and support services, and professional services.
We adopted the new revenue recognition standard Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Contracts with Customers, effective January 1, 2019, using the modified retrospective method for all contracts not completed as of the date of the adoption. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with the customer;
We determine we have a contract with a customer when the contract has been approved by both parties, we can identify each party’s rights regarding the services to be transferred, we can identify the payment terms for the services, we have determined the customer has the ability and intent to pay, and the contract has commercial substance. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intent to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s payment history, credit history and other financial information.
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the products and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the products or services either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the products and services is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract.
Some of our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. We also evaluate whether any performance obligations within optional periods represent a material right. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment.
•Determination of the transaction price;
The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring products or delivery of services to the customer. Transaction price includes both fixed and variable consideration. However, we only include variable consideration in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. None of our contracts contain a significant financing component. Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental entities.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract;
If a contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”). The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative SSP basis. The determination of a relative SSP for each distinct performance obligation requires judgment. We determine the SSP based on our overall pricing objectives, taking into consideration market conditions and other factors, including the value of our contracts, the products
sold, customer demographics, geographic locations, and the number and types of users within our contracts.
•Recognition of the revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring the promised product or delivery of service to the customer. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those products or services. For SaaS arrangements we recognize revenue ratably over the enforceable term of the arrangement, which is typically one year. For perpetual licenses, we typically recognize revenue at the point in time when the customer is able to use and benefit from the software, which is generally upon delivery to the customer. Professional services that are billed on a fixed fee basis are typically satisfied as services are rendered, and we generally use labor hours to measure progress toward completion as this is considered a faithful representation of the transfer of control of the services given the nature of the performance obligation. For professional services that are billed on a time and materials basis, we apply the ‘as-invoiced’ practical expedient. Accordingly, revenue is generally recognized based on the amount that the Company has a right to invoice, as this amount corresponds directly with the value to the customer of the Company’s performance completed to date. Maintenance and support services are transferred evenly using a time-elapsed output method over the contract term given it is a stand-ready obligation and there is no discernible pattern of performance.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable primarily includes trade accounts receivable from our customers.
Allowances for doubtful accounts and allowances for customer credits are established based on various factors, including credit profiles of our customers, contractual terms and conditions, historical payments, and current economic trends. Accounts receivable are written off or credited on a case-by-case basis, net of any amounts that may be collected.
Capitalized Product Development Costs
Our software and website development costs are accounted for under the guidance for internal use software and website development costs. The costs incurred in the preliminary stages of development are expensed as incurred. Once an application has reached the development stage, if: (1) the costs are direct and incremental and (2) management has determined that it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used to perform the function intended, internal and external costs are capitalized until the application is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. We make ongoing evaluations of the recoverability of its capitalized software projects by comparing the net amount capitalized for each product to the estimated net realizable value of the product. If such evaluations indicate that the unamortized software development costs exceed the net realizable value, we write off the amount by which the unamortized software development costs exceed net realizable value. Capitalized software development costs are being amortized on a straight-line basis over five years to cost of revenue. Useful lives are reviewed at the end of each reporting period and adjusted if appropriate.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
When we acquire businesses, we allocate the purchase price to the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, including identifiable intangible assets. Any residual purchase price is recorded as goodwill.
The determination of the useful lives of our developed technology and trademarks is primarily the period during which future expected cash flows are expected to be earned and support the fair value of the intangible assets. Customer relationships are amortized over the weighted average estimated customer life, which more accurately reflects the pattern of realization of economic benefits expected to be obtained.
The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on significant judgments made by management. We typically engage third-party valuation specialists to assist us in determining the fair values and useful lives of the assets acquired. Such valuations and useful life determinations utilize significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience, nature of the intangible asset, and information obtained from management of the acquired companies, and include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows earned from intangible assets and discount rates applied in determining the present value of those cash flows. Intangible assets with estimable useful lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives to their estimated residual values using the straight-line method designed to match the amortization to the benefits received.
Goodwill is the excess of the purchase price in a business combination over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized to earnings, but instead is subject to periodic testing for impairment. Goodwill is assessed at least annually, but also whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying values may not be recoverable. Factors that could trigger an impairment review, include (a) significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results; (b) significant changes in the manner of or use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business and (c) significant negative industry or economic trends.
We conduct a goodwill impairment assessment on December 31st of each year by first evaluating qualitative factors to determine if there are any adverse market factors or changes in circumstances indicating that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. These factors include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and specific Company events such as changes in management, key personnel, strategy or customers, and other events such as a variation in the composition or carrying amount of net assets or an expectation of selling or disposing of a significant asset group or product line.
If it is more likely than not that an impairment of goodwill exists, we perform a quantitative test which compares the fair value of the reporting unit to the net carrying value and record an impairment of goodwill to the extent that the net carrying value exceeds the fair value. There is inherent subjectivity involved in estimating future cash flows, which can have a material impact on the amount of any potential impairment. Changes in estimates of future cash flows could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period. We have not recognized any goodwill impairment in any of the periods presented.
Purchased intangible assets subject to amortization are reviewed for impairment in accordance with ASC 360. Intangible assets with estimable useful lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives to their estimated residual values using the straight-line method designed to match the amortization to the benefits received. We evaluate long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets and other assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Factors that could trigger an impairment review include significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of or use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, and significant negative industry or economic trends. If an event occurs that would cause us to revise our estimates and assumptions used in analyzing the value of our long-lived assets or our finite-lived intangibles and other assets, that revision could have a material impact on our financial results. We have not recognized any long-lived asset impairment in any of the periods presented.
Business Combinations
In accordance with applicable accounting standards, we estimate the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities as of the acquisition date of business combinations. We allocate purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The purchase price is determined based on the fair value of the assets transferred, liabilities assumed, and equity interests issued, after considering any transactions that are separate from the business combination. The excess of fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of the identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets and deferred revenue. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customer bases, acquired technology and acquired trade names, useful lives, royalty rates, and discount rates. Significant estimates in valuing deferred revenue include, but are not limited to, cost to service plus a profit markup.
The estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to revision as additional information is obtained during the measurement period for an acquisition, which may last up to one year from the acquisition date. During the measurement period, we may record adjustments to the fair value of tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill. After the conclusion of the measurement period or the final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Share-Based Compensation
Prior to the IPO, certain employees were granted unit-based awards by the Company’s predecessor entity, Holdings LLC, as profit interests based on the estimated fair value of the awards at the date of grant. Holdings LLC utilized the Black-Scholes pricing model for determining the estimated fair value of the unit-based awards on the date that the awards are granted. Given the absence of any active market for the shares underlying the awards, the fair value of the awards was determined with input from management and third-party valuations. In connection with
the Organizational Transactions, as described in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, certain of these outstanding unit-based awards were converted into restricted and unrestricted shares and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) of PowerSchool Holdings, Inc. After the IPO, the Company uses the publicly quoted price as reported on the New York Stock Exchange as the fair value of the restricted shares, unrestricted shares and its RSUs on their respective grant dates. For service based awards, compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the respective requisite service periods of the awards. For performance-based awards where vesting is contingent upon both a service and a performance condition, compensation expense is recognized over the respective requisite service period of the award when achievement of the performance condition is considered probable. Share-based compensation expense is recognized within cost of revenue; research and development; and selling, general, and administrative expense on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on the function of the employees receiving awards. Any forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
Income Taxes
Holdings LLC is treated as a partnership for income tax reporting purposes. Its members, including the Company, are liable for federal, state, and local income taxes based on their share of Holdings LLC’s taxable income. In addition, the Company is subject to U.S. federal, state, local, and foreign income taxes on the taxable income or loss of certain operating subsidiaries of Holdings LLC that are taxed at the entity level.
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method of accounting. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which we expect to recover or settle those temporary differences. We recognize the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. We reduce the measurement of a deferred tax asset, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that we will not realize some or all of the deferred tax asset.
Significant judgment is required in determining the accounting for income taxes. In the ordinary course of business, many transactions and calculations arise where the ultimate tax outcome is uncertain. Our judgments, assumptions and estimates relative to the accounting for income taxes take into account current tax laws, our interpretation of current tax laws, and possible outcomes of future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. Although we believe that our estimates are reasonable, the final tax outcome of matters could be different from our assumptions and estimates used when determining the accounting for income taxes. Such differences, if identified in future periods, could have a material effect on the amounts recorded in our consolidated financial statements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for analytical and supplemental informational purposes only, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
These non-GAAP financial measures have their limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, these non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as a replacement for their respective comparable financial measures, as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability or liquidity. We compensate for
these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Gross Profit
Adjusted Gross Profit is a supplemental measure of operating performance that is not made under GAAP and that does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to gross profit, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Adjusted Gross Profit as gross profit, adjusted for depreciation, share-based compensation expense and the related employer payroll tax, restructuring and acquisition-related expenses and amortization of acquired intangible assets and capitalized product development costs. We use Adjusted Gross Profit to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Gross Profit is a useful measure to us and to our investors because it provides consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and between fiscal periods, as the metric generally eliminates the effects of the variability of depreciation, share-based compensation, restructuring expense, acquisition-related expenses, and amortization of acquired intangibles and capitalized product development costs from period to period, which may fluctuate for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. We believe that the use of this measure enables us to more effectively evaluate our performance period-over-period and relative to our competitors.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of operating performance that is not made under GAAP and that does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net income (loss), as determined by GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) adjusted for net interest expense, depreciation and amortization, provision for (benefit from) income tax, share-based compensation expense and the related employer payroll tax, management fees, restructuring expense, and acquisition-related expense. We use Adjusted EBITDA to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods and, when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, helps provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations
Free Cash Flow
Free Cash Flow is a supplemental measures of liquidity that is not made under GAAP and does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to cash flow from operations, as determined by GAAP. We define Free Cash Flow as net cash provided by operating activities less cash used for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized product development costs. We believe that Free Cash Flow is a useful indicator of liquidity that provides information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by our operations inclusive of that used for investments in property and equipment and capitalized product development costs.
Reconciliation of gross profit to adjusted gross profit
(1) Refers to expenses associated with share-based compensation within cost of revenue.
(2) Refers to expenses flowing through gross profit related to migration of customers from legacy to core products, and severance expense related to offshoring activities, facility closures and executive departures.
(3) Refers to expenses flowing through gross profit incurred to execute and integrate acquisitions, including retention awards and severance for acquired employees.
(4) Represents gross profit as a percentage of revenue.
(5) Represents Adjusted Gross Profit as a percentage of revenue.
Reconciliation of net (loss) to adjusted EBITDA
(1) Interest expense, net of interest income.
(2) Refers to expense associated with collaboration with Onex and Vista and their internal consulting groups.
(3) Refers to costs incurred related to migration of customers from legacy to core products, remaining lease obligations for abandoned facilities, severance expense related to offshoring activities, facility closures, and executive departures, and event cancellation fees related to COVID-19.
(4) Refers to direct transaction and debt-related fees reflected in our acquisition costs line item of our consolidated income statements and incremental acquisition-related costs that are incurred to perform diligence, execute and integrate acquisitions, including retention awards and severance for acquired employees, and other transaction and integration expenses. These incremental costs are embedded in our research and development, selling, general and administrative and cost of revenue line items.
(5) Represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue.
Reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to Free Cash Flow