ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS
OF OPERATIONS
Parsley Acquisition and DoublePoint Acquisition
The Company regularly seeks to acquire or trade acreage that complements its operations, provides exploration and development opportunities, increases the lateral length of future horizontal wells and provides superior returns on investment.
On May 4, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of Double Eagle III Midco 1 LLC in exchange for 27 million shares of Pioneer common stock representing stock consideration transferred of $4.2 billion, $1.0 billion of cash and the assumption of $890 million of debt. The DoublePoint Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination, with the fair value of the acquisition consideration allocated to the acquisition date fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The results of operations attributable to the assets acquired in the DoublePoint Acquisition were included in the Company's consolidated financial statements beginning in May 2021.
On January 12, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of Parsley Energy, Inc., a Delaware corporation that previously traded on the NYSE under the symbol "PE", pursuant to the Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of October 20, 2020, among Pioneer, certain of its subsidiaries, Parsley and Parsley's subsidiary, Parsley Energy, LLC. The Parsley Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination, with the fair value of the acquisition consideration allocated to the acquisition date fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. As acquisition consideration, the Company issued 52 million shares of Pioneer common stock (representing stock consideration transferred of $6.9 billion) and assumed $3.2 billion of Parsley's debt. The results of operations attributable to the assets acquired in the Parsley Acquisition were included in the Company's consolidated financial statements beginning on January 12, 2021.
See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Delaware Divestiture and Glasscock Divestiture
The Company regularly reviews its asset base to identify nonstrategic assets, the disposition of which would increase capital resources available for other activities, create organizational and operational efficiencies and further the Company's objective of maintaining a strong balance sheet to ensure financial flexibility.
In December 2021, the Company completed the divestiture of its Delaware Basin assets to Continental Resources, Inc. for cash proceeds of $3.1 billion, after normal closing adjustments. The sale of these assets resulted in a pretax loss of $1.1 billion.
In October 2021, the Company completed the sale of 20,000 net acres in western Glasscock County to Laredo Petroleum, Inc. in exchange for $137 million in cash and 960 thousand shares of Laredo's common stock representing total consideration transferred of $206 million, after normal closing adjustments. The sale of these assets resulted in a pretax gain of $1 million.
See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Financial and Operating Performance
The Company's financial and operating performance for 2021 included the following highlights:
•Net income attributable to common stockholders was $2.1 billion ($8.61 per diluted share) for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a net loss of $200 million ($1.21 per diluted share) in 2020. The primary components of the $2.3 billion increase in earnings attributable to common stockholders include:
•a $7.9 billion increase in oil and gas revenues, primarily due to an 89 percent increase in average realized commodity prices per BOE as a result of higher commodity prices in 2021 due to the continued recovery in oil and gas demand from levels achieved earlier in the COVID-19 pandemic, and a 68 percent increase in daily sales volumes due to additional production from the Company's successful horizontal drilling program in the Permian Basin, the Parsley Acquisition and the DoublePoint Acquisition;
partially offset by:
•a $1.9 billion decrease in derivative results, primarily due to changes in forward commodity prices, the cash settlement of derivative positions in accordance with their terms and liquidating certain of the Company's 2022 commodity derivative contracts prior to their maturities;
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
•the aforementioned loss of $1.1 billion that was recognized in 2021 associated with the sale of the Company's Delaware Basin assets;
•a $994 million increase in production costs, including taxes, primarily attributable to (i) increased costs related to the production added from the Parsley Acquisition and the DoublePoint Acquisition and (ii) the increase in production taxes as a result of the aforementioned 89 percent increase in average realized commodity prices per BOE;
•an $859 million increase in DD&A expense, primarily due to the aforementioned increase in daily sales volumes; and
•a $689 million increase in income taxes, primarily due to the increase in earnings in 2021 compared to 2020.
•During 2021, average daily sales volumes increased on a BOE basis by 68 percent to 617,332 BOEPD, as compared to 367,253 BOEPD during 2020, primarily due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program, the Parsley Acquisition and the DoublePoint Acquisition.
•Average oil and NGL prices per Bbl and average gas prices per Mcf increased to $67.60, $32.70 and $3.85, respectively, in 2021, as compared to $37.24, $15.62 and $1.73, respectively, in 2020.
•Cash provided by operating activities increased during 2021 to $6.1 billion, as compared to $2.1 billion for 2020. The increase in net cash flow provided by operating activities in 2021, as compared to 2020, is primarily due to the aforementioned increase in oil and gas revenues as a result of higher commodity prices and sales volumes partially offset by (i) additional cash used in derivative activities, (ii) an increase in production costs, including taxes, due to the aforementioned increase in costs attributable to the production added by the Parsley Acquisition and the DoublePoint Acquisition and production taxes attributable to higher commodity prices, and (iii) one-time Parsley Acquisition and DoublePoint Acquisition cash transaction-related costs.
•As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company's net debt to book capitalization was 12 percent and 14 percent, respectively.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a severe worldwide economic downturn, significantly disrupting the demand for oil throughout the world, and created significant volatility, uncertainty and turmoil in the oil and gas industry. The decrease in demand for oil, combined with pressures on the global supply-demand balance for oil and related products, resulted in oil prices declining significantly in late February 2020. Since mid-2020, oil prices have improved, with demand steadily increasing despite the uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 variants, which have continued to inhibit a full global demand recovery. In addition, worldwide oil inventories are, from a historical perspective, very low and supply increases from OPEC, Russia and other oil producing nations are not expected to be sufficient to meet forecasted oil demand growth in 2022 and 2023, with many OPEC countries not able to produce at their OPEC agreed upon quota levels due to their lack of capital investments over the past few years in developing incremental oil supplies. Global oil price levels will ultimately depend on various factors and consequences beyond the Company's control, such as (i) the effectiveness of responses to combat the COVID-19 virus and their impact on domestic and worldwide demand, (ii) the ability of OPEC, Russia and other oil producing nations to manage the global oil supply, (iii) the timing and supply impact of any Iranian sanction relief on Iran's ability to export oil, (iv) additional actions by businesses and governments in response to the pandemic, (v) the global supply chain constraints associated with manufacturing delays, and (vi) political stability of oil consuming countries.
The Company continues to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company and may modify its response as the impact of COVID-19 continues to evolve.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
First Quarter 2022 Outlook
Based on current estimates, the Company expects the following operating and financial results for the first quarter of 2022:
_____________________
(a)The cash flow impact from firm transportation is primarily based on the forecasted differential between WTI oil prices and Brent oil prices less the costs to transport purchased oil from the areas of the Company's production to the Gulf Coast. To the extent that the Company's Gulf Coast sales of purchased oil does not cover the purchase price and associated firm transport costs, the Company's results of operations will reflect the negative cash flow impact attributable to the shortfall.
2022 Capital Budget
The Company's capital budget for 2022 is expected to be in the range of $3.3 billion to $3.6 billion, consisting of drilling and completion related activities, including additional tank batteries and saltwater disposal facilities, and $85 million for water infrastructure and vehicles. The 2022 capital budget excludes acquisitions, asset retirement obligations, capitalized interest, geological and geophysical general and administrative expense and corporate facilities.
The 2022 capital budget is expected to be funded from operating cash flow, and, if necessary, from cash and cash equivalents on hand or borrowings under the Company's Credit Facility.
Results of Operations
Results of operations should be read together with the Company's consolidated financial statements and related notes included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of the Company's 2020 results of operations as compared to the Company's 2019 results of operations.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
Oil and gas revenues. The Company's revenues are derived from sales of oil, NGL and gas production. Increases or decreases in the Company's revenues, profitability and future production are highly dependent on commodity prices. Prices are market driven and future prices will fluctuate due to supply and demand factors, availability of transportation, seasonality, geopolitical developments and economic factors, among other items.
Average daily sales volumes are as follows:
____________________
(a)Gas production excludes gas produced and used as field fuel.
Average daily sales volumes per BOE increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, primarily due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program, combined with the production added from the Parsley Acquisition and the DoublePoint Acquisition.
The oil, NGL and gas prices reported by the Company are based on the market prices received for each commodity. Commodity prices for year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, increased due to the continued recovery in oil, NGL and gas demand from levels achieved earlier in the COVID-19 pandemic. The average prices are as follows:
Net sales of purchased commodities. The Company enters into pipeline capacity commitments in order to secure available oil, NGLs and gas transportation capacity from the Company's areas of production and secure diesel supply from the Gulf Coast to the Company's operations in the Permian Basin. The Company enters into purchase transactions with third parties and separate sale transactions with third parties to diversify a portion of the Company's oil and gas sales to (i) Gulf Coast refineries, (ii) Gulf Coast and West Coast gas markets and (iii) international oil markets, and to satisfy unused gas pipeline capacity commitments. Revenues and expenses from these transactions are generally presented on a gross basis in sales of purchased commodities and purchased commodities expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations as the Company acts as a principal in the transaction by assuming both the risks and rewards of ownership, including credit risk, of the commodities purchased and the responsibility to deliver the commodities sold. In conjunction with the Company's downstream sales, the Company also enters into pipeline capacity commitments in order to secure available oil, NGL and gas transportation capacity from the Company's areas of production to downstream sales points. The transportation costs associated with these transactions are included in purchased commodities expense.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
The net effect of third party purchases and sales of commodities is as follows:
The change in net sales of purchased commodities for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, is primarily due to a $74 million loss during the first quarter of 2020 attributable to oil that was purchased and in transit via pipeline to the Gulf Coast or in Gulf Coast storage at the end of January 2020 and February 2020, and was subsequently sold in February 2020 and March 2020, respectively, at lower prices. The change was also impacted by a decrease in margins on the Company's downstream Gulf Coast refinery and export oil sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020.
Firm transportation payments on excess pipeline capacity are included in other expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. See Note 16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
Interest and other income (loss), net.
The increase in interest and other income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, is primarily due to (i) a noncash net gain of $12 million attributable to the change in fair value of the Company's investment in affiliates, as compared to a noncash net loss of $64 million for the same period in 2020 and (ii) a $42 million noncash loss in 2020 attributable to the decrease in fair value of contingent consideration associated with the Company's sale of its South Texas Eagle Ford assets ("South Texas Divestiture") in May 2019, partially offset by (i) a $15 million decrease in severance and sales tax refunds and (ii) an $11 million decrease in fair value of the Company's short-term investment in Laredo shares in 2021.
See Note 15 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" for additional information.
PIONEER NATURAL RESOURCES COMPANY
Derivative loss, net.
_____________________
(a)Includes $521 million of losses attributable to the early settlement of certain 2022 oil and gas commodity derivatives, of which the Company recognized $508 million of such in losses during the fourth quarter of 2021 related to (i) the termination of certain of its 2022 oil and gas commodity derivative positions and (ii) entering into equal and offsetting oil and gas commodity derivative trades, which had the net effect of eliminating certain of its 2022 derivative positions. The Company will make cash payments of $328 million during 2022 to settle the deferred obligations associated with the offsetting derivatives.
The Company primarily utilizes commodity swap contracts, collar contracts, collar contracts with short puts and basis swap contracts to (i) reduce the effect of price volatility on the commodities the Company produces and sells or consumes and (ii) support the Company's capital budgeting and expenditure plans. The Company uses marketing derivatives to diversify its oil pricing to Gulf Coast and international markets. The Company also, from time to time, utilizes interest rate contracts to reduce the effect of interest rate volatility on the Company's indebtedness.
Commodity price derivatives and the relative price impact are as follows:
____________________
(a)Excludes the effect from early settlement of certain of the Company's commodity derivative contracts, which resulted in (i) cash payments of $192 million and $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and (ii) deferred obligations with payments to be made in 2022 of $316 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
(b)Excludes the effect from early settlement of certain of the Company's commodity derivative contracts, which resulted in (i) cash payments of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, (ii) deferred obligations with payments to be made in 2022 of $12 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and (iii) cash receipts of $1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company's open derivative contracts are subject to continuing market risk. See "