Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity, and cash flows as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis reflects our historical results of operations and financial position. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements because of various factors, including those discussed elsewhere in this report, particularly Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and other important factors disclosed previously in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).
Unless we state otherwise or the context otherwise requires, the terms “we,” “us,” and “our” and similar references refer to the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries.
For comparisons of our results of operations for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020, refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 filed with the SEC on September 2, 2021 (“2021 Form 10-K”).
Overview
We are a leading Software-as-a-Service (“SaaS”) provider of human capital management (“HCM”) solutions for small and medium-sized businesses. Our unified, cloud-native platform is built to empower leaders by producing actionable, real-time insights to drive workforce optimization. Our comprehensive suite of solutions enables organizations to streamline administrative workflows and achieve regulatory compliance while serving as the single, secure system of record for all employee data. Our highly flexible, scalable, and extensible platform is augmented by industry-specific domain expertise and offers award-winning ease-of-use with an intuitive user experience and deep third-party integrations. More than 29,800 customers across all 50 states trust us to empower their leaders to build winning teams.
Our Business Model
Our revenue is almost entirely recurring in nature and largely attributable to the sale of SaaS subscriptions to our cloud-native HCM software platform. We typically generate revenue from customers on a per-employee-per-month (“PEPM”) basis whereby our revenue is derived from the number of employees of a given customer, and the amount, type, and timing of products provided to a customer with respect to their employees. As a result, we increase our recurring revenue as we add more customers, and as our customers add more employees and purchase more product modules. Our highly recurring revenue model provides significant visibility into our future operating results. Recurring and other revenues are primarily revenues derived from the provision of our payroll, workforce management, HR-related cloud-based computing services and nonrefundable implementation fees, which represented over 99% of total revenue for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. In addition, we earn interest income on funds held for clients.
We have developed a robust organic sales and marketing engine and broad referral network of health insurance and retirement benefits brokers. We market and sell our solutions through a direct sales force, which is organized into field and inside sales teams based on customer size, geography, and industry. The number of unique visitors to our website drives brand awareness and demand generation. We generated more than 8.1 million unique visitors to our website during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Our highly efficient and multi-pronged go-to-market strategy was a key driver of our growth, which enabled us to generate approximately $142 million and $115 million of total bookings for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, respectively. Total bookings increased approximately 24% period-over-period for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
The table below sets forth selected results of operations for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021.
*Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin are non-U.S. GAAP (“non-GAAP”) financial measures. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures below for a definition of our non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most closely comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact
Many of our prospective and existing customers’ businesses were, and continue to be, impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related economic headwinds, which resulted in reduced customer employee headcount, temporary and permanent business closures, and/or delayed sales/starts. While the number of companies on our platform remained consistent, the number of our customers’ employees on our platform declined 7% from March to April 2020. Because we charge our customers on a per-employee basis for certain services, decreases in headcount negatively impacted our recurring revenue beginning in the third quarter of fiscal year 2020. Since then, the number of our customers’ employees on our platform recovered rapidly.
In March 2020, we began transitioning our employees to remote working and continue to embrace a virtual first approach. We have not experienced any material disruptions in our ability to operate our business during the pandemic as our business model enables us to service our clients remotely.
Paycor was among the leaders in the HCM industry to quickly pivot and deliver the technology and expert advice our customers needed to weather the pandemic. For example, we updated our product to facilitate Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loans and funding, partnered with customers to provide the reporting they needed to file for funding, and launched an immunization tracker that enabled customers to track and report on employees’ vaccination status. Paycor also provided thought leadership and expert advice to leaders of small and medium-sized businesses on nearly every aspect of the pandemic, from COVID safety protocols to advice on how to transition to remote work environments, how to safely return to work, how to monitor and launch interventions in support of employee mental health and emotional well-being, as well as articles and webinars on federal and state HR compliance regulations.
Although macroeconomic conditions have improved, the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the long-term effects the pandemic will have on our customers, our operations and general economic conditions, remain uncertain and difficult to predict. Our business and financial performance may continue to be unfavorably impacted in future periods if a significant number of our customers are unable to continue as viable businesses or if they significantly reduce headcount, there is a reduction in business confidence and activity, a decrease in government and consumer spending, a decrease in HCM and payroll solutions spending by SMBs, or a decrease in growth in the overall market, among other factors.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Expand Our Sales Footprint to Add New Customers
Our current customer base represents a small portion of the U.S. market for HCM and payroll solutions. We believe there is substantial opportunity to continue to broaden our customer base, particularly in the 15 most populous metropolitan statistical areas in the United States (i.e. Tier 1 markets), by expanding our sales footprint. Our ability to do so will depend on several factors, including the effectiveness of our products, the relative pricing of our products, our competitors’ offerings, and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts.
As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had approximately 29,800 and 28,000 customers, respectively, representing a period-over-period increase of 6.4%. We define a customer as a parent company grouping, which may include multiple subsidiary client accounts with separate taxpayer identification numbers. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had approximately 47,100 and 44,000 client accounts, respectively. We also track client accounts as it provides an alternative measure of the scale of our business and customers. We believe the number of customer employees on our platform is a key indicator of the growth of our business. We define customer employees as the number of our customers’ employees at the end of any particular period. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had approximately 2.3 million and 2.0 million customer employees, respectively.
In addition, we are also focused on expanding our broker referral relationships to drive the acquisition of new customers. Insurance and benefits brokers are trusted advisors to SMBs and are influential in the HCM selection process. Brokers remained an integral part of our sales approach, with 42% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to 40% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Increase Product Penetration with Existing and New Customers
In recent years we have increasingly focused our product pricing strategy away from sales of individual products and solutions towards a simplified bundled pricing approach whereby we market multi-product offerings to our customers. We believe that this strategy addresses a key need for SMB customers, while also allowing us to better serve the needs of leaders through a more comprehensive product suite. This strategy has enabled us to effectively drive increased product penetration and PEPM growth at the initial point of sale, as well as stronger retention. Our “effective PEPM,” which we define as recurring and other revenue for the period divided by the average number of customer employees, which we calculate as the sum of the number of customer employees at the end of each month over the period divided by the total number of months in the period, was approximately $16 and $15 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We intend to advance this strategy by progressively expanding the breadth of features included in our product bundles. In addition to sales to new customers, there is a substantial opportunity within our existing customer base to cross-sell additional products from our portfolio, including Workforce Management, Benefits Administration and Talent Management.
Our ability to successfully increase revenue per customer is dependent upon several factors, including the number of employees working for our customers, the number of products purchased by each of our customers, our customers’ satisfaction with our solutions and support, and our ability to add new products to our suite.
We believe our ability to retain and expand our existing customers’ spending on our solutions is evidenced by our net revenue retention, which was approximately 98% and 88% for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We define net revenue retention as the current quarterly period recurring revenue for the cohort of customers at the beginning of the prior year quarterly period, divided by the recurring revenue in the prior year reporting period for that same cohort. In calculating the net revenue retention for a period longer than a quarter, such as a fiscal year, we use the weighted average of the retention rates (calculated in accordance with the preceding sentence) for each applicable quarter included in such period.
Net revenue retention has continued to trend favorably and is in line with historical pre-COVID-19 pandemic levels. Our net revenue retention had been negatively impacted during the COVID-19 pandemic by stay-at-home, business closure and other restrictive orders, which resulted in reduced employee headcount, temporary and permanent business closures, and delayed sales and starts with many of our customers.
Ongoing Product Innovation and Optimization
We believe that our product features and functionality are key differentiators of our offerings. We intend to continue to invest in research and development, particularly regarding the functionality of our platform, to sustain and advance our product leadership. For instance, in 2019 we released our Paycor Analytics and Scheduling products. In 2020 we built and released our compensation management product. In 2021 we launched on-demand pay (i.e. Wallet) and a full suite of talent management tools, including performance reviews, one-on-one coaching, objectives and key results (“OKRs”) and structured goal setting. Additionally, in 2021, we released a facial recognition time clock promoting a touchless employee experience, introduced a new payroll-based journal reporting platform to simplify complex staffing reporting requirements for nursing facilities and released a predictive resignation feature providing leaders with actionable insights to identify the top drivers of employee resignation. In 2022, we have released the Paycor Developer Portal making it simple for our customers to connect the power of their people data across their business through improved integrations. By using Paycor’s public APIs and events, companies can be immediately notified of changes and keep multiple systems in-sync. As a result of these and other product launches, we have increased the total list PEPM for our full suite of products to $42 as of June 30, 2022 from $39 as of June 30, 2021. Our effective PEPM was approximately $16 and $15 for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Our ability to
innovate and introduce competitive new products is dependent on our ability to recruit and retain top technical talent and invest in research and development initiatives.
Components of Results of Operations
Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
IPO-Related Expenses
In connection with our IPO of our common stock, we incurred certain transaction-related expenses. These expenses include transaction bonuses, share-based compensation expense associated with two Long Term Incentive Plans (“LTIPs”) and outstanding performance awards under the Pride Aggregator, L.P. Management Equity Plan (“MEP”), and expenses related to the redemption of our Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock. The specifics of the LTIPs, MEP and Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock are presented below.
We granted Long Term Incentive Plan units (“LTIP Units”) under the Pride Aggregator, L.P. Top Talent Incentive Plan and Sales Equity Incentive Plan. The LTIP Units provided for, at our discretion, a cash or stock payment (“LTIP Payment”) to participants on certain determination dates, if an IPO occurred and if the LTIP participant remained employed with us on such date. Our IPO resulted in a determination date, for which each LTIP participant became entitled to an LTIP Payment with respect to 20% of the LTIP participant’s LTIP Units as of the IPO date and 20% on each of four subsequent payment dates that are six, twelve, eighteen and 24 months following the IPO date. As a result of our IPO, the LTIP Units converted into the entitlement to receive a fixed number of shares of our common stock, based on the IPO price. We settled such entitlements by issuing restricted stock units, which vest on the applicable payment dates and we will recognize approximately $47.6 million of compensation expense over the requisite service period relating to the LTIP Units.
Under the terms of the MEP, one-half of the MEP incentive units vest based on an associate’s service time. Vesting for the second half of the MEP incentive units is established based on our performance relative to Apax’s original invested amount, with the performance calculations defined in the plan, triggered by our IPO (implied performance condition). The MEP incentive units are subject to a floor amount established at the grant date, which acts as a participation threshold and permits the award to participate in distributions only to the extent the distribution amount for the units exceed the floor amount. We estimated the fair value of the MEP incentive units using the Monte Carlo simulation method.
The MEP time-based incentive units vest 25% on the first anniversary after the vesting commencement date and thereafter in twelve equal installments on each subsequent quarterly anniversary of the vesting commencement date, with 100% vesting of the time-based incentive units occurring on the fourth anniversary of the vesting commencement date. The MEP time-based incentive units are accounted for as equity awards and the compensation expense calculated based upon the fair market value of the MEP time-based incentive units at the grant date is recognized as the MEP time-based incentive units vest. As of June 30, 2022, there was approximately $3.6 million of unrecognized compensation expense associated with unvested MEP time-based incentive units. The unrecognized compensation expense associated with unvested MEP time-based incentive units outstanding at June 30, 2022 will be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.3 years from June 30, 2022.
As a result of our IPO, and due to an election by Apax Partners, the MEP performance-based incentive units converted to time-based incentive units (“Modified MEP Incentive Units”), with 25% vesting upon successive six month anniversary dates for the 24 months beginning on the date of the IPO. The conversion was treated as a modification for accounting purposes, and accordingly, we estimated fair value as of the modification date.
The Modified MEP Incentive Units are accounted for as equity awards and the compensation expense calculated based upon the fair value of the Modified MEP Incentive Units at the modification date is recognized as the Modified MEP Incentive Units vest. We estimate the fair value of the Modified MEP Incentive Units based upon the IPO price adjusted for a floor amount established at the grant date and other liquidation preferences in accordance with the terms of the MEP. As of June 30, 2022, there was approximately $26.2 million of unrecognized compensation expense associated with unvested Modified MEP Incentive Units. The unrecognized compensation expense associated with the unvested Modified MEP Incentive Units outstanding at June 30, 2022 will be recognized over a weighted average period of 1.1 years from June 30, 2022.
In connection with Apax Partners L.P.’s acquisition of us, Pride Midco, Inc., a direct subsidiary of Paycor HCM, Inc., issued $200 million in aggregate initial liquidation preference of the Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock. The Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock accrued dividends at a rate of LIBOR plus 8.875%. The dividends were payable, or compounded, quarterly on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year. From the issue date through November 2, 2020, dividends were accrued and added to the then-prevailing liquidation preference of the Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock. From November 2, 2020 through the redemption date, we were required to pay 50% of the accrued dividends in cash.
The shares of Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock were accounted for as a redeemable noncontrolling interest in the mezzanine section of our consolidated balance sheet and were accreted using the effective interest method to the redemption value through the net income attributable to redeemable noncontrolling interest line within our consolidated statement of operations.
We redeemed the Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock in connection with, and using proceeds from, our IPO. The redemption price per share was equal to 101% of the liquidation preference, plus accrued and unpaid dividends to the redemption date, or approximately $260.0 million.
Basis of Presentation
Revenues
Recurring and Other Revenue
We derive our revenue from contractual agreements, which contain recurring and non-recurring service fees. The majority of our contracts are cancellable by the customer on 30 days’ notice. We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that we are entitled to for those goods or services. Recurring revenue consists primarily of revenues derived from the provision of our payroll, workforce management, and HR-related cloud-based computing services. The performance obligations related to recurring services are generally satisfied monthly as services are provided, with fees charged and collected based on a PEPM or per-employee-per-payroll basis. Recurring revenue is generally recognized as the services are provided during each client’s payroll period.
Other revenue and non-recurring services fees consist mainly of nonrefundable implementation fees, which involve onboarding and configuring the customer within our cloud-based platform. These nonrefundable implementation fees provide certain clients with a material right to renew the contract, with revenue deferred and recognized over the period to which the material right exists. This is generally a period of 24 months from finalization of onboarding, which typically concludes within three to six months of the original booking. Deferred revenue also includes an immaterial portion related to recurring subscription services where revenue is recognized over the subscription period. Deferred revenue for these nonrefundable upfront fees and recurring subscription services was $17.0 million as of June 30, 2022, with $19.5 million of revenue recognized for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Deferred revenue for these nonrefundable upfront fees and recurring subscription services was $16.0 million as of June 30, 2021, with $19.0 million of revenue recognized for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
We defer certain commission costs that meet the capitalization criteria. We also capitalize certain costs to fulfill a contract related to our proprietary products if they are identifiable, generate or enhance resources used to satisfy future performance obligations and are expected to be recovered. We utilize the portfolio approach to account for both the cost of obtaining a contract and the cost of fulfilling a contract.
Capitalized costs to fulfill a contract and cost to obtain a contract are amortized over the expected period of benefit, which is generally six years based on our average client life and other qualitative factors, including rate of technological changes. We do not incur any additional costs to obtain or fulfill contracts upon renewal. We recognize additional selling and commission costs and fulfillment costs when an existing client purchases additional services. The additional costs only relate to the additional services purchased and do not relate to the renewal of previous services. We continue to expense certain costs to obtain a contract and cost to fulfill a contract if those costs do not meet the capitalization criteria.
We expect recurring and other revenue to increase as we continue to add new customers and sell additional products to our existing customers. See “Critical Accounting Policies-Revenue Recognition” below.
Interest Income on Funds Held for Clients
We earn interest income on funds held for clients. We generally collect substantially all funds for employee payroll payments and related taxes in advance of remittance to employees and taxing authorities. Prior to remittance to employees and taxing authorities, we earn interest on these funds through demand deposit accounts with financial institutions with which we have automated clearing house arrangements. We also earn interest by investing a portion of funds held for clients in highly liquid, investment-grade marketable securities. We expect funds held for our clients to generally grow as the employees per customer increase and as we add customers. Interest income on funds held for clients will fluctuate based on market rates of demand deposit accounts, as well as the highly liquid, investment-grade marketable securities in which we invest the client funds.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes costs relating to the provision of ongoing customer support and implementation activities, payroll tax filing, distribution of printed checks and other materials providing our payroll and other HCM solutions. These costs primarily consist of employee-related expenses for associates who service customers, as well as third-party processing fees, delivery costs, hosting costs, and bank fees associated with client fund transfers. Costs for recurring support are generally expensed as incurred, while such costs for onboarding and configuring our products for our customers are capitalized and amortized over a period of six years.
We amortized $17.3 million and $10.6 million of capitalized contract fulfillment costs during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We expect to realize increased amortization in future periods as the total capitalized contract fulfillment costs on our balance sheet increases.
We also capitalize a portion of our internal-use software costs including external direct costs of materials and services associated with developing or obtaining internal-use software and certain payroll and payroll-related costs for associates who are directly associated with internal-use software projects, which are then generally amortized over a period of three years into cost of revenues. We amortized $41.4 million and $59.9 million of capitalized internal-use and acquired software costs during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Our cost of revenues is expected to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our customer base. However, in the long-term we expect cost of revenues to reduce as a percentage of total revenues as our business scales.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses for our direct sales and marketing staff, marketing, advertising and promotion expenses, and other related costs. We capitalize certain commission costs related to new contracts or purchases of additional services by our existing customers and amortize such items over a period of six years.
We amortized $14.2 million and $8.9 million of capitalized contract acquisition costs during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. We expect to realize increased amortization in future periods as the total capitalized contract acquisition costs on our balance sheet increases.
We seek to grow our number of new customers and upsell existing customers, and therefore our sales and marketing expense is expected to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we grow our sales organization and expand our marketing activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for our administrative, finance, accounting, legal, enterprise technology and human resources departments. Additional expenses include consulting and professional fees, occupancy costs, insurance, and other corporate expenses.
We amortized $82.6 million and $79.5 million of intangible assets, excluding acquired software amortized through cost of revenues, during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in amortization expense in the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 is attributable to our asset acquisition in February 2021.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we grow and scale our business.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses for our software development and product management staff. Additional expenses include costs related to the development, maintenance, quality assurance and testing of new technologies, and ongoing refinement of our existing solutions. Research and development expenses, other than internal-use software costs qualifying for capitalization, including costs associated with preliminary project stage activities, training, maintenance, and all other post-implementation stage activities are expensed as incurred.
We capitalize a portion of our development costs related to internal-use software, which are amortized over a period of three years into cost of revenues. The timing of our capitalized development projects may affect the amount of development costs expensed in any given period. The table below sets forth the amounts of capitalized and expensed research and development costs for the following periods:
We expect to increase our research and development expenses in absolute dollars as we continue to broaden our product offerings and extend our technological leadership by investing in the development of new technologies and introducing them to new and existing customers.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest payments and accruals relating to outstanding borrowings. We expect interest expense to vary each reporting period depending on the amount of outstanding borrowings and prevailing interest rates.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) generally consists of other income and expense items outside of our normal operations, such as realized gains or losses on the sale of certain positions of funds held for clients, gains or losses on the extinguishment of debt and expenses relating to our financing arrangements.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated. Refer to Item 8, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in Part II of our 2021 Form 10-K, for a discussion and comparison of results for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021
Revenues
Total revenue for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $429.4 million and $352.8 million, respectively. In the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, recurring and other revenue accounted for $427.0 million and $351.0 million, respectively. Additionally, interest income on funds held for clients accounted for $2.4 million and $1.8 million, respectively, for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. Total revenues increased primarily as a result of a 6.4% increase in customers to approximately 29,800 at June 30, 2022 from approximately 28,000 at June 30, 2021, an increase in the average number of employees per customer and an increase in effective PEPM.
Interest income on funds held for clients increased primarily as a result of higher average daily balances for funds held due to the addition of new customers and higher average interest rates across our portfolio of debt-security investments. Average client funds balance for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $931.7 million and $718.1 million, respectively.
Cost of Revenues
Total cost of revenues for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $168.2 million and $154.5 million, respectively. Our total cost of revenues increased primarily as a result of a $25.4 million increase in employee-related costs to support new customers, including $6.1 million of share-based compensation expense associated with our IPO, a $8.3 million increase in amortization expense relating to capitalized software, and a $6.7 million increase in amortization of deferred contract costs, partially offset by a $26.8 million decrease in amortization expense relating to software acquired in November 2018 which had fully amortized during the three months ended December 31, 2021.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $170.6 million and $106.1 million, respectively. The increase in sales and marketing expense was primarily the result of a $53.8 million increase in employee-related costs, including $34.2 million of share-based compensation expense associated with our IPO and $4.0 million in additional advertising costs, both principally to expand our sales coverage, a $3.2 million increase in travel and event related expenses and a $2.5 million increase in professional services.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $187.1 million and $145.5 million, respectively. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily driven by a $27.5 million increase in employee-related costs, including $20.3 million of share-based compensation expense associated with our IPO, a $6.9 million increase in facilities expense, including the loss upon exiting leases of certain facilities in March 2022, a $4.6 million increase in professional services, consulting fees and other IPO-related costs and a $3.2 million increase in intangible amortization expense primarily associated with an asset acquisition completed in February 2021, including the capitalization of subsequent earn out payments.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 were $43.1 million and $36.0 million, respectively. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily the result of a $6.7 million increase in share-based compensation expense associated with our IPO.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $0.5 million and $2.5 million, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was primarily the result of a decrease in outstanding borrowings.
Other income (expense)
Other income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was $1.6 million compared to other expense of $1.4 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. Other income for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 primarily consists of $1.4 million relating to the recognition of income deferred on an installment sale due to the receipt of the remaining proceeds. Other expense for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 primarily consists of $2.2 million relating to the write-off of debt acquisition costs and third-party costs associated with entering into a new credit facility in June 2021 and $0.8 million in unrealized gains resulting from changes in foreign currency rates.
Income tax benefit
Income tax benefit for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $30.6 million and $20.8 million, respectively, reflecting effective tax rates for the periods of 22.1% and 22.3%, respectively. The increase in tax benefit was due to an increase in net loss, transaction costs and research and development tax credits.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their U.S. GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit Margin
We define Adjusted Gross Profit as gross profit before amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation expenses, and certain corporate expenses, in each case that are included in costs of recurring revenues. We define Adjusted Gross Profit Margin as Adjusted Gross Profit divided by total revenues.
We use Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends. We believe these metrics are useful measures to us and to our investors to assist in evaluating our core operating performance because it provides consistency and direct comparability with our past financial performance and between fiscal periods, as the metrics eliminate the effects of variability of items such as stock-based compensation expense and amortization of intangible assets, which are non-cash expenses that may fluctuate for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance.
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as replacements for gross profit and gross profit margin, as determined by U.S. GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Gross Profit was $287.2 million and $244.9 million, or 66.9% and 69.4% of total revenue, for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Adjusted Gross Profit increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, primarily driven by the increase in revenue from customer growth, partially offset by additional employee-related costs to support new customers, amortization of capitalized software and amortization of costs to fulfill contracts within cost of revenues.
* Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit are burdened by depreciation expense of $2.6 million and $2.6 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit are burdened by amortization of capitalized software of $22.1 million and $13.8 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Profit are burdened by amortization of deferred contract costs of $17.3 million and $10.6 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Adjusted Operating Income
We define Adjusted Operating Income as loss from operations before amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses, exit cost due to exiting leases of certain facilities and other certain corporate expenses, such as costs related to acquisitions. We define Adjusted Operating Income Margin as Adjusted Operating Income divided by total revenues.
We use Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the
amortization expense relating to intangible assets is excluded from Adjusted Operating Income, the revenue related to such intangible assets is reflected in Adjusted Operating Income as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted Operating Income and Adjusted Operating Income Margin should not be considered as replacements for operating loss and operating loss margin, as determined by U.S. GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Operating Income was $47.5 million and $48.0 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Adjusted Operating Income decreased slightly for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, primarily driven by continued investment in employee-related costs to support new customers, expand our sales coverage, and develop our products, as well as increased amortization related to capitalized software and deferred contract costs and costs associated with becoming a public company, partially offset by an increase in revenue.
* Represents exit cost due to exiting leases of certain facilities.
** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 relate to certain restructuring costs of $0.4 million, transaction expenses and costs associated with the Paltech Solutions, Inc. (“7Geese”) Acquisition and other transactions totaling $0.2 million, as well as costs associated with becoming a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $3.1 million and costs associated with a secondary offering completed in October 2021 (“October 2021 Secondary Offering”) of $1.0 million. Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 relate to certain transition costs of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility $1.0 million, as well as costs associated with becoming a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $5.5 million, transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition totaling $0.7 million, and costs related to implementing certain expense saving and other initiatives related to the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.5 million.
Adjusted Operating Expenses
We define Adjusted Sales and Marketing expense as sales and marketing expenses before stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses and other certain corporate expenses. We define Adjusted General and Administrative expense as general and administrative expenses before amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses, exit cost due to exiting leases of certain facilities and other certain corporate expenses. We define Adjusted Research and Development expense as research and development expenses before stock-based award and liability award compensation expenses and other certain corporate expenses.
We use Adjusted Sales and Marketing expense, Adjusted General and Administrative expense and Adjusted Research and Development expense (collectively, “Adjusted Operating Expenses”) to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Operating Expenses facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between
periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
Adjusted Operating Expenses have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted Operating Expenses should not be considered as replacements for operating expenses, as determined by U.S. GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Sales and Marketing expense was $135.1 million and $103.7 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. Adjusted Sales and Marketing expenses increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, primarily driven by expanding our sales coverage and an increase in amortization of costs to obtain contracts.
Adjusted General and Administrative expense was $68.2 million and $57.3 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. Adjusted General and Administrative expenses increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, primarily driven by additional employee-related costs and professional services, consulting fees and other related costs primarily associated with becoming a public company.
Adjusted Research and Development expense was $36.4 million and $35.9 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Adjusted Research and Development expenses increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, primarily driven by an increase in licensing fees, partially offset by a decrease in employee-related costs due to an increase in capitalization of qualifying costs.
* Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 relate to costs associated with becoming a public company. Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 relate to certain costs related to the transition of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $0.6 million, as well as costs related to implementing certain expense saving and other initiatives as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.5 million.
** Represents exit cost due to exiting leases of certain facilities.
*** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 relate to certain restructuring costs of $0.4 million, as well as costs associated with becoming a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $3.0 million, transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition and other transactions totaling $0.2 million and costs associated with the October 2021 Secondary Offering of $1.0 million. Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 relate to certain transition costs of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility of $0.4 million, as well as costs
associated with becoming a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs, of $5.5 million, and transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition totaling $0.6 million.
**** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 relate to costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition.
Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. and Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. Per Share
We define Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. as loss before benefit for income tax after adjusting for amortization of acquired intangible assets, stock-based award and liability incentive award compensation expenses, gain or loss on the extinguishment of debt, exit cost due to exiting leases of certain facilities and other certain corporate expenses, such as costs related to acquisitions, all of which are tax effected applying an adjusted effective tax rate. We define Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. Per Share as Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. divided by adjusted shares outstanding. Adjusted shares outstanding includes potentially dilutive securities excluded from the U.S. GAAP dilutive net loss per share calculation.
We use Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. and Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. Per Share to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. and Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. Per Share facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense relating to intangible assets is excluded from Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc., the revenue related to such intangible assets is reflected in Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. and Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. Per Share have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. should not be considered as a replacement for Net Loss Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc., and Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. Per Share should not be considered as a replacement for diluted net loss attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. per share, as determined by U.S. GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our U.S. GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. was $35.9 million and $35.6 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Adjusted Net Income Attributable to Paycor HCM, Inc. increased for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, primarily driven by an increase in revenue, partially offset by continued investment in employee-related costs to support new customers, expand our sales coverage, and develop our products, as well as increased amortization related to capitalized software and deferred contract costs and costs associated with becoming a public company.
* Represents exit cost due to exiting leases of certain facilities.
** Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 relate to certain restructuring costs of $0.4 million, transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition and other transactions totaling $0.2 million, as well as costs associated with becoming a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $3.1 million and costs associated with the October 2021 Secondary Offering of $1.0 million. Corporate adjustments for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 relate to certain transition costs of the new executive leadership team and closure of a standalone facility $1.0 million, as well as costs associated with becoming a public company, including the implementation of a new enterprise-resource planning system and professional, consulting, and other costs of $5.5 million, transaction expenses and costs associated with the 7Geese Acquisition totaling $0.7 million, and costs related to implementing certain expense saving and other initiatives related to the COVID-19 pandemic totaling $0.5 million.
*** Non-GAAP adjusted income before applicable income taxes is tax effected using an adjusted effective tax rate of 24.0% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and 23.0% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
**** The adjusted shares outstanding for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 assume the conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock as if it would have occurred on July 1, 2021, based on the if-converted method and include potentially dilutive securities that are excluded from U.S. GAAP dilutive net income per share calculation because including them would have an anti-dilutive effect. The adjusted shares outstanding for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 assume the conversion of the Series A Preferred Stock as if it would have occurred on the December 29, 2020 and January 20, 2021 issuance dates, respectively, based on the if-converted method.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of June 30, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $133.0 million, which was held for working capital purposes, as well as $200.0 million of borrowing capacity available under our revolving credit facility, described further below. As of June 30, 2022, our cash and cash equivalents principally included demand deposit and money market accounts. We expect our operating cash flows to further improve as we increase our operational efficiency and experience economies of scale.
We have historically financed our operations primarily through cash received from operations and debt financing and, more recently, with the issuance of equity in our IPO. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, borrowings available under our revolving credit facility and cash provided by sales of our solutions and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next twelve months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and the introduction of new and enhanced products and services offerings. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. If additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations.
The majority of the Company’s recurring fees are satisfied over time as the services are provided and invoiced by the customer payroll processing period or by month. The Company recognizes deferred revenue for nonrefundable upfront fees as well as for subscription services related to certain ancillary products invoiced prior to the satisfaction of the performance obligation. As of June 30, 2022, we had deferred revenue of $17.0 million, of which $11.7 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next twelve months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
New Senior Secured Credit Facility
In June 2021, Paycor, Inc. entered into a new credit agreement (the “2021 Credit Agreement”) with PNC Bank National Association, as administrative agent and collateral agent, providing a $100.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “2021 Credit Facility”). The 2021 Credit Facility includes an “accordion feature” that allows us, under certain circumstances, to increase the size of the 2021 Credit Facility by an additional principal amount of up to $300.0 million, with a resulting maximum principal amount of $400.0 million, subject to the participating lenders electing to increase their commitments or new lenders being added to the 2021 Credit Agreement.
On September 3, 2021, Paycor, Inc., Pride Guarantor, Inc. and certain other subsidiaries of Paycor HCM, Inc. entered into an amendment (“2021 Amendment”) to the 2021 Credit Agreement. The 2021 Amendment increased the size of the 2021 Credit Facility from $100.0 million to $200.0 million. No other significant terms of the 2021 Credit Agreement were changed in connection with the 2021 Amendment.
The 2021 Credit Facility will mature on June 11, 2026.
The 2021 Credit Facility contains financial covenants, which are reviewed for compliance on a quarterly basis, including a total leverage ratio financial covenant of 3.50 to 1.00 and an interest coverage ratio financial covenant of 3.00 to 1.00. As of June 30, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $24.4 million and $10.8 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The change in operating activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 reflects an increase in adjustments to add back non-cash items, partially offset by an increase in net loss and a decrease in changes in assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $84.6 million and $52.6 million, for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The change in investing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily attributable to the timing of proceeds and purchases within our client funds portfolio, partially offset by the acquisition of 7Geese in September 2020.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1,183.0 million and $55.3 million for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The change in financing activities for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily attributable to an increase in funds held to satisfy client funds obligations as well as proceeds from the issuance of common stock sold in our IPO, net of offering costs, partially offset by cash used for the redemption of our Series A Redeemable Preferred Stock and increased net repayments of long-term debt.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table sets forth the amounts of our significant contractual obligations and commitments with definitive payment terms as of June 30, 2022:
______________________
(1)Purchase obligations include our estimate of the minimum outstanding commitments under purchase orders to buy goods and services and legally binding contractual arrangements with future payment obligations. These obligations primarily include sponsorship agreements, software licensing, and support services.
Impact of Inflation
While inflation may impact our revenues and costs of revenues, we believe the effects of inflation, if any, on our results of operations and financial condition have not been significant. Nonetheless, if our costs become subject to significant inflationary pressures, we may not be able to fully offset such higher costs through price increases. There can be no assurance that our results of operations and financial condition will not be materially impacted by inflation in the future.
In the event Federal Reserve raises interest rates to combat inflation, we could potentially benefit from increased interest income on our funds held for clients balance invested at higher interest rates.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement claims made by third parties. In addition, in connection with the completion of the IPO, we entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers and associates that require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or associates. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that may be material to investors.
JOBS Act
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” pursuant to the provisions of the JOBS Act. For as long as we are an “emerging growth company,” we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not “emerging growth companies,” including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, exemptions from the requirements of holding advisory “say-on-pay” votes on executive compensation and shareholder advisory votes on golden parachute compensation.
The JOBS Act also permits an emerging growth company like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to “opt-in” to this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards on a non-delayed basis.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements: “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included elsewhere in this report for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration we are entitled to for those goods or services. We derive our revenue from contracts predominantly from recurring and non-recurring service fees. The majority of our agreements are generally cancellable by the client on 30 days’ notice.
Recurring fees are derived from payroll, workforce management, and HR-related cloud-based computing services. The majority of our recurring fees are satisfied over time as the services are provided during each client’s payroll period. The performance obligations related to payroll services are delivered based upon the payroll frequency of the client with the fee charged and collected based on a per-employee-per-month or per employee-per-payroll basis. The performance obligations related to workforce management and HR-related services are generally satisfied each month with the fee charged and collected based on a per-employee-per-month basis. For subscription-based fees, which can include payroll, workforce management, and HR-related services, we recognize the applicable recurring fees each month with the fee charged and collected based on a per-employee-per-month basis.
Non-recurring service fees consist mainly of nonrefundable implementation fees. The implementation activities involve setting the client up and loading data into our cloud-based modules. We have determined that the nonrefundable upfront fees provide certain clients with a material right to renew the contract beyond the normal 30-day contractual period without payment of an additional upfront implementation fee. Implementation fees are deferred and recognized as revenue over the period to which the material right exists, which is the period the client is expected to benefit from not having to pay an additional nonrefundable implementation fee upon renewal of the service.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net
An impairment of goodwill is recognized when the carrying amount of assets exceeds their implied fair value. The process of evaluating the potential impairment is subjective and requires the application of judgment. We perform an annual impairment review of goodwill in our fiscal fourth quarter and additional impairment reviews when events and circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that an impairment may have occurred.
In evaluating goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether further impairment testing is necessary or to perform a quantitative assessment by comparing the fair value of our single reporting unit to its carrying amount, including goodwill. Under the qualitative assessment, an entity is not required to calculate the fair value of a reporting unit unless the entity determines that it is more likely than not that its fair value is less than its carrying amount. Qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, and overall financial performance, among others.
If under the quantitative assessment, the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then goodwill is written down for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value. Fair values of the reporting units are estimated using a weighted methodology considering the output from both the income and market approaches. The income approach incorporates the use of a discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis. A number of significant assumptions and estimates are involved in the application of the DCF model to forecast operating cash flows, including markets and market shares, sales volumes and prices, costs to produce, tax rates, capital spending, discount rate, weighted average cost of capital, terminal values and working capital changes. The cash flow forecasts are based on approved strategic operating plans. The market approach is performed using the Guideline Public Companies method which is based on earnings multiple data.
We elected to perform a qualitative assessment during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 and determined for both periods that it is not more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount.
We evaluate other intangible assets, principally consisting of acquired software, customer relationships and trade names, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Events or changes in circumstances that could result in an impairment review include, but are not limited to, significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business, and significant negative industry or economic trends. If an event occurs that would cause us to revise our estimates and assumptions used in analyzing the value of our other intangible assets, the revision could result in a non-cash impairment charge that could have a material impact on our financial results.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all stock-based awards made to associates and directors based on the grant date fair value of the awards. Stock-based compensation expense for time-based awards is determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award, which is typically the vesting term of the award. Stock-based compensation expense for awards subject to market and performance conditions is determined based on the grant-date fair value and is recognized on a graded vesting basis over the term of the award once it is probable that the performance conditions will be met.
For periods prior to the IPO, we estimated the grant date fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. As our equity was not publicly traded, there was no history of market prices for our equity. Thus, estimating the grant date fair value required us to make assumptions, including the value of the Company's equity, expected volatility, expected term and the expected risk-free rate of return.
For periods subsequent to the IPO, we establish the grant date fair value of RSUs based on the fair value of our underlying common stock. We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options, including common stock purchased as a part of our Employee Stock Purchase Plan ("ESPP"), using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires management to make assumptions with respect to the fair value of our award on the grant date, including the expected term of the award, the expected volatility of our stock calculated based on a period of time generally commensurate with the expected term of the award, the expected risk-free rate of return, and expected dividend yields of our stock.
Adoption of Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements: “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies -Pending Accounting Pronouncements” appearing elsewhere in this report.