Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context requires otherwise, references in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to “Pyxis Oncology,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to Pyxis Oncology, Inc. and its subsidiary.
Overview
We are a preclinical oncology company focused on developing an arsenal of next-generation therapeutics to target difficult-to-treat cancers and improve quality of life for patients. We develop our product candidates with the objective to directly kill tumor cells, and to address the underlying pathologies created by cancer that enable its uncontrollable proliferation and immune evasion. We are developing multi-asset, multi-modality portfolio aimed at defeating difficult-to-treat cancers. Since our launch in 2019, we have developed a broad portfolio of novel antibody drug conjugates, or ADCs, immuno-oncology, or (“IO”), product candidates and monoclonal antibody, or mAb, preclinical discovery programs that we are developing as monotherapies and in combination with other therapies.
We take a holistic view of attacking the key drivers of tumor growth and progression within the tumor microenvironment, or TME, including targeting of tumor antigens and modulating the innate and adaptive immune response. The TME is an immunosuppressive environment consisting of cancer cells and stroma, which includes the blood vessels, immune cells, fibroblasts, signaling molecules, and the extracellular matrix that surrounds the tumor. The TME plays multiple roles in tumor formation, progression and metastasis as well as anti-tumor immune activity. We are developing our ADC and IO product candidates and mAb preclinical discovery programs to precisely target key modulators of the adaptive and innate immune system within the TME for difficult-to-treat solid and hematologic tumors. We believe that the diversification of a multi-modality approach optimizes our ability to effectively progress multiple assets for the benefit of patients.
Our ADCs utilize next-generation technologies that, based on observations from preclinical studies, may allow for increased stability and a reduced off target side-effect profile. We in-licensed two ADC programs in March 2021 from Pfizer, one ADC program from LegoChem in December 2020 and one IO program from Biosion in March 2022. Two of our product candidates, PYX-201, and PYX-106 are scheduled for IND submission in the second half of 2022 whereas PYX-203 and PYX-102 are scheduled for IND submission in the second half of 2023.We have additional preclinical mAb discovery programs derived from work at the laboratory of Dr. Thomas Gajewski. We retain full worldwide development and commercialization rights to all our product candidates, with the exception of PYX-202 in South Korea and PYX-106 in Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan). We are focusing our efforts on eliminating tumor cells through the selective antibody mediated delivery of cytotoxic payloads and by modulating key immune-associated pathways in the TME. We intend to develop each of our programs as a monotherapy and potentially also in combination with other therapies. We have designed our product candidates to overcome the limitations of ADCs that use conventional conjugation with the aim of providing patients with safer and more efficacious treatment options.
Recent Developments
PYX-106
On March 28, 2022, we entered into a license agreement, or the “Biosion License Agreement,” with Biosion USA, Inc., or Biosion, pursuant to which we licensed worldwide (other than Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan)) development and commercialization rights for BSI-060T, a Siglec-15 targeting antibody, an IO product candidate (now referred to as PYX-106), and products containing the licensed compound. PYX-106 is a fully human monoclonal antibody and is engineered with high affinity to block Siglec-15 induced immune suppression and therefore restore T cell proliferation, function and anti-tumor immunity in the TME. PYX-106 is a novel immune checkpoint inhibitor targeting Siglec-15, whose expression profile is generally non-overlapping with PD-L1. Siglec-15 is expressed on M2 macrophages but can also be expressed by tumor cells. Binding of Siglec-15 to an as of yet unknown receptor on T cells leads to suppression of T cell proliferation and function. This inhibition also reduces IFNγ secretion which may further promote Siglec-15 expression. PYX-106 may synergize with and rescue PD(L)-1 targeted therapy activity, with the potential for sequential drug administration to synergize for enhanced anti-tumor activity.
We are initially evaluating our Siglec-15 targeting antibody for the treatment of advanced or metastatic solid tumors, which could include thyroid cancer, HNSCC, NSCLC and other solid tumors where high unmet need exists. We plan to submit an IND for PYX-106 in the second half of 2022.
PYX-102
The anti-KLRG1 mAb, which we referred to as PYX-102, is our first organically built IO development candidate from our internal discovery engine. PYX-102 was identified as a promising IO target through our proprietary target catalog licensed from Tom Gajewski’s lab at the University of Chicago. PYX-102 is an inhibitory immunoreceptor trysine-based inhibitory motif-containing receptor expressed on T cells and NK cells in the tumor microenvironment and acts as an inhibitory immune checkpoint receptor via its interactions with E- and N-Cadherin ligands. We believe that targeting KLRG1 to reprogram these suppressed T and NK cells represents an exciting strategy to promote the full anti-tumor activity of cytotoxic T cells and NK cells in the tumor microenvironment. We are working through our development plans and we anticipate IND submission in the second half of 2023.
PYX-202
In December 2020, we entered into a license agreement, or the “LegoChem License Agreement,” with LegoChem Biosciences, Inc., or LegoChem, pursuant to which we licensed worldwide (other than Korea) development and commercialization rights for LCB67, an ADC product candidate targeting DLK1 (now referred to as PYX-202), and products containing the licensed compound. In studies conducted by LegoChem of preclinical small cell lung cancer, or SCLC, PDX models, as well as in a human cell line-based, or CDX, mouse model of cancer, we have observed significant anti-tumor activity as measured by durable tumor regression. In preparation for our IND filing and based on observation of our GLP studies to date, we have determined that we will need to conduct additional GLP and non-GLP toxicity studies to determine whether PYX-202 is a viable clinical candidate. We will continue to monitor the progress of our PYX-202 program and expect to provide an update about PYX-202 in mid-2022.
Our current pipeline is summarized below.
PYX-106 is an investigational fully human IgG1 isotype Siglec-15 targeting antibody that is designed to block Siglec-15 mediated suppression of T-cell proliferation and function. We plan to initially develop this asset for the treatment of thyroid cancer, Head & Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma, or HNSCC, non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, and other solid tumors. We licensed worldwide rights, other than in Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan), to our Siglec-15 targeting antibody from Biosion USA, Inc. We expect to submit an IND in the second half of 2022.
PYX-102 is an investigational immune-therapeutic consisting of a ligand-blocking antibody which rescues KLRG1-mediated suppression of human CD8+ T cells. KLRG1 ligands E-and N-cadherin are expressed in numerous solid cancers. KLRG1 is an inhibitory ITIM-containing receptor expressed on T cells and NK cells. Blocking ligand/receptor interaction will relieve immune inhibition in these tumors. We anticipate submitting an IND in the second half of 2023.
PYX-201 is an investigational, novel ADC consisting of an Immunoglobulin G1, or IgG1, anti-fibronectin Extradomain-B, or EDB, mAb site-specifically conjugated to auristatin via a cathepsin B-cleavable linker. Fibronectin is a glycoprotein found in the extracellular matrix. Fibronectin EDB regulates blood vessel morphogenesis, which provides the tumor access to nutrition and oxygen, a means to remove waste, and a pathway for metastasizing cells. EDB is overexpressed in many malignancies and is minimally expressed in most normal adult tissues, making it a potentially attractive means to target tumors while sparing healthy cells. In preclinical models of patient derived xenograft, or PDX models, we observed tumor regression with single agent PYX-201. In addition, we observed that the treatment of preclinical syngeneic tumor models with PYX-201 resulted in enhanced T cell infiltration into the TME, which is a hallmark of immunogenic cell death, or ICD, enabling synergistic activity in combination with a checkpoint inhibitor. We anticipate submitting an IND in the second half of 2022.
PYX-202 is an investigational, novel ADC consisting of an IgG1 anti-Delta-like 1 homolog, or DLK1, mAb conjugated to MMAE via a site-specific plasma-stable ß-glucuronide linker. DLK1 is a transmembrane protein normally expressed in embryonic tissues but highly restricted in healthy adult tissues. DLK1 becomes re-expressed in certain solid tumor malignancies. PYX-202 is designed to use the microtubule-disrupting MMAE payload, which is utilized in three currently marketed ADCs providing clinical support that the payload has anti-tumor effect potential. As discussed in Recent Development section above, we are currently in process of doing further testing and analysis and expect to provide an update about PYX-202 in mid-2022.
PYX-203 is an investigational ADC consisting of an IgG1 anti-CD123 mAb antibody conjugated to a novel cyclopropylpyrroloindoline, or CPI dimer payload via a site-specific plasma-stable, cleavable linker. CD123, or IL-3Ra, is a cell surface antigen highly expressed on leukemic stem cells and leukemic blasts in acute myeloid leukemia, or AML. PYX-203, utilizes a novel DNA-damaging toxin, CPI, and we have observed significant anti-tumor activity as measured by the reduction in the frequency of the leukemic cells in the blood and bone marrow in nine disseminated preclinical AML models. We anticipate submitting an IND in the second half of 2023.
In addition to the programs identified above, we are conducting research and development activities on various targets, leveraging our expertise in monoclonal antibodies and understanding of immuno-oncology. Our preclinical discovery programs are novel antibody programs intended to enhance the anti-tumor activity of natural killer, or NK cells, and T cells and to overcome immunosuppressive activity of tumor resident myeloid cells such as tumor associated macrophages, or TAMs, and myeloid derived suppressor cells, or MDSCs.
Since our inception, we have focused substantially all our resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, conducting research and development activities, filing and prosecuting patent applications, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking preclinical studies and a clinical trial. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales or from any other sources. To date, we have funded our operations with proceeds from sales of convertible preferred stock and our recent IPO. Our ability to generate any product revenue, and in particular to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
We have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. We reported net losses of $76.0 million and $12.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $91.7 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect that our expenses and capital expenditures will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities.
COVID-19 Business Update
We are monitoring the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and consolidated financial statements. To date, we have not experienced material business disruptions. We are following, and will continue to follow, recommendations from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as federal, state and local governments regarding working-from-home practices for non-essential employees. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic in Massachusetts resulted in a temporary reduction in workforce presence at our Cambridge research facility. While we have increased workforce presence at our facility, not all employees have returned to our facility, and we cannot be certain that we will not be required to close our facility in the future as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We cannot be certain what the overall impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will be on our business, and it has the potential to adversely affect our business. For additional information about risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our business, financial condition and results of operations, see the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report.
Licensing and Collaboration Agreements
License Agreement with Pfizer, Inc.
In December 2020, we entered into a license agreement, as amended, the “Pfizer License Agreement,” with Pfizer, Inc., or Pfizer, for worldwide development and commercialization rights to two of Pfizer’s proprietary ADC product candidates (now referred to as PYX-201 and PYX-203), as well as other ADC product candidates directed to the licensed targets. The Pfizer License Agreement became effective in March 2021. The initial exclusively licensed targets are extra domain B (EBD of fibronectin) and CD123 and we have the option to expand the scope of our license to add other licensed targets. Pfizer has also granted us a non-exclusive license to use Pfizer’s FACT platform technology to develop and commercialize the licensed ADCs. In March 2021, we entered into an amendment to the Pfizer License Agreement to include additional know-how within the scope of our license.
Pursuant to the Pfizer License Agreement, we incurred a combined $25.0 million for license fee, consisting of an upfront fee of $5.0 million and issued 12,152,145 shares of Series B convertible preferred stock in 2021 to Pfizer, and are obligated to pay future contingent payments and royalties, including up to an aggregate of $660 million in milestones for the first four licensed ADCs. Additional ADC targets may be licensed for an additional upfront fee, and such targets would be subject to additional regulatory and commercial sales milestones.
Additionally, if products are launched, we will pay Pfizer tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products in varying royalty rates ranging from low single digits to mid-teens. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis from first commercial sale until the latest to occur of: (1) 12 years from first commercial sale; (2) the expiration of all regulatory or data exclusivity; and (3) the expiration of the last valid claim of a licensed patent covering the licensed product in a country. We are also obligated to pay Pfizer a percentage of certain sublicensing revenue ranging from low-double digits to thirty percent based on the stage of development of the licensed product at the time of entering into the applicable sublicense.
License Agreement with the University of Chicago
In April 2020, we entered into a license agreement, or the “University License Agreement,” with the University of Chicago, or the University, to obtain an exclusive license under certain patents resulting from research performed, in-part, by our scientific founder, Dr. Thomas Gajewski, as well as a non-exclusive license to certain know-how and materials. Under the terms of the license, we have the exclusive global right to develop and commercialize products that are covered by a valid claim of a licensed patent, incorporate or use the licensed know-how and materials or are known to assess, modulate or utilize the activity of certain specified biological targets.
In partial consideration for the license from the University, we issued to the University 48,919 shares of our Common Stock in 2020. Pursuant to the University License Agreement, we are obligated to pay to the University an annual maintenance fee of $10 thousand commencing on the third anniversary of the effective date, potential development and commercial milestones of up to an aggregate of $7.7 million as well as running royalties on net sales of licensed products at varying rates ranging from less than one percent to the low single digits, subject to a minimum annual royalty ranging from $1.0 million to $3.0 million during certain years following the first commercial sale of a licensed product. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until: (1) for licensed products covered by a valid claim of a licensed patent in a given country, the expiration of such valid claims; and (2) for all other licensed products, 10 years from the first commercial sale of a licensed product in a given country. We are also obligated to pay the University a percentage of certain sublicensing revenue ranging from low- to mid-teens based on the date of entering into the applicable sublicense.
Agreements with LegoChem Biosciences, Inc.
In December 2020, we entered into a license agreement, or the “LegoChem License Agreement,” with LegoChem Biosciences, Inc., or LegoChem, pursuant to which we licensed worldwide (other than Korea) development and commercialization rights for LCB67, an ADC product candidate targeting DLK1 (now referred to as PYX-202), and products containing the licensed compound. We have the right to ask LegoChem to use commercially reasonable efforts at our cost to modify the licensed compound if there are certain technical failures of the licensed compound that we believe are attributable to the linker or the payload used in the licensed compound, and the modified compound will replace the unmodified version as the licensed compound. In February 2021, we entered into an amendment to the LegoChem License Agreement to include additional patents within the scope of our license.
Pursuant to the LegoChem License Agreement, we paid an upfront fee of $0.5 million in 2020 and $9.0 million in 2021 and are required to purchase certain initial quantities of licensed product from LegoChem for an estimated cost of $7.0 million. We are also obligated to pay up to an aggregate of $284.5 million to LegoChem if certain development, regulatory and sales milestones are achieved, as well as tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products ranging from mid-single digit to high single digit royalty rates. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the latest to occur of: (1) the date of expiration of the last valid claim of a licensed patent covering the licensed product; (2) 10 years from first commercial sale; and (3) the expiration of regulatory or data exclusivity.
In December 2020, we also entered into an opt-in, investment and additional consideration agreement with LegoChem, or the “Opt-In Agreement.” Under the Opt-In Agreement, we issued to LegoChem shares of Series B convertible preferred stock as part of our Series B financing in March 2021. We are also obligated to pay LegoChem a percentage of sublicensing revenue ranging from low-double digits to thirty percent based on the stage of development of the licensed product at the time of entering into the applicable sublicense, which percentage may be increased to up to fifty percent for any upfront payment from a sublicensee under certain circumstances. LegoChem has exercised its option under the Opt-In Agreement to make a $8.0 million payment to us, which payment was made in April 2021, in exchange for the right to receive an extra milestone payment of $9.6 million upon the earliest to occur of certain events, including the date of pricing or offer of the first public offering of our common stock or if we are the subject of a change of control transaction. Upon our IPO in October 2021, the extra milestone payment event triggered and we paid $9.6 million in January 2022 to LegoChem.
The Voxall Joint Venture with Alloy Therapeutics, Inc.
In March 2021, we entered into definitive transaction agreements with Alloy to finance and operate Voxall, a joint venture company formed in collaboration with Alloy to leverage Pyxis Oncology’s site-specific target catalog and Alloy’s ATX-Gx™ platform and antibody discovery services.
Voxall granted to both Pyxis Oncology and Alloy 50% of the voting membership units of Voxall in exchange for certain initial contributions. Our initial contribution included $50 thousand and a non-exclusive fully paid-up license to certain intellectual property owned or controlled by us to enable the collaboration with Voxall. Alloy’s initial contribution included $50 thousand and the execution of a license agreement and a services agreement to enable the collaboration with Voxall. Voxall is governed by a board of directors consisting of an equal number of our representatives and Alloy’s representatives. The protective provisions under Voxall’s operating agreement require the approval of both Pyxis Oncology and Alloy before Voxall may take certain actions.
In connection with the formation of Voxall, we entered into a three-year research collaboration with Alloy and Voxall to identify and select certain biological targets and create development candidate antibodies directed to those targets for further preclinical development, clinical development and commercialization. Under the collaboration agreement, the parties will conduct research under a mutually agreed research plan and budget for up to six research programs focused on mutually selected targets. Each of us and Alloy will provide research support for the collaboration through separate services agreements with Voxall, which services will be paid in the form of promissory notes issued by Voxall. Voxall will own all intellectual property arising from the collaboration, subject to certain exceptions for intellectual property relating to Alloy’s ATX-Gx™ platform.
If a development candidate antibody under a research program meets certain mutually agreed selection criteria, we will have the exclusive option to obtain an exclusive license from Voxall to further develop and commercialize all the development candidate antibodies discovered under that research program. We may in-license one research program on certain pre-agreed financial terms. For all other in-licensed research programs, we will be obligated to pay fair market value as determined by a third-party valuation. Any research program that we do not in-license may be licensed by Voxall to a third party.
License Agreement with Biosion USA, Inc.
On March 28, 2022, we entered into a license agreement, or the “Biosion License Agreement,” with Biosion USA, Inc., or Biosion, pursuant to which we obtained exclusive, worldwide (other than Greater China (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan)), licenses for development, manufacture and commercialization rights for BSI-060T, a potentially best-in-class Siglec-15 targeting antibody, an IO product candidate (now referred to as PYX-106), and products containing the licensed compound.
Pursuant to the Biosion License Agreement, we agreed to pay an upfront fee of $10 million and are obligated to pay future contingent payments including development, regulatory and commercial milestone up to an aggregate of $217.5 million in case of normal approval and $222.5 million in case of accelerated approval. Additionally, if products are launched, we will pay Biosion tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products in varying royalty rates ranging from low single digits to low teens. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis from first commercial sale until the latest to occur of: (1) 12 years from first commercial sale; (2) the expiration of all regulatory or data exclusivity; and (3) the expiration of the last valid claim of a licensed patent covering the licensed product in a country.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts, and the development of our programs. These expenses include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, payroll taxes, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development activities;
•expenses incurred in connection with our product candidates and the development of research programs, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants, contractors, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and contract research organizations, or CROs;
•laboratory supplies and research materials; and
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and insurance.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Non-refundable advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed, or when it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered, or the services rendered.
Our direct external research and development expenses consist of costs that include fees, reimbursed materials and other costs paid to consultants, contractors, CMOs and CROs in connection with our preclinical and clinical activities. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our discovery efforts, laboratory supplies, and facilities expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple programs and our platform and, as such, are not separately classified.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing and planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future. The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot accurately estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates and we may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, legal, finance and accounting, human resources and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees paid for accounting, auditing, consulting and tax services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our programs and platform. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, director and officer insurance, and investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Other (Expense) Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on our invested cash and cash equivalent balances.
The change in fair value of derivative liability represents the increase in the fair value of the derivative liability recorded as a result of an opt-in, investment and additional consideration agreement with LegoChem.
Loss from Equity Method Investment in Joint Venture
In March 2021, we entered into definitive transaction agreements with Alloy Therapeutics, Inc. (“Alloy”) and Voxall Therapeutics, LLC to finance and operate Voxall, a joint venture company formed in collaboration with Alloy to leverage our technology and Alloy’s ATX-Gx™ platform and antibody discovery services. We account for our investment in the Voxall joint venture under the equity method of accounting.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recognized any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred or for the research and development tax credits earned in each year and interim period, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2021, our federal and state net operating losses in the United States were $10.1 million ($48.0 million before tax) and $2.8 million ($45.9 million before tax) respectively. The federal net operating loss carryforwards in the United States can be carried forward indefinitely but may be subject to annual usage limitations to the extent certain substantial changes our ownership occur. The state net operating loss carryforwards begin expiring in 2039. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, we had $1.0 million and $0.6 million of federal and state credit carryovers which begin to expire in 2039. These loss and credit carryforwards are subject to review and possible adjustment by the appropriate taxing authorities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased by $42.0 million, from $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $51.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The program expenses increased by $35.4 million, which was primarily due to license fee of $25.0 million related to Pfizer License Agreement, license fee of $4.4 million related to LegoChem License Agreement, increased cell line development fees of $4.5 million and laboratory supplies of $1.0 million. Personnel-related expenses including stock-based compensation increased by $5.2 million, which was primarily due to higher personnel-related expenses of $2.7 million and higher stock-based compensation of $2.5 million, both of which were due to an increase in headcount to support our research and development activities. Other research and development expenses increased by $1.4 million, which primarily related to the increase in facility maintenance costs and higher depreciation on laboratory equipment.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses increased by $14.8 million, from $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $18.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Personnel-related expenses including stock-based compensation increased by $7.2 million primarily due to higher personnel-related expenses of $3.3 million and higher stock-based compensation of $3.9 million, both of which were due to an increase in headcount. Professional and consultant fees increased by $6.0 million related to recruiting fees, intellectual property counsel fees, accounting fees, audit fees and corporate counsel fees, to support our growth and operations as a public company. Facilities, insurance and other costs increased by $1.6 million to support our internal growth and operations.
Other (Expense) Income
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was less than $0.1 million consisting of interest earned on invested cash and cash equivalent balances.
Other expense consists of change in fair value of the derivative liability of $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of the Opt-In Agreement. Service fee income from related party consists of income from services provided to the Voxall joint venture of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had cash and cash equivalents of $274.7 million as of December 31, 2021. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had net losses of $76.0 million and $12.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $91.7 million.
In October 2021, we completed our IPO in which we sold 10,500,000 shares of our common stock at $16.00 per share and received net proceeds of approximately $152.3 million, after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions and other issuance costs.
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials for our product candidates in development. The timing and amount of our funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the manufacture of product candidates, completion of our IND enabling studies and initiation of Phase 1 clinical trials for PYX-201, PYX-202, PYX-203, PYX-106, and PYX-102;
•the timing and progress of our other preclinical and clinical development activities;
•the number and scope of other preclinical and clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we have entered or may in the future enter into in-licensing, collaborations and research and development agreements;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing licensure;
•our ability to maintain our current licenses and research and development programs and to establish new collaboration arrangements;
•the costs involved in prosecuting, maintaining and enforcing patent and other intellectual property rights;
•any delays or interruptions, including due to the COVID-19 pandemic, that we experience in our preclinical studies, future clinical trials and/or supply chain;
•the cost and timing of regulatory licenses; and
•our efforts to hire additional clinical, regulatory, scientific, operational, financial and management personnel; and
•incur insurance, legal and other regulatory compliance expenses to operate as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions, engaging in acquisition, merger or collaboration transactions, selling or licensing our assets, making capital expenditures, redeeming our stock, making certain investments or declaring dividends.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $35.3 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $76.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $34.0 million and net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $6.7 million. The non-cash charges of $34.0 million was primarily due to the $20.0 million of research and development license fees for Pfizer settled in Series B convertible preferred stock, the $6.2 million change in the fair value of derivative liability and $6.4 million in stock-based compensation. The change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $9.7 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by changes in prepaid and other current assets and lease payments of $3.0 million, all of which were due to growth in our business, the advancement of our research programs, and the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $10.1 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $12.8 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $0.9 million and net cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.8 million. Net cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted primarily of increase of $2.3 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $0.6 million and $1.5 million, respectively, due to purchases of property and equipment. The purchases of property and equipment consists of laboratory equipment, leasehold improvements, and furniture and fixtures. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we also made an investment in our joint venture, Voxall Therapeutics, LLC, for $0.1 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $304.0 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $152.3 million from the issuance of our common stock in the initial public offering and net proceeds of $151.6 million from the sale of our Series B convertible preferred stock.
No significant financing activities other than exercise of stock options during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Outlook
Based on our cash balance as of December 31, 2021 of $274.7 million and our research & development and business development plans, we expect to be able to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the third quarter of 2024. However, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and our operating plan may change as a result of many factors currently unknown to us. In addition, we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, and the effects that such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
We lease our operating facility in Cambridge, Massachusetts under a non-cancellable operating lease agreement for our corporate headquarters and laboratory space which expires in March 2022, with a remaining lease obligation of $0.5 million. On September 29, 2021, we entered into a lease agreement for an office and laboratory space in Boston, Massachusetts. The lease will expire on December 31, 2032, with future undiscounted operating lease payments (base rent) under the lease agreement of $33.8 million over an initial lease period of approximately ten years.
During 2020 and 2021, we entered into a few licensing and related agreements in the normal course of business. In accordance with the agreements, we are obligated to pay, among other items, future contingent payments, royalties, and sublicensing revenue in the future, as applicable. We have not included potential future payments due under these licensing and collaboration agreements in a table of contractual obligations because the payment obligations under this agreement are contingent upon future events.
Pursuant to the Pfizer License Agreement, we are obligated to pay future contingent payments and royalties, including up to an aggregate of $660 million in milestones for the first four licensed ADCs. Additional ADC targets may be licensed for an additional upfront fee, and such targets would be subject to additional regulatory and commercial sales milestones. Additionally, if products are launched, we will pay Pfizer tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products in varying royalty rates ranging from low single digits to mid-teens. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis from first commercial sale until the latest to occur of: (1) 12 years from first commercial sale; (2) the expiration of all regulatory or data exclusivity; and (3) the expiration of the last valid claim of a licensed patent covering the licensed product in a country. We are also obligated to pay Pfizer a percentage of certain sublicensing revenue ranging from low-double digits to thirty percent based on the stage of development of the licensed product at the time of entering into the applicable sublicense.
Pursuant to the LegoChem License Agreement, we are obligated to pay up to an aggregate of $284.5 million to LegoChem if certain development, regulatory and sales milestones are achieved, as well as tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products ranging from mid-single digit to high single digit royalty rates. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the latest to occur of: (1) the date of expiration of the last valid claim of a licensed patent covering the licensed product; (2) 10 years from first commercial sale; and (3) the expiration of regulatory or data exclusivity.
Pursuant to the University License Agreement with the University of Chicago (the “University”), we are obligated to pay to the University an annual maintenance fee of $10 thousand commencing on the third anniversary of the effective date, potential development and commercial milestones of up to an aggregate of $7.7 million as well as running royalties on net sales of licensed products at varying rates ranging from less than one percent to the low single digits, subject to a minimum annual royalty ranging from $1.0 million to $3.0 million during certain years following the first commercial sale of a licensed product. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until: (1) for licensed products covered by a valid claim of a licensed patent in a given country, the expiration of such valid claims; and (2) for all other licensed products, 10 years from the first commercial sale of a licensed product in a given country. We are also obligated to pay the University a percentage of certain sublicensing revenue ranging from low- to mid-teens based on the date of entering into the applicable sublicense.
Pursuant to the Biosion License Agreement, we are obligated to pay future contingent payments including development, regulatory and commercial milestone up to an aggregate of $217.5 million in case of normal approval and $222.5 million in case of accelerated approval. Additionally, if products are launched, we will pay Biosion tiered royalties on net sales of licensed products in varying royalty rates ranging from low single digits to low teens. Our royalty obligations apply on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis from first commercial sale until the latest to occur of: (1) 12 years from first commercial sale; (2) the expiration of all regulatory or data exclusivity; and (3) the expiration of the last valid claim of a licensed patent covering the licensed product in a country.
We also enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CMOs, and other third parties for preclinical studies. These contracts do not contain minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in contractual obligations above as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements that require significant estimates and judgments.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. At each period end, we corroborate the accuracy of these estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include those related to fees paid to:
•vendors in connection with discovery and preclinical development activities; and
•CROs in connection with preclinical studies and clinical trials.
We record the expense and accrual related to contract research and manufacturing based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended considering a number of factors, including our knowledge of the progress towards completion of the research, development and manufacturing activities; invoicing to date under contracts; communication from the CROs, CMOs and other companies of any actual costs incurred during the period that have not yet been invoiced; and the costs included in the contracts and purchase orders. In accruing service fees, we estimate the period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expense accordingly. There have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principle or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. A framework is used for measuring fair value utilizing a three-tier hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3).
The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Level 1-Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities;
Level 2-Quoted prices in markets that are not considered to be active or financial instrument valuations for which all significant inputs are observable, either directly or indirectly; and
Level 3-Prices or valuations that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
Financial instruments are categorized in their entirety based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The assessment of the significance of a particular input to the fair value measurement requires judgment and considers factors specific to the investment. To the extent that the valuation is based on models or inputs that are less observable or unobservable in the market, the determination of fair value requires more judgment. Accordingly, the degree of judgment exercised by us in determining fair value is greatest for instruments categorized in Level 3.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain an equity incentive plan as a long-term incentive for employees, consultants, and directors. We account for all stock-based awards granted to employees and non-employees based on their fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense for those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards with graded vesting is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. We recognize forfeitures related to stock-based compensation awards as they occur and reverse any previously recognized compensation cost associated with forfeited awards in the period the forfeiture occurs.
We value stock options with service conditions using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model uses various inputs and we make certain assumptions regarding the fair value of our common stock, the expected volatility of our common stock, the expected term of stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options and our expected dividend yield. The following summarizes the inputs used and assumptions made:
Expected Volatility-We lack company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, we estimate the expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies and expects to continue to do so until we have adequate historical data regarding the volatility of our traded stock price.
Expected Term-We use the simplified method described in the SEC’s Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107, Share-Based Payment (“SAB 107”), to determine the expected life of the option grants.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
Dividends-Expected dividend yield is zero because we have not paid cash dividends on shares of common stock and do not expect to pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Determination of Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to the our IPO on October 8, 2021, the estimated fair value of our common stock has been determined by our board of directors as of the date of grant of each option award, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Our common stock valuations were prepared using either an option pricing method, or OPM, or a hybrid method, both of which used market approaches to estimate our enterprise value.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimate, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Since the completion of our IPO on October 8, 2021, it is no longer necessary for our board of directors to estimate the fair value of our common stock in connection with our accounting for stock option grants and other such awards that we may grant, as the fair value of our common stock is based on the publicly quoted market price of our common stock.
Leases
Operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets represent our right to use an underlying asset during the lease term, and operating lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Operating lease ROU assets and lease liabilities are initially recognized and measured based on the present value of the future fixed lease payments over the expected lease term at commencement date calculated using our incremental borrowing rate applicable to the lease asset, unless the implicit rate is readily determinable. We determine the lease term as the non-cancelable period of the lease and may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Operating lease ROU assets also include any initial direct costs incurred and any lease payments made on or before the lease commencement date, less lease incentives received. Operating lease ROU assets are subsequently measured throughout the lease term at the carrying amount of the lease liability, plus initial direct costs, plus (minus) any prepaid (accrued) lease payments, less the unamortized balance of lease incentives received. Leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recognized on the consolidated balance sheets. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Variable lease costs such as common area costs and other operating costs are expensed as incurred. We account for lease and non-lease components as a single lease component for all its facilities leases. We had no finance leases as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), which requires the use of the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined on the basis of the differences between amounts in the consolidated financial statements and the tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income tax (benefit) expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that we believe these assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of our net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recently issued accounting standards and the impact of these standards on our consolidated financial statements, refer to “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) permits an “emerging growth company” to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards. We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Section 107(b) of the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this extended transition period, and, as a result, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for other public companies.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our shares held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company, we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and, similar to emerging growth companies, if we are a smaller reporting company with less than $100 million in annual revenue, we would not be required to obtain an attestation report on internal control over financial reporting issued by our independent registered public accounting firm.