Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are engaged in the business of acquiring, exploring and developing precious metal projects in the United States of America. Paramount owns both exploration and development stage projects in the states of Nevada and Oregon. We enhance the value of our projects by implementing exploration and engineering programs that are likely to expand and upgrade known mineral resources to mineral reserves. To further advance our projects towards the production decision, we manage the completion of the appropriate technical studies including feasibility studies and undertake permitting processes with the relevant local, state and federal regulators. The following discussion updates our outlook and plan of operations for the foreseeable future. It also analyzes our financial condition and summarizes the results of our operations for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 and compares each year’s results to the results of the prior year.
Operating Highlights:
During the fiscal year-ended June, 2022, the Company conducted several exploration programs and continued with its permitting at its Grassy Mountain Project. Highlights include:
•Submitted a modified Consolidated Permit Application (the “CPA”) with the State of Oregon seeking approval to construct and operate its proposed gold mine for its Grassy Mountain Project.
•Submitted a modified Plan of Operation to the Bureau of Land Management (the ”BLM”) for its proposes mining operations for its Grassy Mountain Project.
•Entering into an option agreement with Nevada Select Royalty to purchase 100% interest in the Bald Peak Project (“Bald Peak”) located in Mineral County, Nevada. Total consideration of $300,000 will be paid based on achieving certain milestones over time.
•Completed a drill exploration program to test several targets identified to bring the Sleeper Gold Project back into production.
•Completed surface sampling and a geophysical survey at its Bald Peak Project in Nevada. Both these programs confirm a large and shallow target that the Company will design and plan a new drill program in 2022.
•Received positive assay results from geotechnical drill holes at its Grassy Mountain Project that indicate the potential for additional economic material to be used during mine operations.
•Received from Malheur County an extension on the Conditional Use Permit for the proposed Grassy Mountain underground mine.
•Completed a 15-hole reverse circulation drill program at the Frost Project which is located 12 miles from the Company’s Grassy Mountain Project in Eastern Oregon. The program was designed to locate and test historical gold intercepts from drilling that was performed by the previous operators.
•Completed a metallurgical testing program using Atmospheric Alkaline Oxidation recovery process for the treatment of sulfide mineralization at the Sleeper Gold Project.
Outlook:
We believe that investors will gain a better understanding of our company if they understand how we measure and talk about our results. As an exploration and development company, we recognize the importance of managing our liquidity and capital resources. We pay close attention to non-discretionary cash expenses and look for ways to minimize them when possible. We ensure we have sufficient cash on hand to meet our annual land holding costs as the maintenance of mining claims and leases are essential to preserve the value of our mineral property assets.
Comparison of Operating Results for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to June 30, 2021
Results of Operations
We did not earn any revenue from mining operations for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. During the year ended June 30, 2022, we completed various activities and milestones as described above in operating highlights. Other normal course of business
activities included filing annual mining claim fees with the BLM, reclamation work at the Sleeper mine site and on-going reviews of its mining claims were completed.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $7,837,316 compared to a net loss of $5,903,618 in the previous year. The increase of approximately 33% is fully described below. We will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future as we continue with our planned exploration and development programs.
Expenses
Exploration, Development and Reclamation and Land Holding Costs
For the year ended June 30, 2022, exploration and development expenses were $4,436,266 compared to $2,816,685 in the prior year. This represents an increase of 57% or $1,619,581 which was mainly due to the Company completing several exploration and development activities at both its Oregon and Nevada based properties. At Grassy Mountain, the Company continued with the permitting process with the State of Oregon and the BLM and submitted modified permit applications and at our Frost Property completed a drill program. Total exploration and development expenses at Grassy Mountain and Frost Project during the year were $2,859,348. At Sleeper, the Company completed a small drill program to test zones of mineralization and at its Bald Peak Project conducted rock surface sampling, completed a geophysical survey and planned for a future exploratory drill program. We also incurred expenses related to the reclamation program at the Sleeper Project. These reclamation expenses are reimbursed from an insurance policy the Company holds related to the closure and reclamation of the past producing Sleeper mine. Total exploration and reclamation expenses at our Nevada based properties during the year were $1,576,918.
For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company mainly focused its development activities on the permitting process with the State of Oregon. Total development expense at Grassy Mountain in the previous year were $1,949,753. For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company incurred $866,932 at its Sleeper Gold Project for reclamation and general exploration activities which included drill program planning.
For the year ended June 30, 2022, land holding costs increased by $99,948 or by 18% from the prior year of $540,401 to $640,349. The increase is primarily due the additional mining claim maintenance from the acquisition of new exploration properties.
Salaries and Benefits
For the year ended June 30, 2022, salary and benefits decreased by 13% or by $177,149 from the prior year to $1,196,302. Salary and benefits are comprised of cash and stock-based compensation of the Company’s executive and corporate administration teams. The decrease primarily reflects lower cash bonus and stock-based compensation recorded in the current year compared to the previous comparable year. Included in the salary and benefits expense amount for the year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was non-cash stock based compensation of $262,398 and $332,786 respectively.
Directors’ Compensation
For the year ended June 30, 2022, directors’ compensation decreased by 28% or by $44,977 from the prior year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease is due to the stock-based compensation recorded in the current year-ended June 30, 2022 compared to the prior year ended June 30, 2021.
Professional Fees and General and Administration
For the year ended June 30, 2022, professional fees were $130,765 compared to $174,039 in the prior year. This represents a decrease of 25% or $43,274. Professional fees included legal, advisory and consultant expenses incurred on corporate and operational activities being performed by the Company on a period-by-period basis.
For the year ended June 30, 2022, general and administration expenses increased by 17% to $565,466 from $483,608 in the prior year. The increase in expenses was mainly due to an increase in travel and marketing costs.
Asset Retirement Obligation
For the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company's asset retirement obligation for the Sleeper Gold Project increased to $4,475,270 from $1,849,644 from the prior year ended June 30, 2021. $2,475,169 of the increase was a result of a change in estimate in the cost to convert ponds from the past mining operations to evaporation cell as required by NDEP. Due to the engineered designs required and approved by NDEP, the Company requested proposals to complete the pond conversions from third party contractors which were materially higher than its previous estimates. The work to complete the ponds are expected to be completed in the second half of
calendar year 2024 and the costs are expected to be reimbursed by the insurance policy held by the Company for government mandated reclamation at the Sleeper Gold Project.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating, Investing and Financing Activities
At June 30, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2,484,156 compared to $3,113,064 as at June 30, 2021. In May 2020, the Company established an “at the market” equity offering program (“ATM”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and Canaccord Genuity LLC to proactively increase financial flexibility. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 the Company issued 7,766,388 shares (2021- 3,209,133 shares) for net proceeds of $6,119,954 (2021 -$3,722,554) under the program. At June 30, 2022, the Company’s prepaid expenses were $1,280,895 compared to $1,152,396 for the year-ended June 30, 2021. Included in the total for the year-ended June 30, 2022 were annual payments to hold the Company’s mining claims for all its mineral properties of $568,572. The prepaid expenses also included amounts to secure a helicopter for Paramount’s planned drill program at the Bald Peak Project.
The main uses of cash were comprised of the following material amounts:
•Cash used to fund our operations, which included general and administration expenses, land holding costs, exploration and development programs at our mineral properties, of $6,701,139.
In addition to cash used in operating activities, the Company used and received cash as follows:
•Cash used to purchase mining claims in the State of Nevada and equipment of $47,723;
•Cash received from equity financings of $6,119,954.
Going Concern
The Consolidated Financial Statements of the Company have been prepared on a “going concern” basis, which means that the continuation of the Company is presumed even though events and conditions exist that, when considered in aggregate, raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern because it is possible that the Company will be required to adversely change its current business plan or many be unable to meet its obligations as they become due with one year after the date of that these financial statements were issued.
Paramount expects to continue to incur losses as a result of costs and expenses related to maintaining its properties and general and administrative expenses. Since 2015, the Company has relied on equity financings, debt financings and sale of royalties to fund its operations and the Company expects to rely on these forms of financing to fund operations into the near future. The Company will also continue to identify ways to reduce its cash expenditures.
Paramount’s current business plan requires working capital to fund non-discretionary expenditures for its exploration and development activities on its mineral properties, mineral property holding costs and general and administrative expenses. It also requires approximately $4.3 million in capital to repay the 2019 convertible notes which become due in September 2023.
We anticipate our twelve-month cash expenditures for our fiscal year ending June 30, 2023 to be as follows:
•$3.3 million on corporate, land claim maintenance and general expenses
For discretionary exploration and development, subject to available cash on hand and additional share issuances, we are budgeting the following amounts:
•$3.0 million on the Grassy Mountain Project state and federal permitting activities
•$0.25 million on the Sleeper Gold Project
•$0.8 million on the Bald Peak exploration programs
For the planned reclamation activities required by state and federal regulators at Sleeper, the Company expects that these expenditures will be reimbursed by insurance proceeds. For any interest that accrues and is owing on the outstanding convertible debt, the Company expects to elect to pay the semi-annual interest payment in shares of its Common Stock.
Subsequent to October 13, 2022, the Company expects to fund operations as follows:
•Existing cash on hand and working capital.
•The existing ATM with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and Canaccord Genuity LLC.
•Other debt, equity financings and sale of royalties.
Historically, we have been successful in accessing capital through equity and debt financing arrangements or by the sale of royalties on its mineral properties, no assurance can be given that additional financing will be available to it in amounts sufficient to meet its needs, or on terms acceptable to the Company. In the event that we are unable to obtain additional capital or financing, our operations, exploration and development activities will be significantly adversely affected. The continuation of the Company as a going concern is dependent on having sufficient capital to maintain our operations and to repay the convertible notes which become due in September 2023. In considering our financing plans, our current working capital position and our ability to reduce operating expenses the Company believes there is substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern twelve months after the date that our financial statements are issued.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management considers the following policies to be most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the Company’s consolidated financial statements and the uncertainties that could impact the results of operations, financial condition and cash flows. Our financial statements are affected by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by management during their preparation. Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies are those related to mineral property acquisition costs, exploration and development cost, stock-based compensation, derivative accounting and foreign currency translation.
Estimates
The Company prepares its consolidated financial statements and notes in conformity to United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates these estimates, including those related the adequacy of the Company’s reclamation and environmental obligation, share based compensation, valuation of deferred tax assets and assessment of impairment of mineral properties. Management bases these estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis of making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Mineral property acquisition costs
The Company capitalizes the cost of acquiring mineral properties and will amortize these costs over the useful life of a property following the commencement of production or expense these costs if it is determined that the mineral property has no future economic value or the properties are sold or abandoned. Costs include cash consideration and the fair market value of shares issued on the acquisition of mineral properties. Properties acquired under option agreements, whereby payments are made at the sole discretion of the Company, are recorded in the accounts of the specific mineral property at the time the payments are made.
The amounts recorded as mineral properties reflect actual costs incurred to acquire the properties and do not indicate any present or future value of economically recoverable reserves.
Exploration expenses
We record exploration expenses as incurred. When we determine that precious metal resource deposit can be economically and legally extracted or produced based on established proven and probable reserves, further exploration expenses related to such reserves incurred after such a determination will be capitalized. To date, we have not established any proven or probable reserves and will continue to expense exploration costs as incurred.
Asset Retirement Obligation
The fair value of the Company’s asset retirement obligation (“ARO”) is measured by discounting the expected cash flows using a discount factor that reflects the credit-adjusted risk free rate of interest, while taking into account the inflation rate. The Company prepares estimates of the timing and amounts of expected cash flows and ongoing reclamation expenditures are charged against the ARO as incurred to the extent they relate to the ARO. Significant judgments and estimates are made when estimating the fair value of ARO.
Stock Based Compensation
For stock option grants with market conditions that affect vesting, the Company uses a lattice approach incorporating a Monte Carlo simulation to value stock options granted.
Option awards are generally granted with an exercise price equal to the market price of Paramount’s stock at the date of grant and have contractual lives of 5 years. To better align the interests of its key executives, employee and directors with those of its shareholders a significant portion of those share option awards will vest contingent upon meeting certain stock price appreciation performance goals and other performance conditions. Option and share awards provide for accelerated vesting if there is a change in control (as defined in the employee share option plan). For the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company did not grant any stock
options. For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company used the Black-Scholes option valuation model to value stock options granted. The Black-Scholes option valuation model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. The model requires management to make estimates which are subjective and may not be representative of actual results. Changes in assumptions can materially affect estimates of fair values. For purposes of the calculation, the following assumptions were used for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not currently a party to, or otherwise involved with, any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources.