ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This discussion contains certain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those set forth under the Section entitled “Risk Factors”, and other documents we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Overview
Q BioMed Inc. (or “the Company”) was incorporated in the State of Nevada on November 22, 2013 and is a commercial stage biomedical acceleration and development company focused on licensing, acquiring and providing strategic resources to life sciences and healthcare companies. We intend to mitigate risk by acquiring multiple assets over time and across a broad spectrum of healthcare related products, companies and sectors. We intend to develop these assets to provide returns via organic growth, revenue production, out-licensing, sale or spin out. Our mission is to solve problems by accelerating the development of important therapies and availability of those therapies to patients.
The focus for 2022 is to monetize the current pipeline and build a platform for future growth. There are 4 areas of focus: commercial product revenue growth, partnerships, joint venture equity value and future development platform.
Commercial Product
We believe that Strontium89 has great potential in the cancer palliation space. As a result of a world in which opioids were a treatment of choice for those patients unlucky enough to be diagnosed with painful metastatic cancers in the bone, we felt that Strontium89 had become a neglected and forgotten drug. We have stayed committed to our belief that Strontium89 was a valuable treatment and have focused on advancing that asset from concept, a neglected drug, to a fully approved, reimbursed commercial product. Since we acquired Strontium89, we have built an infrastructure to commercialize the product, including manufacturing, branding, pharmacovigilance, reporting, federal supply contract, and entering into distribution agreements in the United States and several other countries. We believe that our last remaining investment is now focused on a sales team to promote the drug both in federal and non-government institutions and clinics. Revenue has started to grow even without a sales force fully deployed. Our recent partnership with a sales organization is in place, and once funded we plan to capitalize on the groundwork in place. We expect revenues to grow steadily and over the next 12-18 months.
We are also assessing additional products in nuclear medicine that could complement our infrastructure and provide additional revenue opportunities.
Partnership Opportunities
UTTROSIDE B - Liver Cancer Chemotherapeutic
Along with our developmental partners, we are advancing an innovative treatment for liver cancer, a disease indication that currently has a high unmet need. This molecule was identified in India, traditionally used to treat liver ailments. Subsequent research on that isolated molecule showed promising data, indicating that the molecule was more cytotoxic, killing cancer cells more effectively, in liver cancer cells lines than the current first line liver cancer chemotherapeutic. We have advanced this from a naturally occurring unsustainable plant product to a commercially viable and scalable synthetic drug candidate. This provides an opportunity to partner this asset with a larger oncology focused institution. Currently, there are only two approved first-line liver cancer therapies. We have received Orphan Drug Designation, and we are now preparing to advance this toward clinical partnership.
Development Platform - Rare Disease Focus
During 2022 we will focus our future development platform on the Rare Disease Space. This focusses our resources on an area in which we already have a presence. Our liver cancer drug candidate, Uttroside B, has already received Orphan Drug Designation. We expect to partner this asset in mid-2022 and will grow our development platform through in-licensing or acquisition.
This rare disease platform will also complement our early-stage treatment for young minimally verbal children on the Autism Spectrum. While our immediate focus is on the above-mentioned assets, we are also developing a new drug candidate to treat young children with pediatric minimally verbal autism. The advancement of this program will depend on the availability of funds and resources as we prioritize our clinical development milestones. There is no effective treatment available to help an estimated 250,000 children born with the condition worldwide each year, 20,000 of them in the United States. We are working on a discovery and development program to address this highly unmet need.
Corporate Strategic Goals
Our mission is to solve problems by accelerating the development of important therapies and the availability of those therapies to patients. We have been busy building a portfolio that we believe has significant value ranging from blockbuster potential drugs to revenue-producing opportunities.
On September 29, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with an accredited investor (“Lender”), pursuant to which we sold a convertible debenture (the “Debenture”) with a maturity date of 12 months after the issuance thereof for $2,000,000 gross proceeds. The closing date of the sale was on October 5, 2021. The Debenture in the aggregate principal amount of $2,200,000 which includes an original issue discount of $185,000 and $15,000 for the payment of the Lender’s legal fees and carries an interest rate of 6% per annum.
Deeper Pipeline Review
Strontium-89 - FDA Approved Drug Launched
In January 2021, we announced that treatment with Strontium-89 in the hospital out-patient setting is fully reimbursed by Medicare. In March 2021, we were approved as a federal supplier which allows us to sell into federal hospital systems, notably the U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs and the U.S. Department of Defense. We have deployed a VA sales force, and we are preparing to launch an institutional contract sales force to increase our presence and uptake in non-government hospitals Revenue for our fiscal 2021, while still fairly low, is up by over 600% over our fiscal 2020. In January 2021, we received full reimbursement from Medicare and Medicaid, were approved as a federal supplier in March 2021, and engaged a federal sales team working mostly with the U.S Departments of Veterans’ Affairs, the Department of Defense and Indian Health Services. We have recently retained Eversana to partner on the institutional sales efforts and expect to deploy in field sales reps in 2022.
In mid-2020, we began the regulatory registration process for full commercial access in the European Union. These efforts have seen some delay due to Brexit related regulatory requirements. In parallel, we are midway through the registration process in many other countries. Due to some legacy data from previous owners not being available in current reporting standards to complete the filings, we have begun the process of creating our own source documents to complete the filings in non-US jurisdictions. We expect this to be complete in the first half of our fiscal 2022. We have already identified and contracted with a few international distribution partners in anticipation of approval in those countries.
We are assessing several potential clinical trial programs that may expand the indication beyond palliation into a therapeutic use that may increase utilization in years to come.
Mannin Platform Drugs for ARDS, Glaucoma, Kidney Diseases and others
In March 2021, our technology partner Mannin Research Inc. (Mannin) was granted an additional CAD$1.7 million from the Canadian governments COVID response budget, adding to the approximate $7.7 million granted in Europe, which together will fund 65-75 percent of every dollar incurred to advance the Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome therapy for COVID patients as well as a portfolio of therapeutic assets for vascular diseases currently in development at Mannin, including: glaucoma, cardiovascular diseases, acute kidney disease, and other infectious diseases.
With the uptake of vaccines for COVID-19 growing, the infection numbers are still soaring around the world due to new variants and communities growing apathy and resistance to mandates and social restrictions. Together with Mannin Research Inc., our technology partner, we are pursuing a treatment for Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, the condition that causes the most severe symptoms in COVID patients usually resulting in hospitalization and death. The treatment is not dependent on targeting any specific viral variant but rather is virus agnostic, which we believe makes it an invaluable treatment for Corona viruses and other viral diseases like influenza, pneumonia and any future viral pandemic outbreaks.
The MAN-19 therapeutic is a recombinant fusion protein that treats the patient, instead of targeting the virus. It is not a cure for COVID-19, but it strengthens a patient’s blood vessels and protects them against ARDS, breathing problems, sepsis and other infections that may cause the body’s organs to begin shutting down. It is designed to keep COVID-19 or other ARDS patients out of the ICU and off a ventilator. Pending upcoming toxicology testing, we believe that clinical trials for the drug will start in 2022. If the drug proves both safe and effective, our goal is to have it available for use by patients by early 2023.
The market for this kind of treatment in the current pandemic climate is substantial and global. COVID-19 is not going away any time soon. As a result, there is a need to develop more effective treatments. We believe that this technology will play a role in the broader treatment landscape and not only for COVID-19, but also for other infectious diseases that cause ARDS.
GDF 15 Diagnostic for Glaucoma - In Clinical Trial and Product Development and FDA approval anticipated early 2022
In early 2019, we licensed a diagnostic biomarker known as GDF-15 for determining the severity of glaucoma from Washington University in St. Louis. . GDF15 is an attractive biomarker for glaucoma, with distinct advantages over conventional clinical tests and the potential to be a first-in-class diagnostic test. In collaboration with our development partners, we are developing a prototype for point of care In Vitro Diagnostic (IVD) device to detect GDF15 in clinical samples of aqueous humor. Our teams are generating, assessing, and applying DNA aptamers and DNAzymes to detect GDF15 in aqueous humor, to develop a prototype assay and diagnostic test strip for detection of GDF15 in clinical samples. This integrated and printable diagnostic will allow ophthalmologists to detect and monitor glaucoma progression in patients at their office without need for additional external or expensive equipment. In partnership with Mannin Research Inc. and McMaster University, we are nearing the completion of development of an IVD with both point-of-care (detection in a doctor’s office) as well as an external laboratory-based detection (i.e. for use in existing CLIA laboratories using existing diagnostic equipment). With appropriate funding, we anticipate completion of the IVD device and submission to the FDA (510K) for in vitro diagnostic approval in 2022.
UTTROSIDE B - Liver Cancer Chemotherapeutic
Along with our developmental partners, we are advancing an innovative treatment for liver cancer, a disease indication that currently has a high unmet need. Currently, there are only two approved first-line therapies. Uttroside-B was discovered in the leaf of the Black Nightshade plant in India. As it is not feasible to use the plant as the source for a drug, we successfully synthesized the molecule thereby creating an exact replica of the naturally occurring chemical compound. We have received Orphan Drug Designation and we are now preparing to advance this toward IND application with the FDA.
QBM-001 - Early Stage Treatment for young minimally verbal children on the Autism Spectrum
While our immediate focus is on the above-mentioned assets, we are also developing a new drug candidate to treat young children with pediatric minimally verbal autism. The advancement of this program will depend on the availability of funds and resources as we prioritize our clinical development milestones. There is no effective treatment available to help an estimated 250,000 children born with the condition worldwide each year, 20,000 of them in the United States. We are working on a discovery and development program to address this highly unmet need.
Financial Overview
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets subject to amortization include acquired intellectual property for a marketable product acquired in November 2018.
The intellectual property is being amortized over the estimated life remaining at the time of acquisition, which is 10 years.
Intangible assets are monitored for potential impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable and are also reviewed annually to determine whether any impairment is necessary. Management has assessed the economic life of our Metastron asset to be at least equal to its remaining use life of eight years. As such, management modelled the recoverability test using seven years of estimated future cash flows. Based on this projection, the $350,000 net carrying value of our Metastron asset is fully recoverable and therefore there was no impairment loss as of November 30, 2021 and 2020.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the Statement of Operations. Depending on the features of the derivative financial instrument, we use either the Black-Scholes option-pricing model or a binomial model to value the derivative instruments at inception and subsequent valuation dates. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The Company evaluates embedded conversion features within convertible debt under ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging to determine whether the embedded conversion feature(s) should be bifurcated from the host instrument and accounted for as a derivative at fair value with changes in fair value recorded in earnings. If the conversion feature does not require derivative treatment under ASC 815, the instrument is evaluated under ASC 470-20 Debt with
Conversion and Other Options for consideration of any beneficial conversion features.
As of November 30, 2021 and 2020, the fair value of embedded derivative liability measured at fair value on a recurring basis was approximately $0.9 million and $0, respectively.
Stock Based Compensation
Share-based payment awards are measured at grant-date fair value of the equity instruments that the Company is obligated to issue when the good has been delivered or the service has been rendered and any other conditions necessary to earn the right to benefit from the instruments have been satisfied. There was no cumulative effect of the adoption of this standard.
Share-based compensation cost is recorded for all option grants and awards of non-vested stock based on the grant date fair value of the award and is recognized over the service period required for the award.
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized in the consolidated financial statements based on the fair value of the awards granted. Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period, which generally represents the vesting period. We calculate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model at grant date.
We recognized general and administrative expenses of approximately $2.3 million and $6.6 million as a result of the shares, outstanding warrants and options issued to consultants and employees during the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development
We expense the cost of research and development as incurred. Research and development expenses comprise costs incurred in funding research and development activities, license fees, and other external costs. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity is performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when payment is made, in accordance with ASC 730, Research and Development. During the year ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, we incurred $1.1 million and $1.9 million in research and development expenses.
Recent accounting pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements, see Note 3, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8, Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results of Operation for the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020
Net Sales
During the year ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, we recognized approximately $196,000 and $30,000 of revenue from sales of Strontium89, respectively. This increase was due to more doses being sold during the year ended November 30, 2021 compared to the prior year.
Cost of Sales
During the year ended November 30, 2021, we recognized approximately $247,000 in cost of sales. These costs were related to raw materials cost, manufacturing cost, distribution cost and write-offs of expired inventory.
During the year ended November 30, 2020, we recognized approximately $326,000 in cost of sales. These costs were related to raw materials cost, manufacturing cost and distribution cost and write-offs of expired inventory.
The decrease in cost of sales was due to less expired inventories being written-off during the year ended November 30, 2021 compared to the prior year.
Operating expenses
We incur various costs and expenses in the execution of our business. The decrease in operating expenses was mainly due to significantly less stock-based compensation recognized in the year ended November 30, 2021compared to the 2020 fiscal year. We recognized approximately $2.3 million and $6.6 million of stock-based compensation in general and administrative expense during year ended November 30, 2021and 2020, respectively. We had more common shares, options and warrants granted in 2020 compared to 2021. In addition, the common stock price traded relatively higher in 2020 compared to 2021.
Interest expense
The following table summarizes interest expense incurred during the year ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively (amounts are rounded to nearest thousand):
Change in fair value of embedded derivatives
We recognized losses of approximately $304,000 and $19,000 resulting from the change in fair value of embedded contingent put options in convertible notes during the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020 respectively. The fluctuation is mainly due to the change in stock price during the reporting periods.
Loss on debt extinguishment
We recognized a loss of approximately $41,000 and $31,000 due to the conversion of outstanding debentures into shares of common stock during the year ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net loss
During the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses of approximately $8.2 million and $13.5 million, respectively. Our management expects to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, due to our need to continue to establish a broader pipeline of assets, expenditure on R&D and to implement other aspects of our business plan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We prepared the accompanying consolidated financial statements assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business.
We have not yet established a significant ongoing source of revenues and in both the short- and long-term, we must cover our operating through debt and equity financings to allow us to continue as a going concern. We had approximately $0.3 million in cash as of November 30, 2021. Our ability to continue as a going concern depends on our ability to obtain adequate capital to fund operating losses until we generate adequate cash flows from operations to fund our operating costs and obligations. If we are unable to obtain adequate capital, we could be forced to cease operations.
We depend upon our ability, and will continue to attempt, to secure equity and/or debt financing. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available on acceptable terms, or at all. Our management determined that there was substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the consolidated financial statements were issued, and management’s concerns about our ability to continue as a going concern within the year following this report persist.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from this uncertainty.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash for the periods addressed in this report:
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $4.3 million for the year ended November 30, 2021 as compared to approximately $6.2 million for the year ended November 30, 2020. During the year ended November 30, 2021, operating activities used $4.3 million of cash, resulting from a net loss of $8.2 million, partially offset by $2.3 million of share-based compensation, change in fair value of embedded conversion options of $0.3 million, loss on debt extinguishment of $41,000, and non-cash interest expense resulting from accretion of debt discounts of $0.4 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.8 million. During the year ended November 30, 2020, net cash used in operating activities results from the net loss of approximately $13.5 million for the year ended November 30, 2020, partially offset by $6.6 million of share-based compensation, change in fair value of embedded conversion options of $19,000, and non-cash interest expense resulting from accretion of debt discounts of $0.1 million and changes in our operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.8 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $4.5 million for the year ended November 30, 2021 as compared to approximately $6.2 million for the year ended November 30, 2020. During the year ended November 30, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities relates to proceeds received from the issuance of common stock and debentures, and is offset by the repayment of notes to related parties. During the year ended November 30, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities relates to proceeds received from the issuance of preferred shares, shares of common stock and warrants, and convertible debentures.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Legal
Periodically, we review the status of significant matters, if any exist, and assesses its potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal claim is considered probable and the amount can be estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Legal proceedings are subject to uncertainties, and the outcomes are difficult to predict. Because of such uncertainties, accruals are based on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to pending claims and litigation.
Advisory Agreements
We entered into customary consulting arrangements with various counterparties to provide consulting services, business development and investor relations services, pursuant to which we agreed to issue shares of common stock as services are received.
Lease Agreement
In December 2016, we entered into a lease agreement for office space located in Cayman Islands for $30,000 per annum. The initial term of the agreement ended in December 2019 and has been further renewed for another three years. This agreement does not identify a specific asset and does not convey the use of substantially all of the shared office capacity. As such, this agreement does not contain a lease under ASC 842. We recognize monthly license payments as incurred over the term of the arrangement.
Rent expense is classified within general and administrative expenses on a straight-line basis.
License Agreements
Mannin
On October 29, 2015, we entered into a Patent and Technology License and Purchase Option Agreement (“Exclusive License”) with a vendor whereby we were granted a worldwide, exclusive, license on, and option to, acquire certain intellectual property (“Mannin IP”) which initially focused on developing a first-in-class eye drop treatment for glaucoma within the four-year term of the Exclusive License. Pursuant to the exclusive license from Mannin, we may purchase the Mannin IP within six years of entry into the agreement. During the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, we respectively incurred approximately $0.8 million and $1.0 million of research and development expenses under our license with Mannin. The purchase option under the license agreement has now expired.
On March 26, 2019, we entered into an amendment to the Patent and Technology License and Purchase Option Agreement that it initially entered into with Mannin Research Inc. on October 29, 2015 (the “Mannin Agreement”). Under such amendment, the term of the option granted under the Mannin Agreement was extended to October 29, 2021 in exchange for our issuing 100,000 shares to Mannin Research Inc. on April 9, 2019.
On September 1, 2020, we further amended the license agreement allowing Mannin to grant an exclusive license to Mannin GmbH (its wholly owned German subsidiary) in order fully take advantage of the German government grant to Mannin. The agreement also confirms our ongoing investment into the Tie2 platform to create, and therefore maintain economic value for us and our shareholders. We have agreed to contribute funds in Mannin GmbH. We paid Mannin $1.5 million in cash payable in three instalments. In addition, we paid to Mannin $0.75 million in shares of our common stock valued as of June 15, 2020, in full satisfaction of R&D payables, contracted by Mannin in development of the Tie2 platform. We continue to have the right to 100% of the revenues derived from the Mannin Tie2 technology platform, until such time that Mannin and its subsidiaries have independently raised at least $2 million in funds, expected to happen in 2022, at which time the parties have agreed to a profit share structure reducing our future capital commitments to Mannin R&D.
During the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, we incurred approximately $0.8 million and $1.0 million, respectively, in research and development expenses to fund the costs of development of the eye drop treatment for glaucoma pursuant to the Exclusive License.
Washington University
On March 9, 2019, we entered into an Exclusive License Agreement with Washington University for license of a diagnostic marker for determining the severity of glaucoma using the expression levels of Growth Differentiation Factor 15. The agreement calls for us to pay an initial fee of approximately $88,000, pay annual maintenance fees ranging from $15,000 to $75,000, make additional payments upon the following milestones:
·The first commercial sale of a companion diagnostic product;
·Initiation of a clinical trial for a diagnostic product to support FDA PMA or 510(k) regulatory approval or the foreign equivalent;
·PMA or 510(k) regulatory approval by the FDA or the foreign equivalent; and
·The first commercial sale of a diagnostic product.
In additional to the above payments, royalty payments based upon sales of a companion diagnostic product or diagnostic product are required.
Related Party Transactions
We entered into consulting agreements with certain management personnel and stockholders for consulting and legal services. Consulting and legal expenses resulting from such agreements were included within general and administrative expenses in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations as follows:
On February 1, 2021, the Company issued 35,000 shares to Mr. Rosenstadt, the Company’s Chief Legal Officer and director, for his services performed in connection with December 2020 financing. The fair value was approximate $35,000, which was recorded as part of debt issuance cost to the 2020 Debenture (see note 5).
On April 16, 2021, the Company entered into two unsecured promissory note agreements (the “Notes”) with certain management personnel for an aggregate principal amount of $30,000. The Notes bear interest at 5% per annum and are payable by August 31, 2021. During the quarter ended August 31, 2021, the Company made full repayment of $30,000 to the management personnel, including all outstanding interest.
During the year ended November 30, 2020, we issued 225,000 warrants at fair value of $0.4 million to Mr. Rosenstadt, our Chief Legal Officer and director, for his services performed in connection with preferred stock offering and S-1 registration filling.
On November 30, 2020, we modified an aggregate of 525,000 warrants that were originally granted to certain officers. The term of the warrants was extended for 3 years from the original expiration date. We immediately recognized approximately $0.4 million of incremental stock-based compensation for the modifications on November 30, 2020.