Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional information.
Overview
We are a diversified life sciences company focused on developing treatments for adult and pediatric cancers with potential for Orphan Drug designation, while also commercializing diagnostics. Our cancer therapeutics pipeline includes QN-302, QN-247 and RAS-F. Our investigational QN-302 compound is a small molecule G4 selective transcription inhibitor with strong binding affinity to G4s prevalent in cancer cells. Such binding could, by stabilizing the G4s against “unwinding,” help inhibit cancer cell proliferation. QN-247 is a DNA coated gold nanoparticle cancer drug candidate that has the potential to target various types of cancer; the nanoparticle conjugate technology is similar to the core nanoparticle coating technology used in our blood-testing diagnostic products. The foundational aptamer of QN-247, QN-165 (formerly referred to as AS1411), which the Company has deprioritized as a drug candidate for treating COVID-19 and other viral-based infectious diseases. RAS-F is a family of RAS oncogene protein-protein interaction inhibitor small molecules for preventing mutated RAS genes’ proteins from binding to their effector proteins; preventing this binding could stop tumor growth, especially in RAS-driven tumors such as pancreatic, colorectal and lung cancers. We are also identifying strategic partnering opportunities for STARS, a DNA/RNA-based therapeutic device product concept for removing precisely targeted tumor-produced and viral compounds from circulating blood.
Because our therapeutic candidates are still in the pre-clinical development stage, our only products that are currently commercially available are the FastPack System diagnostic instruments and test kits. Our FastPack System diagnostic instruments and test kits are sold commercially primarily in the United States, as well as certain European countries. The FastPack System menu includes rapid point-of-care diagnostic tests for cancer, men’s health, hormone function, and vitamin D status. We have always utilized a “razor and blades” pricing strategy, providing analyzers to our customers (physician offices, clinics and small hospitals) at low cost in order to increase sales volumes of higher-margin test kits. We currently rely on our diagnostics distribution partner Sekisui for most FastPack distribution worldwide pursuant to a distribution agreement, but maintain direct distribution for certain house accounts, including selling our total testosterone test kits to Low T, the largest men’s health group in the United States, with 40 locations. The distribution agreement with Sekisui will expire on March 31, 2022, at which time the services currently provided by Sekisui will revert to us and we will recognize 100% of the revenue from the sales of our FastPack diagnostic instruments and test kits. We have licensed and technology-transferred our FastPack System technology to Yi Xin Zhen Duan Jishu (Suzhou) Ltd. for the China diagnostics market.
We do not expect to be profitable before products from our therapeutics pipeline are commercialized, because we foresee that research and development expenses on the therapeutics programs will significantly exceed the profits, if any, that we might have from our diagnostics products. To experience losses while therapeutic products are still under development is, of course, typical for biotechnology companies.
Our financial statements do not separate out our diagnostics-related activities and our therapeutics-related activities. Although to date all our reported revenue is diagnostics-related, our reported expenses represent the total of our diagnostics-related and therapeutics-related expenses.
Completion of Reverse Recapitalization Transaction with Ritter
On May 22, 2020, we completed a “reverse recapitalization” transaction with Qualigen, Inc. (not to be confused with the Company); our merger subsidiary merged with and into Qualigen, Inc. with Qualigen, Inc. surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. The Company, which had previously been known as Ritter Pharmaceuticals, Inc., was renamed Qualigen Therapeutics, Inc., and the former stockholders of Qualigen, Inc. acquired, via the recapitalization, a substantial majority of the shares of the Company. Ritter/Qualigen Therapeutics common stock, which was previously traded on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol “RTTR,” commenced trading on Nasdaq, on a post-reverse-stock-split adjusted basis, under the ticker symbol “QLGN” on May 26, 2020.
Because Qualigen, Inc. was the accounting acquirer in the reverse recapitalization transaction, all references to financial figures of “the Company” presented in the accompanying financial statements and Notes are those of Qualigen, Inc.; the corresponding figures of Ritter Pharmaceuticals, Inc. have been disregarded. Moreover, references in this Annual Report to “our” pre-May 22, 2020-merger history, securities and agreements are references to the pre-May 22, 2020 merger history, securities and agreements of Qualigen, Inc., except where otherwise expressly specified.
We are no longer pursuing the gastrointestinal disease treatment business on which Ritter Pharmaceuticals, Inc. had focused before the reverse recapitalization transaction.
Distribution and Development Agreement with Sekisui
In May 2016, through our wholly-owned diagnostics subsidiary Qualigen, Inc., we entered into a Distribution and Development Agreement (the “Distribution Agreement”) with Sekisui. Under the Distribution Agreement, Sekisui currently serves as the exclusive worldwide distributor for FastPack products (although we retain certain specific accounts for direct transactions). Sekisui’s exclusive distribution arrangements are effective until March 31, 2022.
Under the Distribution Agreement, we began development of a proposed “FastPack 2.0” product line, which if successfully introduced by us would have been distributed by Sekisui. Between May 2016 and January 2018, Sekisui paid us a total of approximately $5.5 million upon the achievement of specified development milestones.
Under this program, we developed a FastPack 2.0 diagnostic test for a new whole blood vitamin D assay, and we then conducted a clinical trial of it in March 2019. We determined in May 2019 that it was uncertain whether the results of the trial would enable the test to receive FDA approval, and our FastPack 2.0 project with Sekisui was discontinued. Currently no further FastPack 2.0 analyzer or test development is ongoing, and we have licensed and transferred our FastPack 2.0 technology to Yi Xin Zhen Duan Jishu (Suzhou) Ltd. for them to further develop and commercialize.
We became obligated to pay Sekisui $0.9 million for $0.5 million in research and development costs advanced by Sekisui to us and for the reimbursement of $0.4 million in certain out-of-pocket development and preclinical study expenses incurred by Sekisui. We satisfied these amounts (plus interest) by payment in full on July 21, 2020.
The Distribution Agreement with Sekisui is scheduled to expire on March 31, 2022, at which time the services currently provided by Sekisui will revert to us and we will recognize 100% of the revenue from the sales of our FastPack diagnostic instruments and test kits.
Technology Transfer Agreement with Yi Xin
Through our wholly-owned diagnostics subsidiary Qualigen, Inc., we entered into a Technology Transfer Agreement dated as of October 7, 2020 with Yi Xin, of Suzhou, China, which authorizes Yi Xin to develop, manufacture and sell new generations of diagnostic test systems based on our core FastPack technology. In addition, the Technology Transfer Agreement authorizes Yi Xin to manufacture and sell our current generations of FastPack System diagnostic products (1.0, IP and PRO) in China.
Under the Technology Transfer Agreement, we have received total net cash payments of approximately $670,000, of which approximately $632,000 is classified as license revenue, and approximately $38,000 is classified as product sales on the statement of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. We will receive low- to mid-single-digit royalties on any future new-generations and current-generations product sales by Yi Xin.
We have provided technology transfer and patent/know-how license rights to facilitate Yi Xin’s development and commercialization.
We have provided Yi Xin the exclusive rights for China - which is a market we have not otherwise entered - both for Yi Xin’s new generations of FastPack-based products and for Yi Xin-manufactured versions of our existing FastPack product lines. Yi Xin will also have the right to sell its new generations of FastPack-based diagnostic test systems throughout the world (but not to or toward current customers of our existing generations of FastPack products); any such non-China sales would, until March 31, 2022, need to be through Sekisui. After March 31, 2022, Yi Xin will have the right to sell Yi Xin-manufactured versions of existing FastPack 1.0, IP and PRO product lines worldwide (other than in the United States and other than to or toward current non-US customers of those products). Yi Xin will also have the right, after March 31, 2022, to buy Qualigen-manufactured FastPack 1.0, IP and PRO products from us at distributor prices for resale in and for the United States (but not to or toward current U.S. customers of those products). We did not license Yi Xin to sell in the United States market any Yi Xin-manufactured versions of those legacy FastPack product lines, even after March 31, 2022.
We agreed in the Technology Transfer Agreement that we would not, after March 31, 2022, seek new FastPack customers outside the United States.
Yi Xin is a newly-formed company and is subject to many risks. There can be no assurance that Yi Xin will successfully commercialize any products or that we will receive any royalties from Yi Xin.
Warrant Liabilities
In 2004, Qualigen, Inc. issued Series C preferred stock warrants to investors and brokers in connection with a private placement. These warrants were subsequently extended and survived the May 2020 Ritter reverse recapitalization transaction and are now exercisable for Qualigen Therapeutics common stock. These warrants were so-called “exploding warrants” - as they contained a provision that if Qualigen, Inc. issued shares (except in certain defined scenarios) at a price below the warrants’ exercise price, the exercise price would be re-set to such new price and the number of shares underlying the warrants would be increased in the same proportion as the exercise price decrease. For accounting purposes, such “exploding warrants” give rise to “warrant liabilities”. Although the fair value of the warrants was immaterial at March 31, 2020, the operation of the “double-ratchet” provisions in these “exploding warrants” in connection with the reverse-recapitalization transaction now allow the holders to exercise for a significantly higher number of shares than before and at a significantly lower price than the current market price of our shares. Accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) require us to recognize the fair value of these warrants as warrant liabilities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and to reflect period-to-period changes in the fair value of the warrant liabilities on our Consolidated Statements of Operations. The size of these warrant liabilities was quite large ($1.7 million and $8.3 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively) and caused a significant distortion of our Consolidated Balance Sheets and our results of operations for these periods. Because this fair value will be determined each quarter on a “mark-to-market” basis, this item could result in significant variability in our future quarterly and annual Consolidated Statement of Operations and Consolidated Balance Sheets based on changes in our public market common stock price. Pursuant to U.S. GAAP, a quarter-to-quarter increase in our stock price would result in an increase (possibly quite large) in the fair value of the warrant liabilities and a quarter-to-quarter decrease in our stock price would result in a decrease (possibly quite large) in the fair value of the warrant liabilities. Approximately 53% of these “exploding warrants” have been exercised as of December 31, 2021, which reduced the amplitude of this variability. (There were 2,481,614 of these “exploding warrants” outstanding at December 31, 2021 and 3,378,596 of these “exploding warrants” outstanding at December 31, 2020.) We will continue to encourage the holders of these warrants to exercise them, and if the number of outstanding “exploding warrants” is further reduced the potential amplitude of the changes in the warrant liabilities will correspondingly be further reduced.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 has had, and will continue to have, adverse impacts on the U.S. and world economy, health care systems, personnel availability, supply chains, social and political assumptions, and capital markets. Those impacts are expected to be especially serious for smaller companies such as ours. Our sales of diagnostic products fell significantly in the nine months ended December 31, 2020 (and net loss increased significantly), as deferral of patients’ non-emergency visits to physician offices, clinics and small hospitals sharply reduced demand for FastPack tests. A resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic, or the emergence of new vaccine resistant variants of COVID-19 or some other infectious disease could have a similar impact on our future operations, although the degree of impact will probably depend on the extent of any lockdowns and similar actions taken in response to the pandemic as well as any personal and societal behavior changes arising from psychological factors.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This discussion and analysis is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of warrant liabilities, stock-based compensation, amortization and depreciation, inventory reserves, allowances for doubtful accounts and returns, and warranty costs. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements appearing in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations:
● Revenue recognition
● Allowance for doubtful accounts and returns
● Inventory
● Research and development
● Warrant liabilities and stock-based compensation
● Lease accounting
● Long lived assets
On January 1, 2021, the Company early adopted ASU No. 2021-04 Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) and ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”6, (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity.”
During the nine months ended December 31, 2020, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and Accounting Standards Codification Topic 842, Leases. The application of other existing accounting policies was not changed as of and for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Twelve-Month Year Ended December 31, 2021 (“Fiscal 2021”) and Nine Months Ended December 31, 2020 (the “Transition Period”)
The following table summarizes our results of operations for Fiscal 2021 and the Transition Period:
Revenues
Our operating revenues are primarily generated from sales of diagnostic tests. Revenues for Fiscal 2021 were $5.6 million compared to $2.8 million for the Transition Period, an increase of $2.8 million, or 98%. This increase was primarily due to $2.2 million in increased diagnostic product sales, as well the recognition of approximately $0.6 million in license revenue from Yi Xin under the Technology Transfer Agreement, compared with no license revenue in the Transition Period.
Net product sales
Net product sales are primarily generated from sales of diagnostic tests. Net product sales for Fiscal 2021 and the Transition Period were approximately $5.0 million and $2.8 million, respectively, representing an increase of approximately $2.2 million, or 76%. This improvement was due to a recovery from the effects of COVID-19 pandemic during the prior year as well as the fact that the Transition Period had only nine months versus a full twelve months in Fiscal 2021.
License Revenue
License revenue for Fiscal 2021 was $0.6 million, due to the recognition of revenue from Yi Xin under the Technology Transfer Agreement. There was no license revenue for the Transition Period.
Expenses
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales increased to $4.3 million for Fiscal 2021, or 86% of net product sales, compared to $2.6 million for the Transition Period, or 93% of net product sales. The increase in dollars (even after recognizing and adjusting for the fact that the Transition Period had only nine months and Fiscal 2021 had twelve months) and decrease in percentage of net product sales were primarily due to increased unit sales of product, which resulted in economies of scale.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased sharply from $7.1 million for the Transition Period to $11.7 million for Fiscal 2021. This increase was primarily due to $2.1 million in employee/director stock-based compensation expense, a $0.7 million increase in professional fees (including $0.3 million in stock-based compensation), a $0.6 million increase in insurance expenses, and a $1.2 million increase in payroll expenses, primarily due to the addition of a new President and Chief Strategy Officer position, higher strategic consulting and proxy distribution costs, as well as the fact that the Transition Period had only nine months versus a full twelve months in Fiscal 2021.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs include therapeutic and diagnostic research and product development costs. Research and development costs increased sharply from $3.3 million for the Transition Period to $11.7 million for Fiscal 2021. Of the $3.3 million of research and development costs for the Transition Period (nine months), $2.5 million (75%) was attributable to therapeutics and $0.8 million (25%) was attributable to diagnostics. Of the $11.7 million of research and development costs for Fiscal 2021 (twelve months), $10.4 million (88%) was attributable to therapeutics and $1.3 million (12%) was attributable to diagnostics.
The increase in diagnostic research and development costs was primarily due to $0.3 million in increased stock-based compensation expense, and $0.2 million resulting from the fact that the Transition Period had only nine months and Fiscal 2021 had twelve months. The increase in therapeutics research and development costs was primarily due to an increase of $5.6 million in expenses related to the potential application of QN-165 for the treatment of COVID-19 ($4.3 million in drug compound manufacturing costs, and a $1.3 million increase in other pre-clinical research costs), as well as pre-clinical research and development cost increases of approximately $0.7 million for QN-247, $0.5 million for RAS, and an increase of approximately $0.8 million in payroll-related expenses primarily due to the addition of a new Chief Medical Officer position, and $0.3 million in increased patent costs for Fiscal 2021 (twelve months), all as compared to the Transition Period (nine months). On August 11, 2021, the FDA informed us that additional pre-clinical studies would be required in order for the FDA to clear the IND application that we filed on July 13, 2021 for clinical studies of QN-165 for the treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized patients. We have since decided to deprioritize this QN-165 program.
For the future, we expect our therapeutic research and development costs to continue to significantly outweigh our diagnostic research and development costs, and to be relatively lower in periods when we are focusing on pre-clinical activities and meaningfully higher in periods when we are provisioning for and conducting clinical trials, if any.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses for Fiscal 2021 increased to approximately $0.5 million as compared to $0.3 million for the Transition Period, primarily due to an increase in payroll-related expenses, and the fact that the Transition Period had only nine months and Fiscal 2021 had twelve months.
Impairment Loss
During the Transition Period, we evaluated the ongoing value of construction in progress related to new FastPack manufacturing equipment. Based on this evaluation, we determined the asset was impaired and wrote it down by $1.4 million to its estimated fair value of $0. There was no impairment loss for Fiscal 2021.
Other Expense
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
During Fiscal 2021 we experienced (primarily due to a decrease in our stock price during the period) a $4.7 million gain in other income because of the change in fair value of the warrant liabilities arising from our “exploding warrants” series (containing a “double-ratchet” provision) issued by Qualigen, Inc. many years ago to brokers and investors in connection with a 2004 private placement. The estimated fair value of these warrants decreased to $1.7 million as of December 31, 2021 from $8.3 million as of December 30, 2020. For the Transition Period, the loss on change in fair value of warrant liabilities was $8.3 million due to an associated increase in the market price of our common stock. Typically, a decline in our stock price would result in a decline in the fair value of our warrant liabilities, generating a gain, while an increase in our stock price would result in an increase in the fair value of our warrant liabilities, generating a loss.
Because the fair value of the warrant liabilities will be determined each quarter on a “mark-to-market” basis, this item is likely to continue to result in significant variability in our future quarterly and annual Consolidated Statements of Operations based on unpredictable changes in our public market common stock price and the number of warrants outstanding at the end of each quarter.
Gain on Loan Extinguishment
We recognized a $0.5 million gain on loan extinguishment in the Transition Period when the federal government forgave our CARES Act loan. There was no similar item in Fiscal 2021.
Interest (Income) Expense, Net
There was $43,000 in net interest income during Fiscal 2021 versus net interest expense of $48,000 during the Transition Period. During the Transition Period, interest on $1.7 million principal amount of convertible notes payable ceased to accrue when they automatically converted in May 2020 upon the closing of the reverse recapitalization transaction. In addition, between April 1, 2020 and December 31, 2020 we paid off our revolving factoring line of credit facility and repaid approximately $0.9 million to Sekisui. During the second quarter of Fiscal 2021 we paid off our Equipment Financing Agreements, which eliminated all of our notes payable. Interest income was generated during both periods from cash in interest bearing bank depository accounts.
Other (Income) Expense, Net
There was $5,000 of other income during Fiscal 2021, and approximately $256,000 in other income during the Transition period, of which $250,000 resulted from a license option fee for our FastPack 2.0 technology.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $17.5 million of cash. However, we have suffered recurring losses from operations and expect to continue to do so. Based on our current cash position, and assuming currently planned expenditures and level of operations, we believe we have sufficient capital to fund operations for the twelve-month period subsequent to the date of this Annual Report.
As a pre-clinical development-stage therapeutics biotechnology company, we expect to continue to have net losses and negative cash flow from operations, which over time will challenge our liquidity. There is no assurance that profitable operations will ever be achieved, or, if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. In order to fully execute our business plan, including full clinical trials of therapeutic drug candidates, we will require significant additional financing. There can be no assurance that further financing can be obtained on favorable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain funding, we could be required to delay, reduce or eliminate research and development programs, product portfolio expansion or future commercialization efforts, which could adversely affect our business prospects.
Our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021 included $1.7 million of warrant liabilities. We do not consider that the warrant liabilities constrain our liquidity, as a practical matter. Our current liabilities as of December 31, 2021 included $0.9 million of accounts payable and $1.8 million of accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
On December 15, 2021, our wholly-owned subsidiary Qualigen, Inc. entered into a Second Amendment to Lease with Bond Ranch LP. This Amendment extended the Company’s triple-net leasehold on its existing 22,624-square-foot headquarters/manufacturing facility at 2042 Corte del Nogal, Carlsbad, California for the 61-month period of November 1, 2022 to November 30, 2027. Over the 61 months, the base rent payable will total $1,950,710; however, the base rent for the first 12 months of the 61-month period will be only $335,966. Additionally, Qualigen, Inc. is entitled to a $339,360 tenant improvement allowance. See Note 9 of the consolidated financial statements for additional details.
We have no material contractual obligations not fully recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheet or fully disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
We have obligations under various license and sponsored research agreements to make future payments to third parties that become due and payable on the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones (such as the start of a clinical trial, filing for product approval with the FDA or other regulatory agencies, product approval by the FDA or other regulatory agencies, product launch or product sales) or on the sublicense of our rights to another party. We have not included these commitments on our balance sheet because the achievement and timing of these events is not fixed and determinable. Certain milestones are in advance of receipt of revenue from the sale of products and, therefore, we may require additional debt or equity capital to make such payments.
These commitments include multiple license and sponsored research agreements with UofL Research Foundation (“ULRF”). Under these agreements, we will take over development, regulatory approval and commercialization of various drug compounds from ULRF and are responsible for maintenance of the related intellectual property portfolio. We agreed to reimburse ULRF for sponsored research expenses of up to $805,000 and prior patent costs of up to $200,000 for QN-247. As of December 31, 2021 we had up to $136,000 remaining due under this sponsored research agreement for QN-247. We also agreed to reimburse ULRF for sponsored research expenses of up to $1.8 million and prior patent costs of up to $112,000 for RAS. As of December 31, 2021 we had up to $0.7 million remaining due under this sponsored research agreement for RAS. This sponsored research agreement for RAS was subsequently amended in March 2022 (see Note 15). We agreed to reimburse ULRF for sponsored research expenses of up to $430,000 and prior patent costs of up to $24,000 for QN-165. As of December 31, 2021 we had no remaining amounts due under this sponsored research agreement for QN-165. For these agreements we are required to make patent maintenance payments and payments based upon development, regulatory and commercial milestones for any products covered by the in-licensed intellectual property. The maximum aggregate milestone payments we may be obligated to make per product are $5 million. We will also be required to pay a royalty on net sales of products covered by the in-licensed intellectual property in the low single digits. The royalty is subject to reduction for any third-party payments required to be made, with a minimum floor in the low single digits. We have the right to sublicense our rights under these agreements, and we will be required to pay a percentage of any sublicense income.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business, including with clinical sites, contract research organizations, and other professional service providers for the conduct of clinical trials, contract manufacturers for the production of our product candidates, contract research service providers for preclinical research studies, professional consultants for expert advice and vendors for the sourcing of clinical and laboratory supplies and materials. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the significant sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the periods set forth below:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $14.7 million of cash, primarily resulting from a net loss of $17.9 million. Cash flows from operating activities (as opposed to net loss) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were impacted by a $5.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, a $1.3 million decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets, a $1.0 million increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities and a $0.4 million increase in accounts payable, due to higher costs related to therapeutics research and development. The decrease in prepaid expenses reflected in the statements of cash flows from operating activities was primarily due to the expensing during the period of $1.2 million of previous prepayments to STA Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of WuXi AppTec, which was our manufacturer of QN-165 drug compounds. Cash flows from operating activities (as opposed to net loss) for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were negatively impacted by a $4.7 million gain on change in fair value of warrant liabilities (as described above), and a $0.4 million decrease in deferred revenue primarily resulting from recognition of Yi Xin license revenue.
During the Transition Period, operating activities used $10.2 million of cash, resulting from a net loss of $19.5 million, largely offset by the $8.3 million loss on change in fair value of warrant liabilities. Cash flows from operating activities (as opposed to net loss) for the Transition Period were impacted by the $8.3 million loss on change in fair value of warrant liabilities (as described above), $2.8 million in employee/director stock-based compensation expense, a $1.4 million impairment loss on construction in progress and a $0.4 million write-off of patents and licenses. Cash flows from operating activities (as opposed to net loss) for the Transition Period were negatively impacted by a $1.5 million increase in prepaid expenses, payment of $0.9 million owed to Sekisui, a $0.5 million gain on CARES Act loan extinguishment and a $0.4 million decrease in accounts payable. The increase in prepaid expenses reflected in the statements of cash flows from operating activities was primarily due to $1.2 million of upfront deposits paid to STA Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of WuXi AppTec, which was our manufacturer of QN-165 drug compounds.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During Fiscal 2021, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $0.1 million, primarily related to the purchase of property and equipment.
During the Transition Period, net cash used in investing activities was $0.1 million, primarily related to purchase of property and equipment, offset by cash and cash equivalents acquired in the May 2020 reverse recapitalization.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for Fiscal 2021 was approximately $8.4 million, due to $8.8 million of proceeds from sales of equity securities in a registered-direct offering to several institutional investors, and $0.5 million of net proceeds from warrant exercises, offset by $0.7 million in payments for offering costs related to the registered-direct offering and $0.1 million of principal payments on notes payable.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the Transition Period was $34.1 million, due to $34.0 million of proceeds from a reverse-recapitalization-time equity capital raise and later sales of equity securities in three registered-direct offerings to an institutional investor, $1.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of notes payable (including a $0.5 million CARES Act loan that ultimately was forgiven) and $1.3 million of net proceeds from warrant exercises, offset by $1.4 million in payments for offering costs related to the three registered-direct offerings and $1.3 million of principal payment of notes payable.