Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
This discussion and analysis generally covers our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, including year-over-year comparisons versus the year ended December 31, 2020. Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Overview
We are a clinical stage biopharmaceutical company focused on novel therapeutic approaches to improve the lives of patients diagnosed with Alzheimer’s and other degenerative diseases. Our company was founded on the seminal discovery of the presence of Porphyromonas gingivalis, or P. gingivalis, and its secreted toxic virulence factor proteases, called gingipains. Our evidence demonstrates gingipains are tied to neuro degeneration and inflammation in humans and animal models. Cortexyme’s expanding portfolio of gingipain inhibitors are orally administered, brain-penetrating small molecules. Our pipeline includes proprietary drug candidates for the treatment of CNS disorders including Alzheimer’s disease, oncology applications designed to the development of oral squamous cell carcinoma, as well as for the treatment of underserved and chronic conditions like periodontitis. Our pipeline includes a proprietary irreversible protease inhibitor under development for the treatment of coronavirus infection.
Atuzaginstat Clinical Hold
On February 12, 2021 we received a letter from the FDA stating that a partial clinical hold has been placed on atuzaginstat (COR388) impacting the open-label extension (OLE) phase of our ongoing Phase 2/3 study, the GAIN Trial. Under the hold, no new participants were enrolled in the OLE and enrolled OLE participants were discontinued. Participants in the fully enrolled (N=643) double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized phase of the GAIN Trial continued to receive study drug at their assigned dose. The partial clinical hold was initiated following the review of hepatic adverse events in the atuzaginstat (COR388) trial by the FDA. These events have been reversible and without any known long-term adverse effects for the participants.
On January 25, 2022, we received a letter from the FDA Division of Neurology 1 placing a full clinical hold on atuzaginstat (COR388) IND. We will prioritize the development of our next generation gingipain inhibitor, COR588, in Alzheimer’s disease. We believe atuzaginstat (COR388) holds therapeutic potential in non-CNS indications, including Oncology and Periodontitis. We will continue to leverage our proprietary science and pioneering pipeline through both internal and external opportunities.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the full clinical hold, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
To date, our employees, vendors and clinical trial sites have been able to complete our GAIN clinical trial, advance our Phase 1 clinical trial for COR588 and conduct other preclinical and IND enabling studies for our other pipeline assets. At this time the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has not resulted in changes to our previously stated analysis timelines. We are continuing to assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our expenses, preclinical operations and clinical trials. Our office-based employees began working primarily from home since mid-March 2020, while ensuring essential
staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including maintaining key personnel in our lab facility. We have implemented plans to enable all employees to voluntarily return to work in our offices and lab facility which include safety protocols, such as face coverings, social distancing, frequent cleaning, and COVID-19 testing. Employee have been gradually returning to the office on a voluntary basis since June 2021. We continue to assess the risks which take into account applicable public health authority and local government guidelines and are designed to ensure community and employee safety.
However, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to rapidly evolve and even if our employees more broadly return to work in our offices and lab facility, we may have to resume a more restrictive remote work model, whether as a result of spikes or surges in COVID-19 infection or hospitalization rates or public authority mandates. We are not currently experiencing any significant supply chain disruptions due to COVID-19. We have diversified our vendor relationships geographically for both starting materials and manufacturing. However, in the future, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, may result in the inability of some of our suppliers to deliver drug supplies on a timely basis. We have taken and continues to take proactive measures to maintain the integrity of our ongoing clinical trial. Despite these efforts, the COVID-19 pandemic could impact timelines, subject follow up visits and study completion. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation and its impact on the ability to continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, our product candidates.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this report.
Financial Overview
Since commencing material operations in 2014, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to building our research and development capabilities, establishing our corporate infrastructure and most recently, executing our Phase 1a, Phase 1b and Phase 2/3 clinical trials of atuzaginstat (COR388) and our Phase I SAD/MAD clinical trial of COR588.
To date, we have not generated any revenue and we have never been profitable. We have incurred net losses since the commencement of our operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $236.6 million. We incurred a net loss of $89.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we obtain marketing approval for and commercialize a drug candidate, and we cannot assure you that we will ever generate significant revenue or profits.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of convertible promissory notes and redeemable convertible preferred stock and common stock. From inception through December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $294.9 million from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, convertible promissory notes and common stock.
On December 23, 2021, we entered into an Open Market Sales Agreement, with Jefferies, whereby we may sell up to $150.0 million in aggregate proceeds of common stock from time to time, through Jefferies as our sales agent. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had not sold any shares of common stock under this agreement.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $106.8 million and $133.8 million, respectively. The balances exclude long-term investments of $19.9 million and $50.5 million as of those same periods. Our cash equivalents, short-term and long-term investments are held in money market funds, certificate of deposits, repurchase agreements, investments in corporate debt securities, municipal debt obligations and government agency obligations.
Based on our current business plans including an analysis of our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021 we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our planned operations through 2024. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
In response to the reprioritization of our pipeline on February 2, 2022, the Board of Directors approved a cost reduction program to rationalize operations and allow continued support for the needs of the business following the clinical hold on atuzaginstat (COR388) Investigational New Drug application (IND 134303). Under the Plan, we plan to reduce headcount by approximately 53% through a reduction in our workforce. A majority of the reduction in force will take place by March 2022, and is expected that the remainder will be completed by July 2022. In connection with the cost reduction program, we estimate that we will incur expenses of up to approximately $2.1 million substantially all of which will be cash expenditures relating to severance through the third quarter of 2022. These estimates are subject to a number of assumptions, and actual results may differ.
We expect to incur substantial expenditures in the foreseeable future as we expand our pipeline and advance our drug candidates through clinical development, the regulatory approval process and, if approved, commercial launch activities. Specifically, in the near term we expect to incur substantial expenses relating to our ongoing and planned clinical trials, the development and validation of our manufacturing processes, and other development activities.
We will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our development strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of an approved drug, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other capital sources. Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of our drug candidates or delay our efforts to expand our product pipeline.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in connection with the research and development of our research programs. These expenses include payroll and personnel expenses, including stock-based compensation, for our research and product development employees, laboratory supplies, product licenses, consulting costs, contract research, preclinical and clinical expenses, allocated rent, facilities costs and depreciation. We expense both internal and external research and development costs as they are incurred. Non-refundable advance payments and deposits for services that will be used or rendered for future research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses and recognized as an expense as the related services are performed.
To date, substantially all of our research and development expenses have supported the advancement of atuzaginstat (COR388) and COR588 as well as our other drug candidates that are in early-stage preclinical development. We allocate direct costs to individual drug candidates and report them separately as they approach the clinical trial stage. We expect that at least for the foreseeable future, a substantial majority of our research and development expense will support the clinical and regulatory development of our gingipain protease inhibitors, atuzaginstat (COR388) and COR588.
We expect our research and development expenses to decrease as we complete our cost reduction program and explore other indications for this atuzaginstat (COR388) including oncology and periodontitis. We plan on advancing our second-generation lysine-gingipain inhibitor COR588 from Phase 1 to Phase 2 studies and advance other drug candidates into preclinical and clinical development. Over the next several quarters, we expect our preclinical, clinical and contract manufacturing expenses to decrease relative to what we have incurred to date and may explore external partnership to optimize our pipeline. Predicting the timing or the final cost to complete our clinical program or validation of our manufacturing and supply processes is difficult and delays may occur because of many factors.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of personnel-related costs, including payroll and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, human resources, business and corporate development, and other administrative functions, professional fees for legal, consulting, insurance and accounting services, allocated rent and other facilities costs, depreciation, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will decrease as we adjust the size of our business operations to support our research and development activities.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our short-term and long-term investments portfolio.
Other Expense, net
Other Expense, net consists primarily of the effects of foreign currency exchange rates.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of clinical trial and contract manufacturing expenses related to development of our protease inhibitors. Also included are personnel costs for our research and product development employees, non-personnel costs such as professional fees payable to third parties for preclinical studies and research services, laboratory supplies and equipment maintenance, product licenses, and other consulting costs.
We estimate preclinical and clinical study and research expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to arrangements with contract research organizations, or CROs that conduct and manage preclinical and clinical studies and research services on our behalf. We estimate these expenses based on regular reviews with internal management personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of services and the contracted fees to be paid for such services. Based upon the combined inputs of internal and external resources, if the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the original estimates, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrual is dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from clinical research organizations and other third-party vendors. Payments associated with licensing agreements to acquire exclusive licenses to develop, use, manufacture and commercialize products that have not reached technological feasibility and do not have alternate commercial use are expensed as incurred. Payments made to third parties under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services by the third parties are recorded as prepaid expenses until the services are rendered.
To date, there have been no material differences from our accrued estimated expenses to the actual clinical trial expenses; and our methodology and assumptions used in developing these estimates have not changed materially during the periods presented. Due to the nature of estimates, we cannot assure you that we will not make changes to our estimates in the future as we become aware of additional information about the status or conduct of our clinical studies and other research activities.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We measure and record compensation expense using the applicable accounting guidance for share-based payments related to stock options and performance-based awards granted to our directors and employees. The fair value of stock options is determined by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The fair value of performance stock option awards is estimated at the date of grant, using the Monte Carlo Simulation model. The Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo Simulation valuation models incorporate assumptions as to stock price volatility, the expected life of options or awards, a risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. In valuing our stock options and market-based stock awards, significant judgment is required in determining the expected volatility of our common stock and the expected life that individuals will hold their stock options prior to exercising. Expected volatility for stock options is based on the historical volatility of our own stock and the stock of companies within our defined peer group. Further, our expected volatility
may change in the future, which could substantially change the grant-date fair value of future awards and, ultimately, the expense we record.
We expense stock-based compensation for stock options and performance awards over the requisite service period. For awards with only a service condition, we expense stock-based compensation using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for the entire award. For awards with a market condition, we expense over the vesting period regardless of the value that the award recipients ultimately receive.
We estimate the fair value of stock-based compensation utilizing the Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo Simulation option-pricing models, which are impacted by the following variables:
Expected Term-We have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (generally 10 years).
Expected Volatility-Due to our limited operating history and a lack of company specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of our own stock and the stock of companies within our defined peer group. The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of our stock options.
Expected Dividend-We have not issued any dividends in our history and do not expect to issue dividends over the life of the options and therefore have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
Common Stock Valuations
The estimated fair value of the common stock underlying our stock options was determined at each grant date by our board of directors, with input from management. All options to purchase shares of our common stock are intended to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per-share fair value of our common stock underlying those options on the date of grant.
Prior to our IPO in May 2019, on each grant date, our board of directors made a reasonable determination of the fair value of our common stock based on the information known to us on the date of grant, upon a review of any recent events and their potential impact on the estimated fair value per share of the common stock, and timely valuations from an independent third-party valuation in accordance with guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation (the Practice Aid). The methodology to determine the fair value of our common stock included estimating the fair value of the enterprise using a market approach, which estimates the fair value of the company by including an estimation of the value of the business based on guideline public companies under a number of different scenarios. In determining the fair value of our common stock on each grant date, our board of directors considered numerous objective and subjective factors, including the results of independent third party valuations, external market conditions affecting the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industry and trends within the industry; our stage of development; the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; the prices at which we sold shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock; our financial condition and operating results, including our levels of available capital resources; the progress of our research and development efforts, our stage of development and business strategy; equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies; general U.S. market conditions and the lack of marketability of our common stock.
Following our IPO in May 2019, our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. Current income tax expense or benefit represents the amount of income taxes expected to be payable or refundable for the current year. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the consolidated financial statement reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when such items are expected to reverse. Deferred income tax assets are reduced, as necessary, by a valuation allowance when management determines it is more likely than not that some or all of the tax benefits will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. We assess all material positions taken in any income tax return, including all significant uncertain positions, in all tax years that are still subject to assessment or challenge by relevant taxing authorities. Assessing an uncertain tax position begins with the initial determination of the position’s sustainability and is measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. As of each balance sheet date, unresolved uncertain tax positions must be reassessed, and we will determine whether (i) the factors underlying the sustainability assertion have changed and (ii) the amount of the recognized tax benefit is still appropriate. The recognition and measurement of tax benefits requires significant judgment. Judgments concerning the recognition and measurement of a tax benefit might change as new information becomes available.
As of December 31, 2021, our total net deferred tax assets were $58.6 million. A valuation allowance is established against the net deferred tax assets to reduce their carrying value to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified as noncurrent along with the related valuation allowance. Due to a lack of earnings history, the net deferred tax assets have been fully offset by a valuation allowance. The deferred tax assets were primarily comprised of federal and state tax net operating losses, or NOLs. Utilization of NOLs may be limited by the “ownership change” rules, as defined in Section 382 of the Code. Similar rules may apply under state tax laws. Our ability to use our remaining NOLs may be further limited if we experience an ownership change in connection with future offerings or as a result of future changes in our stock ownership.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses:
Research and development expenses were $60.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $61.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an decrease of $0.5 million.
The costs for atuzaginstat (COR388) development, used in our GAIN Phase 2/3 clinical trial, decreased $16.5 million from the prior year due to a $15.7 million decrease in clinical trial costs for atuzaginstat (COR388) and $3.1 million decrease in drug manufacturing costs related to atuzaginstat (COR388) as the GAIN clinical trial substantially concluded early in the fourth quarter of 2021. These decreases were offset by increases in biomarker work of $1.5 million related to the GAIN trial samples and an increase in consulting expenses of $0.8 million related to statistical analysis and other efforts to conclude the trial and analyze results. We anticipate continued overall expenses to decrease relating to atuzaginstat (COR388) as we finish our biomarker and statistical analysis in the first quarter of 2022 and explore new indications for our drug including, but not limited to oncology and periodontitis.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we initiated a Phase 1 SAD/MAD trial for our new compound COR588 in a cohort of healthy participants in Australia with study results expected in the second quarter of 2022. We incurred $5.0 million in costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.0 million from the prior year. This increase was primarily due to $1.1 million in drug manufacturing costs, $0.9 million in clinical trial costs, and $1.0 million for preclinical toxicology and DMPK studies. We expect increased costs for this compound as it moves through the Phase 1 clinical study which began in August, 2021. Additionally, other direct research costs increased $1.2 million primarily due to pipeline development of our two arginine gingipain inhibitors, COR788 and COR822, our 3CLpro inhibitor, COR803 and other preclinical research.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced a net increase of $11.4 million in personnel related expenses due to an increase in headcount as we prepared for GAIN clinical trial results and scaled our clinical manufacturing operating relationships and capabilities during 2021 for increased COR588 and other pipeline activities. The increase was comprised of compensation and benefit costs of $3.4 million and $8.0 million in allocated stock-based compensation costs.
Facilities and other research and development expenses increased $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to a $0.1 million increase in regulatory and quality assurance consulting expenses and an additional $0.1 million increase in rent expense.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $11.9 million to $29.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses consists of a $9.2 million increase primarily due to increases in our employee headcount to support our growing operations, which was comprised of compensation and benefits costs of $1.8 million and $7.4 million in allocated stock-based compensation, $1.2 million in consulting
and marketing expenses, $0.5 million in insurance expense, and $0.6 million in other professional, legal, and audit and tax expenses. As well as an increase of $0.4 million in facilities and other general and administrative expenses.
As a result of the previously mentioned cost reduction program, we anticipate that both our research and development and general and administrative expenses will decrease in 2022 compared to 2021 as we adjust our expenses to support our current drug development strategy.
Interest Income
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest income decreased $1.4 million or 69.7% due to decreased average cash and investment balances and decreases in the overall yield of the investment portfolio during the year.
Other Expense
Other expense increased by $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to unrealized losses resulting from changes in foreign exchange rates.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred cumulative net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception and anticipate we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $236.6 million. To date we have funded our operations primarily from the sales of our equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $126.7 million. Based on our current business plans, we believe that our existing capital resources will be sufficient to fund our projected operating requirements for at least the next twelve months. Our cash, cash equivalents, and marketable debt securities are held in a variety of deposit accounts, interest-bearing accounts, corporate bond securities, commercial paper, U.S government securities, debt securities in government-sponsored entities, and money market funds. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested with a view toward liquidity and capital preservation, and we seek to minimize the potential effects of concentration and credit risk.
On December 23, 2021, we entered into an Open Market Sales Agreement, with Jefferies, whereby we may sell up to $150.0 million in aggregate proceeds of common stock from time to time, through Jefferies as our sales agent. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had not sold any shares of common stock under this agreement.
During the period of January 1, 2022 through February 24, 2022, we sold 51,769 shares of common stock, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $608,000, after commissions and other offering costs.
In response to the reprioritization of our pipeline on February 2, 2022, the Board of Directors approved a cost reduction program to rationalize operations and allow continued support for the needs of the business following the clinical hold on atuzaginstat (COR388) Investigational New Drug application (IND 134303). Under the Plan, we plan to reduce headcount by approximately 53% through a reduction in our workforce. A majority of the reduction in force will take place by March 2022, and is expected that the remainder will be completed by July 2022. In connection with the cost reduction program, we estimate that we will incur expenses of up to approximately $2.1 million substantially all of which will be cash expenditures relating to severance through the third quarter of 2022. These estimates are subject to a number of assumptions, and actual results may differ.
We anticipate the cost reduction program will result in annual savings of approximately $8 million to $8.5 million in the year ending December 31, 2022 (excluding share-based compensation and any one-time costs related to strategic actions).
Our product candidates are still in clinical development and the outcome of these efforts is uncertain. Accordingly, we cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. We will continue to require additional capital to develop our drug candidates and fund operations for the foreseeable future. We may seek to raise capital through private or public equity or debt financings, collaborative or other arrangements with other companies, or through other sources of financing. Adequate additional funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies. We anticipate that we will need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements of which will depend on many factors, including:
•the progress, costs, trial design, results of and timing of other clinical trials of atuzaginstat (COR388) and COR588, including our Phase 2 PEAK trial for Parkinson’s disease and for potential additional indications that we may pursue beyond Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease including oncology and periodontal disease;
•the progress, costs, trial designs, results of and timing of clinical trial of COR588 or other pipeline compounds we advance through the drug development process.
•the willingness of the FDA or EMA to accept our completed and planned clinical and preclinical studies and other work, as the basis for review and approval of atuzaginstat (COR388) or our other compounds for their respective indications;
•the outcome, costs and timing of seeking and obtaining FDA, EMA and any other regulatory approvals;
•the number and characteristics of drug candidates that we pursue;
•our ability to manufacture sufficient quantities of our drug candidates;
•our need to expand our research and development activities;
•the costs associated with securing and establishing commercialization and manufacturing capabilities;
•the costs of acquiring, licensing or investing in businesses, drug candidates and technologies;
•our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•our need and ability to retain management and hire scientific and clinical personnel;
•the effect of competing drugs and drug candidates and other market developments;
•our ability to realize cost savings from our recently implemented cost reduction program;
•our need to implement additional internal systems and infrastructure, including financial and reporting systems; and
•the economic and other terms, timing of and success of any collaboration, licensing or other arrangements into which we may enter in the future.
If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders will experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our common stock, make certain investments and engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, reduce, or terminate some or all of our development programs and clinical trials. We may also be required to sell or license to others rights to our drug candidates in certain territories or indications that we would prefer to develop and commercialize ourselves. Our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the supply chain, credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Summary Statement of Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $62.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $50.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our net loss for the period of $89.9 million, which included non-cash expenses of $31.3 million, including $29.9 million in stock-based
compensation, and a net decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $3.3 million and increases in our current assets of $1.0 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was $50.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss for the period of $76.8 million, which included non-cash expenses of $15.8 million, including $14.5 million in stock-based compensation, and a net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $7.9 million and decreases in our current assets of $2.4 million.
Investing Activities
Cash provided in investing activities was $59.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily related to the purchase of investments of $38.8 million, maturities of investments of $98.0 million and the purchase of equipment of $0.2 million.
Cash used in investing activities was $52.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to the purchase of investments of $187.1 million, maturities of investments of $134.8 million and the purchase of equipment of $0.1 million.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $6.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, which consisted of net proceeds from the exercise of stock options during the period.
Cash provided by financing activities was $118.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of net proceeds of $117.6 million from our private placement and $1.3 million from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Material contractual obligations arising in the normal course of business primarily consist of operating and finance leases, drug manufacturing, preclinical and clinical contract obligations. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for amounts outstanding for operating and finance leases on December 31, 2021.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with third party contract organizations for clinical trials, non-clinical studies and testing, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and therefore, are cancellable contracts. The amount and timing of the payments under these contracts varies based upon the timing of the services. We have recorded accrued expense of approximately $7.7 million in our consolidated balance sheet for expenditures incurred by these vendors as of December 31, 2021. We have approximately $15.6 million in cancellable future commitments based on existing contracts as of December 31, 2021.
Indemnification
As permitted under Delaware law and in accordance with our bylaws, we indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences while the officer or director is or was serving in such capacity. We are also party to indemnification agreements with our officers and directors. We believe the fair value of the indemnification rights and agreements is minimal. Accordingly, we have not recorded any liabilities for these indemnification rights and agreements as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.