ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
Unless otherwise indicated, references in this section to the terms the “Company,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer to CITIC Capital Acquisition Corp. (“CCAC”) prior to the Business Combination and the term “Quanergy” refers to Quanergy Perception Technologies, Inc., a Delaware corporation (f/k/a Quanergy Systems, Inc.) prior to the Business Combination. The financial information included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is that of CCAC prior to the Business Combination because the Business Combination was consummated after the period covered by the financial statements included in this report on Form 10-K. Accordingly, the historical financial information included in this report on Form 10-K, unless otherwise indicated or as the context otherwise requires, is that of CCAC prior to the Business Combination.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on September 9, 2019 as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
On February 13, 2020, we sold 27,600,000 units at a price of $10.00 per unit, including 3,600,000 units issued pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. Each unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, par value $0.0001 per share and one-half of one redeemable warrant. Each whole public warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. Concurrently with the closing of the IPO, our sponsor purchased an aggregate of 7,520,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrants. Each warrant is exercisable to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share. The proceeds from the private placement warrants were added to the proceeds from the IPO held in the Trust Account.
We paid an underwriting discount at the closing of the IPO of $5.52 million. An additional fee of $9.66 million was deferred and was paid upon our completion of an initial business combination. The deferred portion of the discount will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event we complete our initial business combination.
Recent Developments
On February 8, 2022, CCAC consummated the previously announced merger pursuant to the Merger Agreement, by and among CCAC, Merger Sub and Legacy Quanergy. On January 28, 2022, Legacy Quanergy changed its corporate name to Quanergy Perception Technologies, Inc. CCAC’s shareholders approved the Business Combination and the change of CCAC’s jurisdiction of incorporation from the Cayman Islands to the State of Delaware by deregistering as an exempted company in the Cayman Islands and domesticating and continuing as a corporation formed under the laws of the State of Delaware an extraordinary general meeting of stockholders held on January 31, 2022. In connection with the Business Combination, holders of 26,867,796 of CCAC’s Class A Ordinary Shares, or approximately 97.3% of the shares with redemption rights, exercised their right to redeem their shares for cash at a redemption price of approximately $10.07 per share, for an aggregate redemption amount of $270,503,771. On February 8, 2022, holders of 600,000 of CCAC’s Class A Ordinary Shares, or approximately 2.2% of the shares with redemption rights, reversed their prior redemptions, resulting in $6,040,773 being returned to the Trust Account established at the consummation of CCAC’s initial public offering prior to the Closing.
On February 7, 2022, one business day prior to the Closing Date, CCAC effectuated the Domestication, pursuant to which each of CCAC’s currently issued and outstanding Class A Ordinary Shares and Class B Ordinary Shares automatically converted by operation of law, on a one-for-one basis, into shares of the Company’s Common Stock. Similarly, all of CCAC’s outstanding warrants became warrants to acquire shares of Common Stock, and no other changes were made to the terms of any outstanding warrants.
Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement, the Business Combination was effected through the merger of Merger Sub with and into Legacy Quanergy, whereupon the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased and Legacy Quanergy became the surviving company and a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. In connection with the Domestication, the Company changed its name from CITIC Capital Acquisition Corp. to Quanergy Systems, Inc.
On the Closing Date, purchasers subscribed to purchase from the Company an aggregate of 3,650,000 shares of the Company’s common stock (the “PIPE Shares”), for a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $36,500,000, pursuant to separate subscription agreements (the “Subscription Agreements”). The sale of PIPE Shares was consummated substantially concurrently with the Closing.
In addition, as previously reported, in order to better manage working capital and liquidity needs post Business Combination, CCAC, GEM Global Yield LLC SCS (“GEM Investor”) and GEM Yield Bahamas Ltd. (“GYBL”) entered into a Share Purchase Agreement, dated December 12, 2021 (the “GEM Agreement”), which allows us to fund general corporate purpose and working capital needs. We are entitled to draw up to $125 million of gross proceeds in exchange for Common Stock, at a price equal to 90% of the average closing bid price of the shares of Common Stock on the NYSE for a 30 day period, subject to meeting the terms and conditions of the GEM Agreement. GEM Investor is also entitled to purchase Common Stock pursuant to a warrant exercisable for up to 2.5% of our outstanding Common Stock on a fully diluted basis as of the closing of the Business Combination for a period of 3 years (the “GEM Warrant”).
In January 2022, we negotiated an amendment to the GEM Agreement (the “GEM Amendment”) to provide for two advance draw downs of $12.5 million each that are not limited based on trading volume.
Results of Operations
Much of the activity from inception up to December 31, 2021 was related to our formation, the initial public offering and business combination. Since the initial public offering, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of business combination candidates, merger activity, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate small amounts of non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and investments. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $17,568,412, which was comprised of interest income of $27,789 from investments in our Trust Account and $23,303,840 of unrealized gain on fair value changes of warrants, offset by operating and acquisition related costs of $5,763,217. The operating and acquisition related expenses were primarily due to fees to professionals such as the auditors, legal counsel and consultants, insurance expenses and merger related expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $10,506,796, which was comprised of operating costs of $562,220, warrant issuance costs of $1,044,453, unrealized loss on changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,813,200, excess of the fair value of the private placement warrants over the cash received of 2,932,800, interest and dividend income of $488,766 from investments in our Trust Account, and realized gain from sale of treasury securities of $1,357,111. The operating expenses were primarily due to fees to professionals such as the auditors, legal counsel and consultants, and insurance expense.
We pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to members of our management team. Upon completion of our initial business combination, we ceased paying these monthly fees. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred $12,000 and $105,862 expenses under this agreement, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs have been satisfied prior to the completion of the initial public offering through receipt of a $25,000 capital contribution from our sponsor in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares to our sponsor and $300,000 in loans from our sponsor, which were repaid upon our initial public offering and not outstanding as of December 31, 2021, and the remaining net proceeds from our offering and private placements.
As of December 31, 2021, the amount due to related parties was $1,659,679. The amounts were unpaid reimbursements for the operating expenses, administrative support expenses, merger related expenses and deferred offering costs paid by the related parties on behalf of the Company.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the Trust Account of $31,344 available for working capital needs. All cash and securities held in the Trust Account are generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination, and was restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem ordinary shares. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount in the trust account was available to be withdrawn.
On June 21, 2021, we entered into the Subscription Agreements with PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to purchase, in the aggregate, 4,000,000 shares of Quanergy PubCo common shares at $10.00 per share for an aggregate commitment amount of $40 million. The PIPE Investment Amounts will be used to pay the expenses related to the Business Combination with Quanergy. On February 8, 2022, the Business Combination with Quanergy was closed.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated as of February 10, 2020. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $5,520,000, or $0.20 per unit of the gross proceeds of the initial 27,600,000 Units (inclusive of 3,600,000 unit over-allotment option) sold in the initial public offering, in the aggregate. In addition, the underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) $0.35 per unit of the gross proceeds of the initial 24,000,000 units sold in the initial public offering, or $8,400,000, and (ii) $0.35 per unit of the gross proceeds from the 3,600,000 units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $1,260,000, aggregating to a deferred fee of $9,660,000. The deferred fee was paid to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account after we completed the Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) Topic 5A-“Expenses of Offering”. Offering costs consist of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs that are directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs amounting to $1,044,453 were allocated to public warrants and expensed, offering costs amounting to $14,661,607 were charged to temporary equity upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption value, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity
classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for its Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “ Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, 27,600,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption were presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets respectively.
Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption value, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The 14,891,667 potential ordinary shares for outstanding warrants to purchase the Company’s shares were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met as of December 31, 2021. As a result, diluted net loss per ordinary share is the same as basic net loss per ordinary share for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.