ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, based upon our current expectations and related to future events and our future financial performance, that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors,” “Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our Business
We are a national provider of waste and recycling services to customers from across multiple industry sectors that are typically larger, multi-location businesses. We create customer-specific programs and perform the related services for the collection, processing, recycling, disposal, and tracking of waste streams and recyclables. Our programs and services enable our customers to address their business, environmental and sustainability goals and responsibilities.
We believe our services are comprehensive, innovative, and cost effective. Our services are designed to enable our business customers to capture the commodity value of their waste streams and recyclables, better manage their disposal and total operating costs, enhance their management of environmental risks, enhance their legal and regulatory compliance, and achieve their business and environmental goals while maximizing the efficiency of their assets. Our services currently focus on the waste streams and recyclables from big box, grocers, and other specialty retailers; automotive after-market operations such as automotive maintenance, quick lube, dealerships, and collision repair; transportation, logistics, and fleet operators; manufacturing and industrial facilities; multi-family and commercial properties; restaurant chains and food operations; and construction and demolition projects. We currently concentrate on programs for recycling motor oil and automotive lubricants, oil filters, scrap tires, oily water, goods destruction, food waste, meat renderings, cooking oil and grease trap waste, plastics, cardboard, metal, glass, mixed paper, construction debris, as well as a large variety of regulated and non-regulated solid, liquid, and gas wastes. In addition, we offer products such as antifreeze and windshield washer fluid, dumpster and compacting equipment, and other minor ancillary services.
We also provide information and data that tracks and reports the detailed transactional and environmental results of our services and provides actionable data to improve business operations. The data we generate enables our customers to address their environmental goals and responsibilities and to report to internal and external parties such as employees, investors, business partners, and governmental agencies.
Our results of operations from November 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021 reflect the results of RWS. See Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of this transaction.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 Operating Results
Our consolidated financial statements include the operating activities of our company and our subsidiaries for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following table summarizes our operating results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the global COVID-19 pandemic crisis, we have prioritized the health and safety of our employees, customers and subcontractors and continue to work to support their needs. While we continue to implement actions to mitigate the effects of this crisis on our business and operations, the uncertainty around the duration and economic impact of this crisis makes it difficult for management to predict the future impact on our business operations and financial performance.
To date, we have experienced some limitations in employee resources resulting from travel restrictions and “stay at home” orders. Despite these restrictions, we continue to efficiently manage supply chain requirements of our customers and subcontractors. The waste management and recycling services we provide are currently designated an essential critical infrastructure business under the President’s COVID-19 guidance, the continued operation of which is vital for national public health, safety, and national economic security. While some of our customers shut down or scaled back their businesses in the short term, other customers operating in the restaurant, grocery, automotive and certain specialty retail industries, which may be considered as essential businesses in different jurisdictions or who are more capable of working remotely than other industries, have continued to operate.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the severity and duration of the crisis and the impact of actions taken and that will be taken to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact. These future impacts are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence. The economic impact from COVID-19 may adversely impact our results of operations in the future and may affect the credit condition of some of our customers, which could increase delays in customer payments and credit losses.
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue was $155.7 million, an increase of $57.1 million, or 57.8%, compared with revenue of $98.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase was primarily due to the impact of customers’ business recovery compared with the COVID-19 impacted levels a year ago, heightened customer production levels, increased value for recycled materials compared to a year ago, increased services from certain continuing and new customers, and contribution from the acquired customer base related to the business acquisitions in 2021 and 2020, partially offset by lower levels of services due to COVID-19 related shutdowns or reduced operations at certain other customers. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for a discussion of acquisitions during 2021 and 2020.
Cost of Revenue/Gross Profit
Cost of revenue increased to $126.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the same reasons impacting the increase in revenue, partially offset by lower costs related to certain contracted services.
Gross profit increased $9.8 million or 51.3%, to $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our gross margin was 18.5% in 2021 compared with 19.3% in 2020. The changes in gross profit and gross profit margin percentage for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily due to the net effect of the impact of customers’ business recovery compared with the COVID-19 impacted levels a year ago, a production ramp up at one of our largest industrial customers, increased value for certain recycled materials compared to a year ago, increased services from certain continuing and new customers, the acquired customer base related to acquisitions in 2021 and 2020, lower costs related to certain contracted services, and lower levels of services due to COVID-19 related shutdowns or reduced operations at certain other customers.
Revenue, gross profit, and gross profit margins are affected period to period by the volumes of waste and recycling materials generated by our customers, the frequency and type of services provided, the price and mix of the services provided, commodity price changes for recycled materials, the cost and mix of subcontracted services provided in any one reporting period, and the timing of acquisitions. Volumes of waste and recycling materials generated by our customers is impacted period to period based on several factors including their production or sales levels, demand of their product or services in the market, supply chain reliability, and labor force stability, among other business factors. If the impact of these factors either individually or in the aggregate cause a significant decline in the volume of waste and recycling materials generated by our customers, it could have an adverse effect on our revenues, gross profit, and gross profit margins.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses increased to $24.2 million from $18.3 million for 2020. Selling, general, and administrative expenses were $21.7 million and $17.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a year-over-year increase of $4.6 million. The increase primarily relates to increases in labor related expenses of $2.7 million, acquisition/integration related expenses of $1.1 million inclusive of professional fees of $882,000, IT professional fees of $538,000, software license fees of $131,000, tradeshow/advertising expenses of $64,000 and other administrative expenses of $267,000, partially offset by decreases in stock related compensation of $106,000.
Operating expenses also included depreciation and amortization of $2.5 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in depreciation and amortization was primarily related to the Green Remedies asset acquisition in October 2020 and the business acquisitions in 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense was $(116,000) for the year ended December 31, 2021 for the adjustment of the Green Remedies earnout. Other income was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and represented the use of proceeds received under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under a promissory note from BMO Harris Bank National Association (the “PPP Loan”) to fund eligible payroll, rent and utility expenses.
Interest Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense increased to $2.5 million from $702,000 for 2020 as a result of an increase in debt, primarily related to the acquisitions in 2021 and 2020. We are amortizing debt issuance costs of $3.1 million and OID of $2.2 million to interest expense over the life of the related debt arrangements as discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
In the third quarter of 2020, the PNC Loan Agreement replaced a prior loan agreement with Citizens bank, which was paid off and terminated effective August 5, 2020. We recorded $168,000 in loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with this loan termination, including the write-off of the unamortized portion of debt issuance costs and fees directly associated with the loan payoff.
Income Taxes
We recorded a provision for income taxes of $321,000 and $254,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The provision for income taxes for 2021 and 2020 is primarily attributable to state tax obligations based on current estimated state tax apportionments for states with no net operating loss carryforwards.
We recorded a full valuation allowance against all of our deferred tax assets (“DTAs”) as of both December 31, 2021 and 2020. We intend on maintaining a full valuation allowance on our DTAs until there is sufficient evidence to support the reversal of all or some portion of these allowances. However, given our current earnings and anticipated future earnings, we believe that there is a reasonable possibility that within the next 12 months, sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion that a significant portion of the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain DTAs and a decrease to income tax expense for the period the release is recorded. However, the exact timing and amount of the valuation allowance release are subject to change based on the level of profitability that we are able to actually achieve.
Net Income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.7 million compared with net income of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The explanations above explain the primary changes related to the improvement in net results.
Our operating results, including revenue, operating expenses, and operating margins, vary from period to period depending on commodity prices of recycled materials, the volumes and mix of services provided, as well as customer mix during the reporting period and the timing of acquisitions.
Income per Share
Net income per basic and diluted share attributable to common stockholders was $0.09 and $0.08, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with net income per basic and diluted share of $0.05 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income attributable to common stockholders in the year ended December 31, 2020 includes a deemed dividend of $205,014 as a result of the triggering of a down round provision in certain outstanding warrants. The basic and diluted weighted average number of shares of Common Stock outstanding was approximately 18.9 million and 20.7 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to basic and diluted weighted average number of shares of Common Stock outstanding of approximately 16.7 million and 16.8 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA
In 2021, Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, increased 144.3% to $10.9 million, from $4.5 million in 2020.
We use the non-GAAP measurement of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-related compensation charges, acquisition-related costs, and other adjustments, or “Adjusted EBITDA,” to evaluate our performance. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure that is also frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate the market value of companies considered to be in similar businesses. We suggest that Adjusted EBITDA be viewed in conjunction with our reported financial results or other financial information prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). In 2021, other adjustments included $116,000 earnout adjustment, certain severance and recruiting costs of $194,000 and bank fees of approximately $65,000. In 2020, other adjustments included $(1,408,000) use of PPP Loan (as defined in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements) proceeds, partially offset by certain severance and COVID-recall labor costs of $178,000, and loss on extinguishment of debt of $168,000.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Net Income per Diluted Share
Adjusted net income, a non-GAAP financial measure, in 2021 increased 629% to $5.6 million from $769,000 in 2020. We present adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share, both non-GAAP financial measures, supplementally because they are widely used by investors as a valuation measure in the solid waste industry. Management uses adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share as one of the principal measures to evaluate and monitor the ongoing financial performance of our operations. We provide adjusted net income to exclude the effects of items management believes impact the comparability of operating results between periods. Adjusted net income has limitations due to the fact that it excludes items that have an impact on our financial condition and results of operations. Adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share are not a substitute for, and should be used in conjunction with, GAAP financial measures. Other companies may calculate these non-GAAP financial measures differently. Our adjusted net income and adjusted net income per diluted share for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, are calculated as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $12.6 million, including $8.4 million of cash and cash equivalents, compared with working capital of $8.7 million, including cash and cash equivalents of $7.5 million, as of December 31, 2020.
We derive our primary sources of funds for conducting our business activities from operating revenues; borrowings under our credit facilities; and the placement of our equity securities to investors. We require working capital primarily to carry accounts receivable, service debt, purchase capital assets, fund operating expenses, address unanticipated competitive threats or technical problems, withstand adverse economic conditions, fund potential acquisition transactions, and pursue goals and strategies.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents of $8.4 million, our borrowing capacity under our $15.0 million ABL Facility, and cash expected to be generated from operations will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months. As discussed in Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements, as a result of the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our operating results, in May 2020 we received loan proceeds of $1.4 million under the PPP, which were subsequently fully forgiven in accordance with the PPP. As discussed in Notes 7 and 13 to our consolidated financial statements, we entered into the PNC Loan Agreement which provides for an asset-based revolving credit facility of up to $15.0 million and an equipment loan facility in the maximum principal amount of $2.0 million, and in August 2020, we closed on a registered direct offering of our Common Stock, which provided gross proceeds to us of approximately $3.4 million. The PNC Loan Agreement replaced our prior credit facility under the Citizens Bank Loan Agreement (as defined in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements), which was paid off and terminated effective August 5, 2020. On October 19, 2020, we and certain of our domestic subsidiaries entered into the Credit Agreement which provided financing for certain of the acquisitions in 2020 and 2021. Among other things, the Credit Agreement provides for the following:
•A senior secured term loan facility in the principal amount of $58.7 million. The senior secured term loan at the LIBOR Rate for LIBOR Loans plus the Applicable Margin; provided, that if the provision of LIBOR Loans becomes unlawful or unavailable, then interest will be payable at a rate per annum equal to the Base Rate from time to time in effect plus the Applicable Margin for Base Rate Loans. The maturity date of the term loan facility is October 19, 2025, the “Maturity Date.” The senior secured term loan will amortize in aggregate annual amounts equal to 1.00% of the original principal amount of the senior secured term loan facility with the balance payable on the Maturity Date. Proceeds of the senior secured term loan were permitted to be used in connection for certain Permitted Acquisitions (as defined in the Credit Agreement).
•A delayed draw term loan facility in the maximum principal amount of $16.0 million. Loans under the delayed draw term loan facility may be requested at any time until June 7, 2022. Pricing and maturity for the outstanding principal amount of the delayed draw term loan shall be the same as for the senior secured term loan. Proceeds of the delayed draw term loan are to be used for Permitted Acquisitions.
•An accordion term loan facility in the maximum principal amount of $5.3 million. Loans under the accordion loan facility may be requested at any time until the Maturity Date. Each accordion term loan shall be on the same terms as those
applicable to the senior secured term loan. Proceeds of accordion term loans are permitted to be used for Permitted Acquisitions.
Certain of the Company’s domestic subsidiaries are the borrowers under the Credit Agreement. The Company is the guarantor under the Credit Agreement. As security for the obligations of the borrowers under the Credit Agreement, (i) the borrowers under the Credit Agreement have granted a first priority lien on substantially all of their tangible and intangible personal property, including a pledge of the capital stock and membership interests, as applicable, of certain of the Company’s direct and indirect subsidiaries, and (ii) the guarantors under the Credit Agreement have granted a first priority lien on the capital stock and membership interests, as applicable, of the Company’s direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries.
The Credit Agreement contains certain financial covenants, including a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio and a senior net leverage ratio. In addition, the Credit Agreement contains negative covenants limiting, among other things, additional indebtedness, transactions with affiliates, additional liens, sales of assets, dividends, investments and advances, prepayments of debt, mergers and acquisitions, and other matter customarily restricted in such agreements. The Credit Agreement also contains customary events of default, including payment defaults, breaches of representations and warranties, covenant defaults, events of bankruptcy and insolvency, change of control, and failure of any guaranty or security document supporting the Credit Agreement to be in full force and effect. Upon the occurrence of an event of default, the outstanding obligations under the Credit Agreement may be accelerated and become immediately due and payable. The foregoing is a summary only and does not purport to be a complete description of all the terms, provisions, covenants and agreements contained in the Credit Agreement and is subject to and qualified in its entirety by reference to the full text of the Credit Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following discussion relates to the major components of our cash flows.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 related primarily to the net effect of the following:
•net income of $1,691,000;
•non-cash items of $5.2 million, which related primarily to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets and debt issuance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, and stock-based compensation; and
•cash used in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $4.4 million, primarily associated with relative changes in accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 related primarily to the net effect of the following:
•net income of $1,034,000, which includes other income of $1,408,000 for the use of PPP Loan proceeds as discussed further above;
•non-cash items of $3.3 million, which related primarily to depreciation, amortization of intangible assets and debt issuance costs, provision for doubtful accounts, loss on extinguishment of debt and stock-based compensation; and
•cash used in the net change in operating assets and liabilities of $1.2 million, primarily associated with relative changes in accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued liabilities.
Our business, including revenue, operating expenses, and operating margins, may vary depending on the blend of services we provide to our customers, the terms of customer contracts, commodity contracts, and our business volume levels. Our operating activities may require additional cash in the future from our debt facilities and/or equity financings depending on the level of our operations.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $16.9 million and $506,000, respectively. Cash used in 2021 related mainly to $16.3 million cash paid for acquisitions. Other investing activities are primarily from purchases of property and equipment and intangible assets such as software development.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $15.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily from borrowings of $12.5 million from the Credit Agreement with Monroe Capital, net borrowings of $2.9 million on our ABL Facility, $634,000 proceeds from our 2014 Employee Stock Purchase Plan and option stock issuances, partially offset by net repayments of $759,000 of long term debt. Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from $3.0 million net proceeds from the sale of Common Stock in a registered direct offering that closed on August 7, 2020, partially offset by net repayments of $540,000 on our ABL Facility and $1.1 million debt issuance costs related to the ABL Facility and the Credit
Agreement with Monroe Capital. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion regarding the registered direct offering.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on us for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to areas that require a significant level of judgment or are otherwise subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These areas include carrying amounts of accounts receivable, goodwill and other intangible assets, deferred taxes and the fair value of assets and liabilities acquired in business acquisitions and stock-based compensation expense. We base our estimates on historical experience, our observance of trends in particular areas, and information or valuations and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances and which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual amounts could differ significantly from amounts previously estimated.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, the following may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity.
Collectability of Accounts Receivable
Our accounts receivable consists primarily of amounts due from customers for the performance of services, and we record the amount net of an allowance for doubtful accounts. To record our accounts receivable at their net realizable value, we assess their collectability, which requires a considerable amount of judgment. We perform a detailed analysis of the aging of our receivables, the credit worthiness of our customers, our historical bad debts, and other adjustments. If economic, industry, or customer specific business trends worsen, we increase the allowance for uncollectible accounts by recording additional expense in the period in which we become aware of the new conditions.
Impairment of Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, we perform goodwill impairment testing at least annually during the third quarter, unless indicators of impairment exist in interim periods. Our test of goodwill impairment included assessing qualitative factors and the use of judgment in evaluating economic conditions, industry and market conditions, cost factors, and entity-specific events such as market capitalization as compared to book value. The impairment test for goodwill compares the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with goodwill to its carrying value. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit’s goodwill exceeds the fair value of its goodwill, we recognize an impairment loss equal to the excess, not to exceed the total amount of recorded goodwill.
In addition to the required goodwill impairment analysis, we also review the recoverability of our net intangible assets with finite lives when an indicator of impairment exists. Based on our analysis of estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of these net intangibles with finite lives, we determine if we will recover their carrying values as of the test date. If not recoverable, we record an impairment charge. We performed our most recent goodwill impairment analysis in the third quarter of 2021 with no impairment recorded.
Stock Options
We estimate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes-Merton valuation model. Significant assumptions used in the calculation were determined as follows:
•We determine the expected term under the simplified method using an average of the contractual term and vesting period of the award as appropriate statistical data required to properly estimate the expected term was not available;
•We measure the expected volatility using the historical daily changes in the market price of our Common Stock; and
•We approximate the risk-free interest rate using the implied yield on zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bonds with a remaining maturity equal to the expected term of the awards.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. We use significant judgment in determining the provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against net deferred tax assets. We then assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent that recovery is not likely or there is insufficient operating history, we establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish or increase a valuation allowance in a period, we include an adjustment within the tax provision of our consolidated statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had established a full valuation allowance for all deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not recognize any assets or liabilities relative to uncertain tax positions, nor do we anticipate any significant unrecognized tax benefits will be recorded during the next 12 months. We recognize any interest or penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. Since there are no unrecognized tax benefits as a result of tax positions taken, there are no accrued penalties or interest.
Business Combinations
We account for acquisitions in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations. In purchase accounting, identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recognized at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date, and any remaining purchase price is recorded as goodwill. In determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, we make significant estimates and assumptions, particularly with respect to long-lived tangible and intangible assets. Critical estimates used in valuing tangible and intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows, discount rates, market prices and asset lives.
Our consolidated financial statements include the results of operations from the date of the acquisition.
We expense all acquisition-related costs as incurred in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations.
Financial Instruments
Our financial instruments consist of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, deferred revenue, and notes payable. We do not believe that we are exposed to significant interest, currency, or credit risks arising from these financial instruments. The fair values of these financial instruments approximate their carrying values using Level 3 inputs, based on their short maturities or, for long-term portions of notes payable, based on borrowing rates currently available to us for loans with similar terms and maturities.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet debt or similar obligations. We have no transactions or obligations with related parties that are not disclosed, consolidated into, or reflected in our reported results of operations or financial position. We do not guarantee any third-party debt.