Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We were a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on February 13, 2019. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to herein as our “Business Combination.”
On February 14, 2022, we completed our Business Combination with QualTek HoldCo.
Results of Operations
Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”), described below, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and consummating the acquisition of QualTek HoldCo. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $4,056,961, which consists of general and administrative expenses of $3,952,940 and a change in the fair value of warrant liability of $113,903, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $9,882.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $975, which consisted of operating and formational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 5, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 11,500,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 408,000 Private Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit in a private placement to certain of the Company’s stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $4,080,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $115,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $2,882,212 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $2,300,000 of underwriting fees and $582,212 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,683,484. Net loss of $4,056,961 was affected by a change in the fair value of warrant liability of $113,903 and interest earned on marketable securities of $9,882. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,269,456 of cash for operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $2,700. Net loss of $975 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities which used $1,725 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $115,009,882 (including approximately $9,882 of interest income). Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $106,604. Until the consummation of the Business Combination, we used the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
We completed our Business Combination on February 14, 2022, which was the Business Combination with QualTek HoldCo and have raised sufficient capital for our operations. We raised sufficient proceeds in the Business Combination transaction, including funds from the Trust Account net of redemptions and proceeds from the Convertible Notes, to fund operations and transaction expenses.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the
periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Private Placement Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Private Placement Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common stock is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. The remeasurement associated with the redeemable shares common stock is excluded from loss per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The impact of the adoption of ASU 2020-06 is being assessed by us, however no significant impact on the financial statements is anticipated.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.