Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Risk Factors.” Results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 can be referenced on our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 5, 2021.
Overview
We are a life sciences company that has developed next generation, ultra-sensitive digital immunoassay platforms that advance precision health for life sciences research and diagnostics. Our platforms are based on our proprietary digital “Simoa” detection technology. Our Simoa bead-based and planar array platforms enable customers to reliably detect protein biomarkers in extremely low concentrations in blood, serum and other fluids that, in many cases, are undetectable using conventional, analog immunoassay technologies, and also allow researchers to define and validate the function of novel protein biomarkers that are only present in very low concentrations. These capabilities provide our customers with insight into the role of protein biomarkers in human health that has not been possible with other existing technologies and enable researchers to unlock unique insights into the continuum between health and disease. We believe this greater insight will enable the development of novel therapies and diagnostics and facilitate a paradigm shift in healthcare from an emphasis on treatment to a focus on earlier detection, monitoring, prognosis and, ultimately, prevention.
Our instruments are designed to be used either with assays fully developed by us, including all antibodies and supplies required to run the tests, or with “homebrew” kits where we supply some of the components required for testing, and the customer supplies the remaining required elements. Accordingly, our installed instruments generate a recurring revenue stream. As the installed base of the Simoa instruments increases, total consumables revenue overall is expected to increase. We believe that consumables revenue should be subject to less period-to-period fluctuation than our instrument sales revenue, and will become an increasingly important contributor to our overall revenue.
We commercially launched our first immunoassay platform, the Simoa HD-1, in January 2014. The HD-1 is based on our bead-based technology, and assays run on the HD-1 are fully automated. We initiated commercial launch of the SR-X instrument in December 2017. The SR-X utilizes the same Simoa bead-based technology and assay kits as the HD-1 in a compact benchtop form with a lower price point, more flexible assay preparation, and a wider range of applications. In July 2019, we launched the Simoa HD-X, an upgraded version of the Simoa HD-1, which replaces the HD-1. The HD-X has been designed to deliver significant productivity and operational efficiency improvements, as well as greater user flexibility. We began shipping and installing HD-X instruments at customer locations in 2019, and by the end of 2021, approximately 68% of the HD instrument installed base was HD-X instruments.
On January 30, 2018, we acquired Aushon for $3.2 million in cash, with an additional payment of $0.8 million made in July 2018, six months after the acquisition date. With the acquisition of Aushon, we acquired a CLIA certified laboratory, as well as Aushon’s proprietary sensitive planar array detection technology. Leveraging our proprietary sophisticated Simoa image analysis and data analysis algorithms, we further refined this planar array technology to develop the SP-X instrument to provide the same Simoa sensitivity found in our Simoa bead-based platform. We initiated an early-access program for the SP-X instrument in January 2019, with the full commercial launch commenced in April 2019.
On August 1, 2019, we completed our acquisition of Uman for an aggregate purchase price of $21.2 million, comprised of (i) $15.7 million in cash plus (ii) 191,152 shares of our common stock (representing $5.5 million based on the closing prices of our common stock on the Nasdaq Global Market on July 1, 2019 and August 1, 2019, the dates of issuance). Uman supplies neurofilament light (Nf-L) antibodies and ELISA kits, which are widely recognized by
researchers and biopharmaceutical and diagnostics companies world-wide as the premier solution for the detection of Nf-L to advance the development of therapeutics and diagnostics for neurodegenerative conditions.
We also provide contract research services for customers through our CLIA-certified Accelerator Laboratory. The Accelerator Laboratory provides customers with access to Simoa technology, and supports multiple projects and services, including sample testing, homebrew assay development and custom assay development. To date, we have completed over 1,700 projects for approximately 400 customers from all over the world using our Simoa platforms.
We sell our instruments, consumables and services to the life science, pharmaceutical and diagnostics industries through a direct sales force and support organizations in North America and Europe, and through distributors or sales agents in other select markets, including Australia, Brazil, China, Czech Republic, India, Hong Kong, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, and UAE. In addition, Uman sells Nf-L antibodies and Nf-L ELISA kits directly, and in conjunction with us and another distributor worldwide. We have an extensive base of customers in world class academic and governmental research institutions, as well as pharmaceutical, biotechnology and contract research companies.
On September 29, 2020, we entered the Abbott License Agreement with Abbott. Pursuant to the terms of the Abbott License Agreement, we granted Abbott a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-bearing license, without the right to sublicense, under our bead-based single molecule detection patents in the field of IVD. Abbott paid an initial license fee of $10.0 million in connection with the execution of the Abbott License Agreement, which was recognized as license revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Abbott has also agreed to pay us milestone fees subject to the achievement by Abbott of certain development, regulatory and commercialization milestones and low single digit royalties on net sales of licensed products.
We are subject to ongoing uncertainty concerning the COVID-19 pandemic, including its length and severity and its effect on our business. During the first and second quarters of 2020, we implemented a resiliency plan focused on the health and safety of our employees and maintaining continuity of our operations. We saw an impact on instrument revenue due to limitations on our ability to access certain customer sites and complete instrument installations, as well as an impact on consumables revenue from interruptions in certain customer laboratories through the first quarter of 2021. As customers began returning to normal operations in the second quarter of 2021, we have seen less of an impact related to COVID-19 related shutdowns. However, we expect COVID-19 related challenges to continue for the foreseeable future and potentially increase if variants result in new shutdowns.
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, in 2020, we adjusted our operations to expand capacity in our Accelerator Laboratory to support customers whose operations have been disrupted and to sustain clinical trials. We also determined that our cytokine assay technology could provide researchers with important and differentiated tools to study disease progression, cytokine release syndrome, and patient-treatment response in the fight against COVID-19, and began developing a SARS-CoV-2 semi-quantitative IgG assay and a SARS-CoV-2 antigen detection assay, and prototyping a high-definition multiplex SARS-CoV-2 serology assay. In December 2020, the FDA issued an EUA for our Simoa Semi-Quantitative SARS-CoV-2 IgG Antibody Test, and in January 2021, the FDA issued an EUA for our Simoa SARS-CoV-2 N Protein Antigen Test, each of which is run on our HD-X instrument. In September 2021, the FDA expanded the EUA for our Simoa SARS-CoV-2 N Protein Antigen Test to include testing with nasal swabs and saliva and for asymptomatic serial testing with nasal swab samples. We are exploring extending the test to home-based sample collection and pooling to enable larger scale testing.
In September 2020, we entered into WP2 with the NIH under the RADx program. This contract, which has a total award value of up to $18.2 million, is intended to accelerate the continued development, scale-up and deployment of our novel SARS-CoV-2 antigen test. Initial early feasibility of this test was funded in part through the RADx WP1 award we were granted in June 2020. WP2 supports clinical validation of the test in support of the EUA submissions with the FDA, and provides funding to expand assay kit manufacturing capacity and commercial deployment readiness. Contract funding was subject to the achievement of pre-defined milestones and the contract period ran through September 2021, with one milestone extended to March 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we had received $17.7 million out of the full $18.2 million under WP2.
The COVID-19 situation remains dynamic, and there remains significant uncertainty as to the length and severity of the pandemic, the actions that may be taken by government authorities, the impact to the business of our customers and suppliers, the long-term economic implications and other factors identified in “Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business, financial condition, and operating results.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $396.5 million. Since inception, we have incurred annual net losses. Our net loss was $57.7 million, $31.5 million, and $40.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $305.5 million and stockholders' equity of $441.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses at least through the next 24 months. We expect our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● expand our sales and marketing efforts to further commercialize our products;
● strategically acquire companies or technologies that may be complementary to our business;
● expand our research and development efforts to improve our existing products and develop and launch new products, particularly if any of our products are deemed by the FDA to be medical devices or otherwise subject to additional regulation by the FDA;
● seek PMA or 510(k) clearance from the FDA for our existing products or new products if or when we decide to market products for use in the prevention, diagnosis or treatment of a disease or other condition;
● hire additional personnel and continue to grow our employee headcount;
● enter into collaboration arrangements, if any, or in-license other products and technologies;
● add operational, financial and management information systems; and
● continue to incur increased costs as a result of operating as a public company.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
Under Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606), an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price, including variable consideration, if any; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
Once a contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations. Arrangements that include rights to additional goods or services that are exercisable at a customer’s discretion are generally considered options. We assess if these options provide a material right to the customer and if so, they are considered performance obligations. The identification of material rights requires judgments related to the determination of the value of the underlying license relative to the option exercise price, including assumptions about technical feasibility and the probability of developing a candidate that would be subject to the option rights. The exercise of a material right is accounted for as a contract modification for accounting purposes.
The transaction price is then determined and allocated to the identified performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices (SSP) on a relative SSP basis. SSP is determined at contract inception and is not updated to reflect changes between contract inception and when the performance obligations are satisfied. Determining the SSP for performance obligations requires significant judgment. In developing the SSP for a performance obligation, we consider applicable market conditions and relevant entity-specific factors, including factors that were contemplated in negotiating the agreement with the customer and estimated costs. We validate the SSP for performance obligations by evaluating whether changes in the key assumptions used to determine the SSP will have a significant effect on the allocation of arrangement consideration between multiple performance obligations.
We generate product revenue primarily from sales of our HD-X, HD-1, SR-X, and SP-X instruments and related reagents and other consumables. We currently sell our products for RUO applications and our customers are primarily laboratories associated with academic and governmental research institutions, as well as pharmaceutical, biotechnology and contract research companies. Sales of our consumables have consistently increased due to an increasing number of instruments being installed in the field, all of which require certain of our consumables to run customers’ specific tests. Consumable revenue consists of sales of complete assays which are developed internally by us, plus sales of “homebrew” kits which contain all the elements necessary to run tests with the exception of the specific antibodies utilized which are separately provided by the customer.
Service and other revenue consists of testing services provided by us in our Accelerator Laboratory on behalf of certain research customers, in addition to warranty and other service-based revenue. Services provided in our Accelerator Laboratory include sample testing, homebrew assay development and custom assay development.
Collaboration and license revenue consists of revenue associated with licensing our technology to third parties and for related services.
Grants received by us that do not require the transfer of goods or services to a customer are accounted for by analogy to International Accounting Standards (IAS) 20, Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance (IAS 20). Under IAS 20, we recognize revenue as the matching expense or asset is incurred or capitalized.
Cost of Products, Services and Collaboration Revenue
Cost of goods sold for products consists of HD-X, HD-1, and SR-X instrument costs from the manufacturer. Cost of goods sold for SP-X consists of costs based on the internal assembly of this item. Raw material part costs, associated freight, shipping and handling costs, contract manufacturer costs, salaries, personnel costs, royalties, stock-based compensation, overhead and other direct costs related to those sales are classified as cost of goods sold for products.
Cost of goods sold for services consists of salaries and other personnel costs, royalties, stock-based compensation and facility costs associated with operating the Accelerator Laboratory on behalf of customers, in addition to costs related to warranties and other costs of servicing equipment at customer sites.
Cost of collaboration revenue consists of royalty expense due to third parties from revenue generated by collaboration or license deals.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of salaries and other personnel costs, stock-based compensation, research supplies, third-party development costs for new products, materials for prototypes, and allocated overhead costs that include facility and other overhead costs. We have made substantial investments in research and development since our inception, and plan to continue to make substantial investments in the future. Our research and development efforts have focused primarily on the tasks required to support development and commercialization of new and existing products. We believe that our continued investment in research and development is essential to our long-term
competitive position and expect these expenses to increase in future periods. Additionally, costs incurred related to grant revenue are recorded as research and development expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel costs, and stock-based compensation for our sales and marketing, finance, legal, human resources and general management, as well as professional services, such as legal and accounting services. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods as the number of sales, technical support and marketing and administrative personnel grows and we continue to introduce new products, broaden our customer base and grow our business. We also expect to incur additional public company expenses, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and the Nasdaq Stock Market, additional insurance expenses, and expenses related to investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in accounting estimates may occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the following critical accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity than our other significant accounting policies. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in “Significant Accounting Policies” (Note 2) in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when a customer obtains control of a promised good or service. The amount of revenue recognized reflects consideration that we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services, incentives and taxes collected from customers, that are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Product Revenue
Our products are composed of analyzer instruments, assay kits and other consumables such as reagents. Products are sold directly to biopharmaceutical and academic research organizations or are sold through distributors in EMEA and Asia Pacific regions. The sales of instruments are generally accompanied by an initial year of implied service-type warranties and may be bundled with assays and other consumables and may also include other items such as training and installation of the instrument and/or an extended service warranty. Revenues from the sale of products are recognized at a point in time when we transfer control of the product to the customer, which is upon installation for instruments sold to direct customers, and based upon shipping terms for assay kits and other consumables. Revenue for instruments sold to distributors is generally recognized based upon shipping terms (either upon shipment or delivery).
Service and Other Revenue
Service revenues are composed of contract research services, initial implied one-year service-type warranties, extended services contracts and other services such as training. Contract research services are provided through our Accelerator Laboratory and generally consist of fixed fee contracts. Revenues from contract research services are
recognized at a point in time when we complete and deliver our research report on each individually completed study, or over time if the contractual provisions allow for the collection of transaction consideration for costs incurred plus a reasonable margin through the period of performance of the services. Revenues from service-type warranties are recognized ratably over the contract service period. Revenues from other services are immaterial.
Collaboration and License Revenue
We may enter into agreements to license the intellectual property and know-how associated with our instruments in exchange for license fees and future royalties (as described below). The license agreements provide the licensee with a right to use the intellectual property with the license fee revenues recognized at a point in time as the underlying license is considered functional intellectual property. We have recognized revenues from a sales- or usage based royalties related to our licensing technology and intellectual property.
Payment Terms
Our payment terms vary by the type and location of customer and the products or services offered. Payment from customers is generally required in a term ranging from 30 to 45 days from date of shipment or satisfaction of the performance obligation with no discounts for early payment. Occasionally we do provide extended payment terms or financing arrangements to customers.
Disaggregated Revenue
When disaggregating revenue, we considered all of the economic factors that may affect revenues. The following tables disaggregate our revenue from contracts with customers based on their location by revenue type:
Our contracts with customers may include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. In accordance with ASC 606, we combine any performance obligations that are immaterial with one or more other performance obligations that are material to the contract. For arrangements with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract transaction price, including discounts, to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Judgment is required to determine the standalone selling price for each distinct performance obligation. We determine standalone selling prices based on prices charged to customers in observable transactions, and use a range of amounts to estimate standalone selling prices for each performance obligation. We may have more than one range of standalone selling price for certain products and services based on the pricing for different customer classes.
Variable consideration in our contracts primarily relates to (i) sales- and usage-based royalties related to the license of intellectual property in collaboration and license contracts and (ii) certain non-fixed fee research services contracts. ASC 606 provides for an exception to estimating the variable consideration for sales- and usage-based royalties related to the license of intellectual property, such that the sales- or usage-based royalty will be recognized in the period the underlying transaction occurs. We have recorded sales- or usage-based royalty revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 related to the intellectual property licensed by Uman. We recognize revenues from sales- or usage based royalty revenue at the later of when the sales or usage occurs; and the satisfaction or partial satisfaction of the performance obligation to which the royalty has been allocated.
The aggregate amount of transaction price that is allocated to performance obligations that have not yet been satisfied or are partially satisfied as of December 31, 2021 is $7.5 million. Of the performance obligations not yet satisfied or that are partially satisfied, $6.4 million is expected to be recognized as revenue in the next 12 months, with the remainder to be recognized within the 24 months thereafter. The $7.5 million principally consists of amounts billed for undelivered services related to initial and extended service-type warranties and research services, as well as $0.5 million related to undelivered licenses of intellectual property for a diagnostics company.
We have classified the balance of capitalized costs to obtain a contract as a component of prepaid expenses and other current assets as of December 31, 2021 and classified the expense as a component of cost of goods sold and selling, general and administrative expense over the estimated life of the contract. We consider potential impairment in these amounts each period.
ASC 606 provides entities with certain practical expedients and accounting policy elections to minimize the cost and burden of adoption. We exclude from the transaction price any amounts collected from customers related to sales and other similar taxes. We have elected to account for the shipping and handling as an activity to fulfill the
promise to transfer the product, and therefore will not evaluate whether shipping and handling activities are promised services to its customers.
When determining the transaction price of a contract, an adjustment is made if payment from a customer occurs either significantly before or significantly after performance, resulting in a significant financing component. We do not assess whether a significant financing component exists if the period between when we perform our obligations under the contract and when the customer pays is one year or less. None of our contracts contained a significant financing component for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Grant Revenue
We recognize grant revenue as we perform services under the arrangement when the funding is committed. Revenues and related research and development expenses are presented gross in the consolidated statements of operations as we have determined we are the primary obligor under the arrangement relative to the research and development services.
Accounting for grants does not fall under ASC 606, as the grantor will not benefit directly from our expansion or product development. As there is no authoritative guidance under U.S. GAAP on accounting for grants to for-profit business entities, we have accounted for grants by analogy to IAS 20.
Our grants contain both monetary amounts granted related to assets and monetary amounts granted related to income, which are grants other than those related to assets. The grants related to assets are for the expansion and increase of manufacturing capacity. The grants related to income are for additional research and development, as well as other non-asset related scale up costs. We determined it was appropriate to account for each monetary grant amount under the appropriate accounting treatment outlined in IAS 20.
Under IAS 20, grants related to assets shall be presented in the consolidated balance sheets either by recognizing the grant as deferred income (which is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations on a systematic basis over the useful life of the asset), or by deducting the grant in calculating the carrying amount of the asset (which is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations over the life of the depreciable asset as a reduced depreciation expense). Both methods are acceptable under IAS 20. We have elected to record grants related to assets as a deduction in calculating the carrying value of the asset.
Under IAS 20, grants related to income are presented as part of the consolidated statements of operations, either separately or under a general heading. Both methods are acceptable under IAS 20. We have elected to record grants related to income separately on the consolidated statements of operations as grant revenue. The related expenses are recorded within operating expenses and not deducted.
On June 22, 2020, we entered into WP1 under the NIH’s RADx program to assess the feasibility of a novel SARS-CoV-2 antigen detection test using our Simoa technology. During the year ended December 31, 2020 we recognized $2.0 million of grant revenue and incurred $1.0 million in research and development expense related to WP1. WP1 was completed as of December 31, 2020.
On September 29, 2020, we entered into WP2 with the NIH under its RADx program. The contract, which has a total award value of $18.2 million, accelerates the continued development, scale-up, and deployment of the novel SARS-CoV-2 antigen detection test using our Simoa technology. The contract provides funding to expand assay kit manufacturing capacity and commercial deployment readiness. Release of the $18.2 million of funding under WP2 is based on the achievement of certain milestones. Contract funding was subject to achievement of these pre-defined milestones and the contract period ran through September 2021, with one milestone extended to March 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, we had received $17.7 million out of the full $18.2 million under WP2. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $5.2 million in grant revenue and incurred $3.4 million in research and development expense related to WP2. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $4.4 million in grant revenue and incurred $2.6 million in research and development expense related to WP2.
The following table summarizes the cumulative activity under WP2 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation awards in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (ASC 718). ASC 718 requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values. Stock-based compensation awards have historically consisted of stock options and restricted stock units. Prior to the adoption of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (ASU 2018-07), the measurement date for non-employee awards was generally the date the services were completed, resulting in financial reporting period adjustments to stock-based compensation during the vesting period for changes in the fair value of the awards. We adopted ASU 2018-07 on January 1, 2020. After the adoption of ASU 2018-07, the measurement date for non-employee awards is the date of grant without changes in the fair value of the award. Stock-based compensation costs for non-employees are recognized as expense over the vesting period on a straight-line basis. There were no material non-employee awards outstanding during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
We recognize forfeitures as they occur. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
The fair value of stock options granted to employees and non-employees is estimated on the grant date using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model, based on the assumptions noted in the following table:
Expected volatility was calculated based on proportional weighting of reported volatility data for a representative group of guideline publicly traded companies for which historical information was available, as well as our stock. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant, commensurate with the expected life assumption. We estimate the expected life of options granted to employees utilizing the simplified method which calculates the expected life of an option as the average of the time to vesting and
contractual life of the options. The expected life is applied to the stock option grant group as a whole, as we do not expect substantially different exercise or post-vesting termination behavior among our employee population. We use the simplified method due to the lack of historical exercise data and the plain nature of the stock options. We use the remaining contractual term for the expected life of non-employee awards. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on common stock.
We determined the fair value of each share of common stock underlying share-based awards based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by Nasdaq on the date of grant.
The table below summarizes the stock-based compensation expense recognized in our statements of operations by classification (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, we had $35.8 million of total unrecognized stock-based compensation costs which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 2.9 years.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Revenue
Revenue increased by $24.2 million, or 28%, to $110.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $86.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Product revenue increased 84% to $81.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $44.0 million in the same period in 2020. Product revenue consisted of sales of instruments totaling $26.0 million and sales of consumables and other products totaling $55.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Product revenue consisted of sales of instruments totaling $16.6 million and sales of consumables and other products of $27.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in product revenue was primarily due to the increased ability to install instruments as customer sites reopened from COVID-19 related shutdowns that impacted results in the same period in 2020. In addition, as the installed base of instruments increased year over year, consumable sales increased. The decrease in service and other revenue of $0.5 million was primarily due to our open headcount within our services personnel. We had $0.6 million and $11.8 million in collaboration and license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to licensing technology and intellectual property. We had $11.2 million in collaboration and license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily related to entering into the Abbott License Agreement. Grant revenue of $5.2 million and $6.4 million consisted of revenue related to WP2 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, and revenue related to WP2 and WP1 recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
Cost of Goods Sold, Services, and Licenses
Cost of product revenue increased by $8.2 million, or 32%, to $34.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to our increase in volume of our product revenue. Cost of service revenue increased by $3.4 million, or 31%, to $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased personnel costs from the build out of our field service organization. Cost of collaboration and license revenue of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from the licensing of certain technology and intellectual property to Abbott. Overall cost of goods sold and services as a percentage of revenue was consistent at 44% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense increased by $7.8 million, or 39%, to $28.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $20.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased headcount as we build our organization to support growth and invest in process improvements.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $32.7 million, or 55%, to $92.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $59.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher personnel costs from increased headcount and other spending increases in various departments as we build out our organization to support growth and invest in process improvements.
Interest Expense
Interest expense, net decreased by $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the unfavorable impact of interest rates on our cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net increased by $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to other income of $2.1 million related to an employee retention tax credit established under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Securities Act, offset by other expense due to unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit was less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.4 million tax for the same period in 2020. The change is primarily due to the decrease in the tax benefit recorded on the operating results of our foreign subsidiaries.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred annual net losses and negative cash flows from operations. We used $47.9 million, $23.4 million and $26.2 million of cash for our operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The significant increase in our cash used for operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to December 31, 2020, was principally driven by our increased net loss for the 2021 period. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $305.5 million. As of December 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $396.5 million.
Sources of Liquidity
To date, we have financed our operations principally through equity offerings, borrowings from credit facilities and revenue from our commercial operations.
Equity Offerings
On March 19, 2019, we entered into a Sales Agreement for an “at-the-market offering” arrangement with Cowen and Company, LLC (Cowen), which allowed us to issue and sell shares of common stock pursuant to a shelf registration statement for total gross sales proceeds of up to $50.0 million from time to time through Cowen, acting as our agent. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold an aggregate of 2,186,163 shares of common stock pursuant to this agreement resulting in $49.7 million in gross proceeds and $48.0 million in net proceeds. On August 6, 2020, we delivered written notice to Cowen to terminate the Sales Agreement, which termination the parties agreed to make immediately effective.
On August 8, 2019, we entered into an underwriting agreement with J.P. Morgan Securities LLC and SVB Leerink LLC, or Leerink, as representatives of the several underwriters, relating to an underwritten public offering of 2,732,673 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $25.25 per share. We received $69.0 million in gross proceeds and $64.5 million in net proceeds.
On August 6, 2020, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Leerink and Cowen, as representatives of the several underwriters, relating to an underwritten public offering of 3,048,774 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $32.00 per share. We received $97.6 million in gross proceeds and $91.4 million in net proceeds.
On February 3, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, Leerink and Cowen, as representatives of the several underwriters, relating to an underwritten public offering of 4,107,142 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $70.00 per share. We received $287.5 million in gross proceeds and approximately $269.7 million in net proceeds.
Loan Facility with Hercules
On April 14, 2014, we executed a loan agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc. (Hercules), as subsequently amended most recently in April 2019. The interest rate on this term loan was variable based on a calculation of 8% plus the prime rate less 5.25%, with a minimum interest rate of 8%. Interest was to be paid monthly beginning the month following the borrowing date. Under the amended agreement, we were required to pay the loan principal in four equal installments starting July 1, 2021, with the final principal payment and end of term charge to be made on October 1, 2021. On October 1, 2021, we made the final principal payment, including end of term fees, of $2.0 million related to the loan agreement. As of December 31, 2021, there were no additional amounts available to borrow under the loan facility.
Uman Acquisition
In August 2019, we completed the acquisition of Uman, in which we paid $15.7 million in cash to the shareholders of Uman. We funded this payment through our existing cash balances. In addition, we issued $5.5 million in stock in connection with the purchase of Uman. The acquisition closed with respect to 95% of the outstanding shares of capital stock of Uman on July 1, 2019 and with respect to the remaining 5% of the outstanding shares of capital stock of Uman on August 1, 2019.
Cash Flows
The following table presents our cash flows for each period presented (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
We derive cash flows from operations primarily from the sale of our products and services. Our cash flows from operating activities are also significantly influenced by our use of cash for operating expenses to support the growth of our business. We have historically experienced negative cash flows from operating activities as we have developed our technology, expanded our business and built our infrastructure and this may continue in the future.
Net cash used in operating activities was $47.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash used in operating activities primarily consisted of net loss of $57.7 million offset by non-cash charges of $16.0 million of stock-based compensation expense and $4.9 million of depreciation and amortization expense. Cash used as a result of changes in operating assets and liabilities of $12.2 million was primarily due to an increase in inventory of $8.1 million and an increase in accounts receivable of $6.9 million, offset by an increase in accounts payable, accrued compensation and benefits and other accrued expenses of $3.5 million, all driven by growth and our investments in process improvements.
Net cash used in operating activities was $23.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities primarily consisted of net loss of $31.5 million offset by non-cash charges of $10.1 million of stock-based compensation expense and $4.3 million of depreciation and amortization expense. Cash used as a result of changes in operating assets and liabilities of $8.0 million was primarily due to an increase in an increase in accounts receivable of $6.7 million, an increase in inventory of $5.1 million, and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $3.9 million, offset by a decrease in accrued compensation and benefits and other accrued expenses of $6.2 million.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Historically, our primary investing activities have consisted of capital expenditures for the purchase of capital equipment to support our expanding infrastructure and work force. We expect to continue to incur additional costs for capital expenditures related to these efforts in future periods.
We used $6.3 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of $13.6 million for the purchase of property and equipment, offset by $7.3 million in grant proceeds related to assets acquired under WP2.
We used $0.6 million of cash in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting of $3.9 million in additions to property and equipment, offset by $3.3 million in grant proceeds related to assets acquired under WP2.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Historically, we have financed our operations principally through private placements of our convertible preferred stock and borrowings from credit facilities, the sale of shares of our common stock in our IPO or other offerings and revenues from our commercial operations.
Financing activities provided $270.8 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily from $269.7 million in net proceeds from our underwritten public offering during the first quarter of 2021.
Financing activities provided $96.2 million of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily from net proceeds of our underwritten public offering during the third quarter of 2020.
Capital Resources
We have not achieved profitability on an annual basis since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur net losses in the future. We also expect that our operating expenses will increase as we continue to increase our marketing efforts to drive adoption of our commercial products. Our liquidity requirements have historically consisted, and we expect that they will continue to consist, of sales and marketing expenses, research and development expenses, working capital, debt service and general corporate expenses.
We believe cash generated from commercial sales along with our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. In the future, we expect our operating and capital expenditures to increase as we increase headcount, expand our sales and marketing activities and grow our customer base. Our estimates of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations and the costs to support research and development and our sales and marketing activities are forward-looking statements and involve risks and uncertainties and actual results could vary materially and negatively as a result of a number of factors, including the factors discussed in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● market acceptance of our products and services;
● the cost and timing of establishing additional sales, marketing and distribution capabilities;
● the cost of our research and development activities;
● our ability to enter into collaborations in the future, and the success of any such collaborations;
● the cost and timing of potential regulatory clearances or approvals that may be required in the future for our products; and
● the effect of competing technological and market developments.
We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain additional funds on acceptable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Future debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. Any debt or equity financing that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through collaboration and licensing arrangements with third parties, it may be necessary to relinquish some rights to our technologies or our products, or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. If we do not have or are not able to obtain sufficient funds, we may have to delay development or commercialization of our products. We also may have to reduce marketing, customer support or other resources devoted to our products or cease operations.
If the conditions for raising capital are favorable, we may seek to finance future cash needs through public or private equity or debt offerings or other financings. On November 6, 2020, we filed an automatically effective shelf registration statement with the SEC. Each issuance of securities under the shelf registration statement will require the filing of a prospectus supplement identifying the amount and terms of securities to be issued. The registration statement does not limit the amount of securities that may be issued thereunder. Our ability to issue securities is subject to market
conditions and other factors. This registration statement will expire on November 6, 2023, three years after its date of effectiveness.
Contractual Obligations, Commitments and Contingencies
Lease Obligations
We currently lease approximately 91,600 square feet of office, laboratory, and manufacturing space at our headquarters in Billerica, Massachusetts. In addition, in the first quarter of 2022, we executed a lease for 85,800 square feet of office and laboratory space in Bedford, Massachusetts. The premises covered by these leases serves as our principal office and laboratory space effective the second quarter of 2019. The initial term of the Billerica lease is eleven years and five months beginning on April 1, 2019, and we have the option to extend the lease for two additional five-year periods. The initial term of the Bedford lease is eight years and nine months beginning on the earlier of our occupancy, or May 1, 2022.
In addition, our subsidiary, Uman, leases a total of approximately 6,500 square feet of office, laboratory, manufacturing and storage space in Umeå, Sweden. These leases expire at various dates through February 28, 2023.
The following table summarizes our operating lease obligations (in thousands):
Backlog
We generally expect to ship all instrument and consumable orders received in a given period with the exception of orders received near the end of a fiscal quarter; and as a result, our backlog at the end of any period is typically insignificant.