ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION.
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. See “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Management’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition (“MD&A”) is a supplement to the accompanying condensed financial statements and provides additional information on Quantum Computing Inc.’s (“Quantum” or the “Company’) business, current developments, financial condition, cash flows and results of operations.
When we say “we,” “us,” “our,” “Company,” or “Quantum,” we mean Quantum Computing Inc.
Overview
At the present time, we are a development stage company with limited operations. The Company plans to enter the market for high performance computers and software applications, specifically focusing on what are known as “quantum computers”. The Company has assembled a team of experts in quantum computing software technology and quantum mathematics, which will focus on the design and development of several quantum software applications targeting solutions to non-deterministic polynomial applications. The Company’s development team has initially focused on addressing computational problems in the financial services, supply chain and logistics management; pharmaceutical design, heavy manufacturing, and computer security (cyber) market segments. The Company’s development team includes mathematicians, physicists, and software developers.
Results of Operations
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 vs. December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the Twelve Months ended December 31, 2021 were $0 as compared with $0 for the comparable prior year period, a change of $0, or 0%. In 2021, QCI continued to execute its business strategy to provide quantum-ready solutions for solving real-world problems. Much progress was made toward this overarching objective, but the generation of revenue from customers has been slower to develop. The lack of revenue is due in part to the fact that quantum computing hardware is still emerging and only beginning to scale to levels that are closer to solving important optimization problems at a commercial scale, and in part due to the fact that quantum computing is a novel idea for most potential customers. Accordingly, the Company has focused on developing software technology to amplify the performance of existing quantum hardware, and on customer education and building customer awareness as a precursor to generating sales. We have developed and released two products and are now in the process of marketing and commercialization. We expect to generate revenue in 2022.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $0 as compared with $0 for the comparable prior year period, a change of $0 or 0%. There was no cost of revenues recorded because the Company has not yet commenced generating revenue from sales of products or services.
Gross Margin
Gross margin for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $0 as compared with $0 for the comparable prior year period. There was no gross margin because the Company has not yet commenced generating revenue from sales of products or services.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 were $17,130,093 as compared with $17,343,007 for the comparable prior year period, a decrease of $212,914 or 1.23%. The decrease in operating expenses is due to a decrease in stock-based compensation expense of $1,775,766, a decrease in consulting expense of $606,511, a decrease in legal expense of $169,889, and a decrease in other SG&A expense of $582,419 compared to the comparable prior year period. These decreases were offset in part by an increase of $1,846,201 in salary expense and an increase in R&D expense of $1,046,279, as the Company hired additional staff during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and reduced its use of consultants compared with the prior year period.
Net Loss
Our net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $27,898,847 as compared with a net loss of $24,734,280 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of $3,164,567 or 12.8%. The increase in net loss is primarily due to an increase in interest expense of $3,160,703 relating to the offering of Series A Convertible Preferred and Warrants, coupled with a decrease in other income of $225,749, incurred during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared with the prior year period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We fund our working capital with cash from investment. Since commencing operations as Quantum Computing in February 2018, the Company has raised $27,759,904 through private placement of equity and $5,133,000 through private placements of Convertible Promissory Notes for a total of $32,892,904 in new investment. The Company has no lines of credit, and no long-term debt obligations outstanding. As of February 28, 2022, the Company had cash and equivalents of $13,229,380 on hand. We believe that our current cash position and other available financing resources, coupled with our ongoing operating activities, will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our business needs over the next twelve months and beyond. To the extent the sources of capital described above are insufficient to meet our needs, we may also conduct additional public offerings of our securities, refinance debt, dispose of certain assets to fund our operating activities, or draw on existing or new debt facilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation:
The accompanying audited Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2021, and the audited financial statements of the Company have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP for interim financial information, the instructions to Form 10-Q and Article 10 of Regulation S-X. In the opinion of management, the accompanying audited, financial statements contain all adjustments necessary to present fairly the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021, and the cash flows and results of operations for the three and twelve months then ended. Such adjustments consisted only of normal recurring items. The results of operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 are not necessarily indicative of the results for subsequent periods.
Accounting Changes
Except for the changes discussed below, Quantum has consistently applied the accounting policies to all periods presented in these unaudited financial statements. The Company has evaluated all recently implemented accounting standards and concluded that none currently apply to the Company.
Use of Estimates:
These financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. Because a precise determination of assets and liabilities, and correspondingly revenues and expenses, depends on future events, the preparation of financial statements for any period necessarily involves the use of estimates and assumption an example being assumptions in valuation of stock options. Actual amounts may differ from these estimates. These financial statements have, in management’s opinion, been properly prepared within reasonable limits of materiality and within the framework of the accounting policies summarized below.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company’s policy is to present bank balances under cash and cash equivalents, which at times, may exceed federally insured limits. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts.
Operating Leases - ASC 842
On January 1, 2019, we adopted FASB Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”) which requires the recognition of the right-of-use assets and relating operating and finance lease liabilities on the balance sheet. Under ASC 842, all leases are required to be recorded on the balance sheet and are classified as either operating leases or finance leases. The lease classification affects the expense recognition in the income statement. Operating lease charges are recorded entirely in operating expenses. Finance lease charges are split, where amortization of the right-of-use asset is recorded in operating expenses and an implied interest component is recorded in interest expense.
We lease substantially all our office space used to conduct our business. For contracts entered into on or after the effective date, at the inception of a contract we assess whether the contract is, or contains, a lease. Our assessment is based on (1) whether the contract involves the use of a distinct identified asset, (2) whether we obtain the right to substantially all the economic benefit from the use of the asset throughout the period, and (3) whether we have the right to direct the use of the asset. At inception of a lease, we allocate the consideration in the contract to each lease component based on its relative stand-alone price to determine the lease payments.
Leases are classified as either finance leases or operating leases. A lease is classified as a finance lease if any one of the following criteria are met: (1) the lease transfers ownership of the asset by the end of the lease term, (2) the lease contains an option to purchase the asset that is reasonably certain to be exercised, (3) the lease term is for a major part of the remaining useful life of the asset or (4) the present value of the lease payments equals or exceeds substantially all of the fair value of the asset. A lease is classified as an operating lease if it does not meet any one of these criteria. Substantially all our operating leases are comprised of office space leases and as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 we had no finance leases.
For all leases at the lease commencement date, a right-of-use asset and a lease liability are recognized. The right-of-use asset represents the right to use the leased asset for the lease term. The lease liability represents the present value of the lease payments under the lease. The Company is currently leasing space in three locations, Leesburg, VA, Minneapolis, MN and Vancouver, BC, and we have recognized right-of-use assets and lease liabilities accordingly.
The right-of-use asset is initially measured at cost, which primarily comprises the initial amount of the lease liability, plus any initial direct costs incurred, consisting mainly of brokerage commissions, less any lease incentives received. All right-of-use assets are reviewed for impairment. The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments, discounted using the interest rate implicit in the lease, or if that rate cannot be readily determined, our secured incremental borrowing rate for the same term as the underlying lease. For our real estate and other operating leases, we use our secured incremental borrowing rate. For our finance leases, we use the rate implicit in the lease or our secured incremental borrowing rate if the implicit lease rate cannot be determined.
Lease payments included in the measurement of the lease liability comprise the following: the fixed noncancelable lease payments, payments for optional renewal periods where it is reasonably certain the renewal period will be exercised, and payments for early termination options unless it is reasonably certain the lease will not be terminated early.
Lease expense for operating leases consists of the lease payments plus any initial direct costs, primarily brokerage commissions, and is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost or contributed value. Depreciation of furniture, software and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, and leasehold improvements are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the lease term. The cost and related accumulated depreciation of equipment retired or sold are removed from the accounts and any differences between the undepreciated amount and the proceeds from the sale are recorded as a gain or loss on sale of equipment.
Net Loss Per Share:
Net loss per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares and common shares equivalents outstanding during the period.