Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes to consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs and expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this prospectus, particularly in “Risk Factors” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
Quotient Technology Inc. is an industry leading digital media and promotions technology company that powers cohesive omnichannel brand-building and sales-driving marketing campaigns for advertisers and retailers to influence purchasing decisions throughout a shopper's path to purchase. These marketing campaigns are planned, delivered and measured using our technology platforms and data analytics tool. Our vision is to build the world's leading performance marketing platform that delivers a variety of targeted digital marketing solutions which advertisers and retailers can purchase to drive measurable improvements in sales and customer loyalty.
Our customers consist primarily of consumer-packaged goods ("CPG") companies and their brand marketers (together referred to as "advertisers") who want to drive sales and positive brand engagement with shoppers. Our digital marketing platform is designed to produce returns on marketing investment for advertisers by utilizing consumer behavior and intent data to deliver the right marketing message to the right shopper at the right time, through multiple touchpoints while they are engaged online, out of home and in-store. We partner with retailers, who primarily sell through local, physical stores as well as through eCommerce properties. We are primarily focused on the US-based grocery retail market and the advertisers who sell products through that channel. However, we are aiming to expand outside the grocery retail space, such as with partners in certain vertically-integrated industries (also known as "verticals").
By partnering with Quotient, retailers can monetize their proprietary sales data and digital properties to build an alternative revenue stream and offer effective marketing opportunities for their brand partners to engage consumers, with the aim of achieving higher sales through their physical stores and eCommerce sites.
Over the last five years, we have grown our platform capabilities and our network of marketing channels to reach shoppers through a combination of in-house innovation, partnerships, and acquisitions. Our network includes the digital properties of our retail partners, non-retail partners and CPG customers, social media platforms, and our flagship consumer brand Coupons.com and DOOH properties. This network provides Quotient with proprietary and licensed data, including retailers' POS shopper data, consumer behavior and purchase intent data, and location intelligence. With such data powering our platforms, customers and partners use Quotient to leverage consumer data and insights, engage consumers via digital channels, and integrate marketing and merchandising programs to drive measurable sales results and consumer engagement.
Our network is made up of several different constituencies:
•Our advertiser customers consist of approximately 900 CPGs, representing over 2,500 brands, including many of the leading food, beverage, personal care and household product manufacturers;
•Our retail partners represent multiple classes of trade such as grocery retailers, drug, automotive, mass merchant, dollar, club, and convenience merchandise channels, where most CPGs' products are sold;
•Our network partners currently include a select group of partners who invest heavily in online consumer engagement and who help us increase our network's reach to more US shoppers; and
•Millions of consumers who visit our owned websites, mobile properties and social channels, as well as those of our CPGs, retailer partners and other network partners.
Through these relationships, we believe we have created a network effect, which engages consumers and provides us a competitive advantage over both offline and online competitors. As our network expands and our consumer audience increases, we generate more consumer data and insights, which further improves our ability to deliver targeted and personalized media and promotions, and also strengthens our measurement and data insight solutions. We believe this will make our platforms more valuable to advertisers and retailers for their digital marketing campaigns. We expect that the breadth of media and promotion content delivered through Quotient platforms from leading brands will increase and enable us to attract and retain more retailers and consumers.
We primarily generate revenue by advertisers and retailers using our technology platforms to help achieve their digital marketing objectives in four distinct ways:
•Plan and buy media and promotions campaigns to reach the right shoppers;
•Target advertising, promotions and messaging to shoppers for maximum impact;
•Sell advertising space and activate the shopper data that retailers collect through loyalty programs and digital transactions; and
•Measure the impact of advertisements, promotions or messages that have been planned, sold or placed with "closed loop" measurement, defined as the use of consumer data to help understand and evaluate how certain digital campaigns impact our advertiser customers' and retailer partners' sales.
Using shopper data from our retail partners and our proprietary data and audience segments, we deliver targeted and/or personalized digital media and promotions to shoppers through our network. As our customers and partners shift more of their marketing spend to digital channels, our solutions help them optimize the performance of such digital channels. Our platforms measure performance by attribution of digital campaigns to retail purchases in near real time, demonstrating return on spend for our customers and partners.
Our promotions products include digital paperless coupons, digital print coupons, in-lane on receipt promotions, digital national promotions, shopper promotions, digital rebates and loyalty offers. Our media solutions include display, social, DOOH, Retailer.com display and sponsored search, shoppable brand pages, and audiences. A growing number of our customers purchase an integrated campaign which combines a mix of digital media and/or promotions solutions within a single campaign. While the revenue we earn from these programs is generally determined on a cost-per-click, cost-per-impression or cost-per-acquisition basis, in 2021 we launched duration-based pricing for our new offering Duration-Based National Promotions Solution, which we plan to deploy to a greater extent in the future.
We generally pay a distribution fee, or revenue share, to retailers and publishers for activation or redemption of a digital promotion, for media campaigns, and for use of data for targeting or measurement. We also pay a fee to third-party publishers for traffic acquisition, which consists of delivering campaigns on certain networks or properties. Generally, these distribution, revenue share and third-party service fees are included in our cost of revenues because we control the digital promotion and media advertising inventory before it is transferred to our customers. In limited instances where we do not control the digital promotion and media advertising inventory, we record revenues on a net basis, and the distribution, revenue-share and third-party service fees are deducted from gross revenues to arrive at net revenues.
We expect our operating expenses to decline in absolute dollars as we remove costs from the business. However, we also expect operating expenses to increase as a percentage of revenue as more of our future revenue is recognized on a net basis compared to the prior periods due to the business model changes.. When revenues begin to grow again, we expect to increase spending to support that growth.
For 2021, 2020 and 2019, our revenues were $521.5 million, $445.9 million, and $436.2 million, respectively. Our net loss for 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $45.6 million, $65.4 million, and $37.1 million, respectively.
Seasonality
Some of the Company’s products experience seasonal sales and buying patterns mirroring those in the CPG, retail, advertising, and eCommerce markets, including back-to-school and holiday campaigns, where demand increases during the second half of the Company’s fiscal year. Seasonality may also be affected by CPG annual budget cycles, as some large CPGs have fiscal years ending in June. We believe that this seasonality pattern has affected, and will continue to affect, our business and the associated revenues during the first half and second half of our fiscal year. We recognized 54%, 59% and 54% of our annual revenue during the second half of 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We believe the first half of 2020 results were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a higher percentage of revenues in our second half of the year than we have experienced in the past.
Impact of COVID-19
We are cognizant of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting global implications. In an effort to protect the health and safety of our employees, our workforce has had, and continues in most instances, to spend a significant amount of time working remotely, and travel has been impacted. Many government measures initially imposed to contain COVID-19 or slow its spread, including orders to close all businesses not deemed “essential,” isolate residents to their homes or places of residence, and practice social distancing, have been lifted in certain global locations and have been lifted widely in the U.S., although as a result of new virus variants arising, it is possible that such measures may be reinstated in the future. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to negatively impact business activity across the globe, even though vaccination efforts are continuing throughout the United States and, to varying extents, in other countries.
While we observed revenue growth during 2021, we cannot estimate the impact COVID-19 will have in the future as government entities and businesses make decisions about whether and when to open businesses or whether to return to restrictive measures after re-openings have occurred, and we also cannot estimate what impact these decisions will have on consumer activity across the globe, especially as it remains uncertain how strong or lasting the impact of the vaccinations will be.
We will continue to actively monitor the pandemic situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and stockholders. If brands or retailers pause, delay, or cancel campaigns due to the continuing uncertainty, supply-chain disruption, inflationary input-cost factors affecting advertiser and retailers, and consumer purchasing behavior changes caused by COVID-19, there may be an adverse impact on our promotion and media revenues, and the growth of our business. The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations and financial results will depend on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure and Key Operating Metrics
Adjusted Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”), a non-GAAP financial measure, is a key metric used by our management and our Board of Directors to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, to develop short and long-term operational plans, and to determine bonus payouts. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of certain income and expenses in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core business. Additionally, Adjusted EBITDA is a key financial metric used by the compensation committee of our Board of Directors in connection with the determination of compensation for our executive officers. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as it does for our management and Board of Directors.
Adjusted EBITDA excludes non-cash charges, such as depreciation, amortization and stock-based compensation, because such non-cash expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations and can vary significantly between periods. Additionally, it excludes the effects of interest expense; income taxes; other (income) expense net; change in fair value contingent consideration; impairment of certain intangible assets; certain acquisition related costs; restructuring charges; and a loss contingency/settlement related to a contract dispute. We exclude certain items because we believe that these costs (benefits) do not reflect expected future operating expenses. Additionally, certain items are inconsistent in amounts and frequency, making it difficult to contribute to a meaningful evaluation of our current or past operating performance.
Net loss and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods presented were as follows:
Our use of Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and one should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest and tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
•Adjusted EBITDA also does not include the effects of stock-based compensation; amortization of acquired intangible assets; change in fair value of contingent consideration; interest expense; other (income)
expense, net; provision for income taxes; impairment of certain intangible assets; certain acquisition related costs; restructuring charges; and a loss contingency/settlement related to a contract dispute; and
•other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented is set forth as follows:
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2021, Other includes a charge of $9.1 million related to the impairment of certain intangible assets due to the circumstances surrounding the termination of our partnership with Albertsons, and restructuring charges of $2.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Other includes a $8.8 million loss contingency/settlement related to a contract dispute with Albertsons associated with a guaranteed distribution fee arrangement, and restructuring charges of $1.5 million. For the year ended December 31, 2019, Other includes restructuring charges of $4.3 million. Restructuring charges relate to severance for impacted employees. Acquisition related costs primarily include certain bonuses contingent upon the acquired company meeting certain financial metrics over the contingent consideration period, together with diligence, accounting, and legal expenses incurred related to certain acquisitions.
This non-GAAP financial measure is not intended to be considered in isolation from, as substitute for, or as superior to, the corresponding financial measure prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Because of these and other limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered along with U.S. GAAP-based financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net loss, and our other U.S. GAAP financial results.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Obtaining high quality promotions, increasing the number of brand-authorized activations, and capitalizing on new pricing/revenue models for promotions. Our ability to grow revenue will depend upon our ability to shift more dollars to our platforms from our brand customers, to continue to obtain high quality promotions and to increase the number of brand-authorized activations available through our platforms, and to capitalize on new pricing/revenue models for promotions, such as duration-based pricing. If we are unable to do any of these, growth in our revenue may be adversely affected.
Increasing revenue from advertisers on our platforms. Our ability to grow our revenue in the future depends upon our ability to continue to increase revenues from existing and new advertisers on our platforms through national brand coupons, targeted media and measurement, and increasing the number of brands that are using our platforms within each advertiser.
Variability in promotional and media spend by advertisers or brands. Our revenues may fluctuate due to changes in promotional or media spending budgets of advertisers as well as the timing of their promotional and media spending. Decisions by major advertisers, whether or not due to the impact of COVID-19 and related supply chain and inflation input-cost issues, to delay or reduce their promotional and media spending, move campaigns, or divert spending away from digital promotions or media, could slow our revenue growth or reduce our revenues.
Grow our network. The success and scale of our platforms and our ability to grow revenue will depend on our ability to grow our publishing network, expand our reach to engaged consumers, and drive volume of transactions on our platforms. If we do not add network partners or expand our relationship with existing network partners, or if network partners do not deliver active users to our platforms, our business and revenue growth will be negatively impacted.
Ability to retain and expand our relationships with retailers, obtain commitment and support for our platforms from retailers, and successfully renegotiate or amend retailer agreements. The success and scale of our platforms depend on our strategic relationships with retailers. The success and scale of our platforms also depends on the level of commitment and support for our platforms from retailers. Renewals or amendments of existing retailer relationships may become more challenging for us in light of our business model and pricing changes. These changes require restructuring our agreements and the way we operate with retailers and revenue arrangements for certain services. If we do not expand these relationships, if we do not renew or amend these relationships on as favorable terms as were in place immediately prior to renewal or amendment, if we lose significant retailers, or if we do not add new retailers to our platforms, our business will be negatively affected. In the near term, we expect that the forthcoming termination of our relationship with Albertsons will have a negative impact on our financial performance.
Innovation in our media and promotions offerings, expansion of our consumer reach and growth of our data and analytics capabilities. Our ability to grow our revenue in the future will depend on our ability to (i) innovate and invest in promotion and media solutions, particularly with regard to automation and self-service offerings; and (ii) invest in solutions around our data and analytic capabilities, referred to as Quotient Analytics and Audiences, for advertisers and retailers.
International Growth and Acquisitions. Our ability to grow our revenues will also depend on our ability to grow our operations and offerings in existing international markets and expand our business through selective acquisitions, similar to our acquisitions of MLW Squared inc. ("Ahalogy"), Crisp Media, Inc. ("Crisp"), Elevaate Ltd. ("Elevaate"), SavingStar Inc. ("SavingStar"), Shopmium SAS ("Shopmium") and Ubimo Ltd. ("Ubimo"), and our ability to integrate such acquisitions with the core business of the Company.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate revenues by providing digital media and promotions solutions to our customers and partners. We provide digital promotions, including digital coupons, and/or media programs to our customers which consist of advertisers, retail partners, and advertising agencies whereby we use our proprietary technology platforms to create, target, deliver and analyze these programs. We typically generate revenue from our customers through the use of these programs on a cost-per-click, cost-per-impression, or cost-per acquisition basis, which are typically billed monthly. Duration-based campaigns are generally billed prior to campaign launch.
Digital Media. Our media programs enable advertisers and retailers to distribute digital media to promote their brands and products on our retailer's websites, and mobile applications, and through a network of affiliate publishers and non-publisher third parties that display our media offerings on their websites or mobile applications. Pricing for media campaigns is usually determined on a cost-per-impression, cost-per-click or cost-per-acquisition basis. The Company recognizes revenue each time a digital media ad is displayed or each time a user clicks on the media ad displayed on the Company’s websites, mobile applications or on third-party websites. Changes to the way we process and deliver media or changes in our arrangements with retailers or partners, including whether we are acting as the retailers' agent, could affect whether revenue is recognized on a gross or net basis.
Digital Promotions. Our digital promotions programs typically include both promotion set up fees and promotion campaign fees. Promotion setup fees relates to the creation of digital promotions and setup of the underlying campaign on our proprietary platforms for tracking of related clicks. We recognize revenues related to
promotion setup fees over time, proportionally, on a per click basis, using the number of authorized clicks per insertion order, commencing on the date of the first click. A click refers to the consumers action of activating a digital promotion through our proprietary technology platforms by either saving it to a retailer's loyalty account for automatic digital redemption, or by printing it for physical redemption at a retailer. Promotion campaign fees are usually determined on a per click basis. We typically recognize revenues for digital promotion campaign fees as clicks occur. Changes to the way we process and deliver promotions or changes in our arrangements with retailers or partners, including whether we are acting as the retailers' agent, could affect whether revenue is recognized on a gross or net basis.
National Promotions. Our digital promotions also include our national promotions business which are non-retailer specific. Historically, offerings have been sold on a cost-per-click basis. Beginning the first quarter of 2021, we introduced a new offering, Duration-Based National Promotions Solution. This offering provides advertisers access to our proprietary platforms for a specific period of time (the campaign period) in exchange for a fixed fee. We provide a single service of making the advertiser's promotions available for use on our network each day during the campaign period, which generally is between seven and twenty-eight days. The performance obligation is satisfied over time, therefore we recognize revenue ratably over the campaign period.
Shopper Promotions and Media. Our media and promotions programs include shopper campaigns which are retailer-specific. Historically, we recognize revenue for shopper campaign fees as clicks occur. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we introduced a new shopper arrangement whereby retailers pay us for the use of our platforms to sell shopper campaigns to advertisers on behalf of the retailers. We have determined that we are an agent in these arrangements as the retailer is the customer, the retailer controls the delivery of shopper promotion and media programs on our website, and sets the pricing. Our obligation in these arrangements is to provide use of our platforms to the retailers. The retailer determines how shopper promotions and media programs are executed through our platforms; therefore, we recognize revenue on a net basis under these arrangements. Revenue under these arrangements was not significant during 2021, however, we expect revenue for these arrangements to increase during 2022.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues includes the costs resulting from distribution fees or revenue share. If we deliver a digital promotion or media on a retailer’s website or mobile applications, or through its loyalty program, or through the website or mobile applications of a publisher, we generally pay a distribution fee or revenue share to the retailers or publisher which is included in our cost of revenues. These costs are expensed as incurred. We generally do not pay a distribution fee for a coupon, rebate or code which is offered through the website of the advertiser or retailer that is offering the coupon, rebate or coupon code. From time to time, we have entered into arrangements pursuant to which we have agreed to the payment of minimum distribution or other service fees that are included in our cost of revenues.
Cost of revenues also includes personnel compensation costs; depreciation and amortization expense of equipment; software and acquired intangible assets associated with revenue producing technologies; amortization of certain exclusivity rights acquired under strategic partnerships; data center costs; third-party service fees including traffic acquisition costs which consists of payments related to delivering campaigns on certain networks; and purchase of third-party data. Personnel costs related to costs of revenues include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation and employee benefits. These costs are primarily attributable to individuals maintaining our data centers and members of our network operations group which initiates, sets up and delivers digital promotion and media campaigns. We capitalize costs related to software that is developed or obtained for internal use. Costs incurred in connection with internal software development for revenue-producing technologies are capitalized and are amortized in cost of revenues over the internal use software’s useful life. The amortization of these costs begins when the internally developed software is ready for its intended use.
Operating Expenses
We classify our operating expenses primarily into three categories: sales and marketing, research and development, and general and administrative. Our operating expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs and, to a lesser extent, professional fees and facilities expense. Personnel costs for each category of operating expenses generally include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, and employee benefits.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs (including salaries and benefits, sales commissions, and stock-based compensation) provided to our sales and marketing personnel. Sales and marketing expenses also include facility costs and other related overhead costs; marketing programs; amortization of acquired intangible assets; travel costs; and trade show expenses. We expect to continue to invest in sales and marketing in order to support our growth and business objectives, while also continuing to optimize our investment in promotional and advertising activities.
Research and development. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs (including salaries and benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation) provided to our engineering personnel; facility costs and other related overhead costs; costs related to the development of new products and the enhancement of existing products; fees for design, testing and consulting activities; and other related services.
We believe that continued investment in technology, as well as business process and automation, is critical to attaining our strategic objectives, and we intend to balance our investment in research and development with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts. We intend to continue to expand our tools and products that will enable our business to scale and provide more offering to our customers.
General and administrative. Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel compensation costs (including salaries and benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation) provided to our executives, finance, legal, human resource, and administrative personnel; facility costs and other related overhead costs; fees paid for professional services including legal, tax, accounting services; and other related expenses.
We expect general and administrative expenses to remain relatively consistent in future periods as we balance our investment in corporate infrastructure with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration. The change in fair value of contingent consideration is due to the re-measurement of contingent consideration liabilities resulting from acquisitions based on the expected achievement of certain financial metrics over each acquisition’s respective contingent consideration period.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists of cash coupon interest, accretion of debt discounts and issuance costs and primarily relates to our debt obligations under our convertible senior notes issued during the fourth quarter of 2017.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net, includes interest income on U.S. Treasury Bills held as cash equivalents and foreign currency exchange gains and losses.
Provision for Income Taxes
We recorded a provision for income taxes of $3.6 million, $0.7 million, and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increased earnings in foreign jurisdictions.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations and our consolidated results of operations as a percentage of revenues for the periods presented.
Disaggregated Revenue
The following table presents the Company’s revenues disaggregated by type of services. The majority of the Company’s revenue is generated from sales within the United States.
Revenues
Revenues increased by $75.6 million, or 17%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due the growth in 2021 of retailer programs driving more advertising spend on our platform which increased media revenue, and an increase in promotion revenue as brands ramp spend on our platforms. The higher growth in media revenues in 2021 has been primarily due to retailer programs that drive more brand spending through Quotient's RPM platform. These retailer programs incentivize advertisers to invest in marketing programs that target the retailer’s shoppers to increase sales and generate more distribution fees payments to our retailer partners. During 2021, revenues from digital promotion and media campaigns were 48% and 52% of total revenues, respectively, as compared to 53% and 47% of total revenues, respectively, for 2020.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $54.8 million, or 20%, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a net increase of $57.6 million in distribution fees paid to our retailer partners for media and promotion campaigns delivered through our platforms, offset by a decrease in data and media acquisition costs for offsite media on non-owned-and-operated properties; a charge of $9.1 million related to the impairment of certain intangible assets due to circumstances surrounding the termination of our partnership with Albertsons; an increase in compensation costs of $3.5 million; an increase in overhead expenses of $0.3 million related to facilities and infrastructure support; and an increase in restructuring charges of $0.2 million related to severance for impacted employees. The collective impact of these factors was partially offset by a decrease in amortization expense of $7.0 million related to acquired intangible assets and the benefit of the non-recurring settlement charge of $8.9 million recorded in the prior year related to a contract dispute with Albertsons associated with a guaranteed distribution fee arrangement.
Gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to 36% from 38%, as compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a charge related to the impairment of certain intangible assets as well as the shift in our product mix towards more media revenues, which have higher cost of sales due to media acquisition costs and distribution fees and which increased as a percentage of our total revenue as compared to our promotion revenue. This was partially offset by a higher proportion of revenue recognized on a net basis.
We expect the cost of revenues during fiscal 2022 to decline, in absolute dollars, as we expect a higher proportion of our revenue to be recognized on a net basis. We recognize revenue on a net basis for arrangements when we are act as an agent and do not control the service provided by the retailer or the price charged by the partner. CPGs and retailers are responsible for the determination of where a campaign is delivered and retailers are responsible for providing the underlying services.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $7.7 million, or 7%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily the result of an increase in compensation costs of $11.1 million related to hiring additional employees to support our growth and business objectives; an increase in restructuring charges of $0.9 million related to severance for impacted employees; and an increase in intangible asset amortization expense of $1.3 million. The collective impact of these factors was partially offset by reduced spending in travel, entertainment, and other costs of $5.6 million.
We expect sales and marketing expenses, as a percentage of revenue, to increase as we plan to continue to invest in sales and marketing in order to support our growth and business objectives.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $4.6 million, or 11%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in compensation costs of $5.6 million related to hiring additional employees to support our growth and business objectives and an increase in restructuring charges of $0.3 million related to severance for impacted employees. The collective impact of these factors was partially offset by a net increase in capitalization of internal use software development costs of $1.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we capitalized internal use software development costs of $7.0 million, as compared to $5.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
We believe that continued investment in technology is critical to attaining our strategic objectives, and we intend to balance our investment in research and development with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts. However, we expect research and development expenses, in absolute dollars, to decline in future periods as we consolidate our engineering function to drive efficiencies. Over the long term, we plan to continue to expand our tools and products that will enable our business to scale and provide more offerings to our customers.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $2.6 million, or 5%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in professional service fees of $5.3 million, including higher legal fees due to litigation matters, partially offset by a decrease in compensation costs of $1.2 million, a decrease in other administrative expenses of $1.1 million, a decrease in acquisition related charges of $0.3 million, and a decrease in restructuring charges of $0.1 million.
We expect general and administrative expenses, in absolute dollars, to remain relatively consistent in future periods as we balance our investment in corporate infrastructure with our continued operational and cost optimization efforts.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a net charge of $1.4 million related to the re-measurement of contingent consideration associated with both Ubimo and Elevaate, due to the increase in expected achievement of certain financial metrics over the contingent consideration period, as discussed in Note 3 (Fair Value Measurements) to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Expense and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest expense is related to the convertible senior notes, promissory note and finance lease obligations.
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income on U.S. Treasury Bills held as cash equivalents. The decrease in other income (expense), net during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period in 2020, was due to lower interest income earned on U.S. Treasury Bills held as cash equivalents, net of the effect of re-measuring balances in foreign currency due to exchange rate fluctuations.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to increased earnings in foreign jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations and capital expenditures primarily through cash flows from operation as well as from the proceeds from the issuance of convertible senior notes in 2017. As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was cash and cash equivalents of $237.4 million, which were held for working capital purposes. Our cash equivalents are comprised primarily of money market funds.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur legal, accounting, regulatory compliance and other costs in future periods as we continue to invest in corporate infrastructure and in connection with litigation matters. In addition, we may use cash to fund acquisitions or invest in other businesses, or incur capital expenditures including leasehold improvements or technology development activities. We intend to continue to manage our operating expenses in line with our existing cash and available financial resources, and we anticipate we will incur increased spending in future periods in order to execute our long-term business plan and to support our growth to fund our operating expenses.
Our Board of Directors previously approved programs for us to repurchase shares of our common stock. In February 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized the Company to repurchase up to $50.0 million of its common stock from February 2021 through February 2022 (the "February 2021 Program"). Under the February 2021 Program, stock repurchases may be made from time to time in open market transactions or privately negotiated transactions, and the Company may use a plan that is intended to meet the requirements of SEC Rule 10b5-1 to enable stock repurchases to occur during periods when the trading window would otherwise be closed. The February 2021 Program provides that the Company may suspend, modify or terminate the February 2021 Program at any time without prior notice. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company did not repurchase any shares of its common stock, nor did the Company repurchase any of its common stock thereafter. The Company terminated the February 2021 Program prior to its expiration.
Some of our agreements with retailers include an upfront payment for exclusive service rights for the term of the agreement. These payments are generally recognized as an expense or contra-revenue over the term of the exclusive right benefit. We expect payments related to exclusive service rights to total approximately $8.0 million over the next fiscal quarter.
In addition, some of our agreements with retailers include certain guaranteed distribution fees which, in some cases, may apply to multiple annual periods. If the adoption and usage of our platforms do not meet projections or minimums, these guaranteed distribution fees may not be recoverable and any shortfall may be payable by us at the end of the applicable period. We considered various factors in our assessment including our historical experience with the transaction volumes through the retailer and comparative retailers, ongoing communications with the retailer related to the retailer's marketing efforts to promote the digital platform, and revenues and associated revenue share payments for the particular retailer relationship that were projected. For example, in 2020 the Company's efforts to implement, with Albertsons, one of our solutions resulted in multiple disputes being raised by each of the parties against the other, one of which disputes resulted in the Company not being able to meet the contractual minimum at the end of the applicable period under the agreement. In order to resolve certain of the disputes regarding the parties' respective obligations, we recognized a loss of $8.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This loss was included in cost of revenues on our consolidated statements of operations. During the second quarter of 2021, the Company notified Albertsons that, due to Albertsons' failure to meet certain obligations under the agreement, the Company is not obligated to meet the contractual minimums for the period that ended in October 2021. In connection with renewal discussions between the parties, we received a letter in October 2021 from Albertsons notifying us of their intent to early terminate our agreement related to the delivery of promotions and media campaigns, effective December 31, 2021. We informed Albertsons that we disputed their right to terminate the agreement prior to March 31, 2022. The parties are currently in litigation. If the contractual minimum applicable to the period that ended in October 2021 is enforceable, the Company may recognize a loss that, depending on a variety of factors, is estimated to be as high as $8.5 million.
In November 2017, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.75% convertible senior notes due 2022 in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, (the “notes”). The notes are unsecured obligations of the company and bear interest at a fixed rate of 1.75% per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on June 1 and December 1 of each year, commencing on June 1, 2018. The notes will mature on December 1, 2022, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed, or converted in accordance with their terms.
In November 2021, we entered into a Loan, Guaranty, and Security Agreement (the "ABL Credit Agreement") which provides for an asset-backed revolving credit facility in the aggregate amount of $100.0 million and a sublimit for letters of credit of $10.0 million (the "ABL Facility"). The ABL Facility matures on November 17, 2026 with a springing maturity 91 days prior to the maturity of the notes under certain circumstances.
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents, cash flow from operations, and access to financing sources, including our ABL facility, will be sufficient to meet our scheduled debt repayment obligations, working capital and capital expenditure needs for the next 12 months and beyond. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. During this period of uncertainty and volatility related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we will continue to monitor our liquidity. See Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, for an additional discussion of risks related to COVID-19.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations primarily relate to our purchase obligations, debt, and lease obligations. Expected timing of those payments are as follows (in thousands):
(1) Represents aggregate principal amount and estimated interest obligation of the convertible senior notes due 2022, without the effect of associated discounts. See Note 9 Debt Obligations in the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements for further details.
(2) We have various lease office facilities, including our corporate headquarters in Salt Lake City, Utah, and various sales offices under operating lease agreements that expire on various dates through and including January 2031.
(3) We have an unconditional purchase commitment through 2034 in the amount of $5.4 million for marketing arrangements relating to the purchase of a 20-year suite license for a professional sports team which we use for sales and marketing purposes. We have unconditional purchase commitments, primarily related to distribution fees, ongoing software license fees and marketing services collectively totaling $11.2 million. We also have expected payments related to exclusive service rights of $8.0 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities is a result of our net income or loss for the period, adjusted for net non-cash income or expenses and changes in our operating assets and liabilities.
During 2021, net cash provided by operating activities of $26.0 million reflected our net loss of $45.6 million, adjusted for net non-cash expenses of $80.5 million and cash used as a result of changes in working capital of $8.9 million. Non-cash expenses included depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation; amortization of debt discount and issuance costs; allowance for credit losses; deferred income taxes; change in fair value of contingent consideration; impairment of certain intangible assets; and other non-cash expenses including amortization of right-of-use asset, amortization of deferred cost and loss on disposal of property and equipment. The primary sources of cash from working capital items included an increase in accounts payable and other liabilities of $27.6 million due to timing of services and payments, an increase in deferred revenues of $14.7 million due to higher billings for campaigns, and an increase in accrued compensation of $6.1 million related to bonuses and compensation. The collective impact of these factors was partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $40.1 million due to timing of invoicing and collections, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $14.3 million primarily for deferred cost related to a retailer agreement, and an Elevaate contingent consideration payment of $2.9 million related to the changes in fair value over the contingent consideration period.
Investing Activities
Purchases of property and equipment may vary from period-to-period due to the timing of the expansion of our operations, the addition of headcount, and the development activities related to our future offerings. We expect to continue to invest in property and equipment, and in the further development and enhancement of our software platforms for the foreseeable future. In addition, from time to time, we may consider potential acquisitions that would complement our existing offerings, enhance our technical capabilities, or expand our marketing and sales presence. Any such future transaction could require potentially significant amounts of capital or could require us to issue our stock and dilute existing stockholders.
During 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $14.7 million reflected purchase of property and equipment, which includes capitalized software development costs, and technology hardware and software to support our growth.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of payments made for shares withheld to cover payroll withholding taxes and the issuance of shares of common stock upon the exercise of stock options.
During 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $3.3 million reflected $16.2 million of proceeds received from exercises of stock options under equity incentive plans, as well as proceeds from purchases of shares pursuant to the Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP). These items were partially offset by payments made for shares withheld to cover the required payroll withholding taxes of $6.3 million, Elevaate contingent consideration payments of $6.1 million (initially measured and included as part of purchase consideration on the date of acquisition), and payments on promissory note and finance lease obligations of $0.5 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition and goodwill and intangible assets have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We primarily generate revenue by providing digital media and promotions solutions to our customers and partners. Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services.
In the normal course of business and through our distribution network, we deliver digital media and promotions on retailers’ websites through retailers’ loyalty programs, and on the websites of digital publishers. In these situations, we evaluate whether we are the principal (i.e., report revenues on a gross basis) or agent (i.e., report revenues on a net basis). We typically report digital promotion and media advertising revenues for campaigns placed on third-party owned properties on a gross basis; that is, the amounts billed to our customers are recorded as revenues, and distribution fees paid to retailers or digital publishers are recorded as cost of revenues. We are the principal because we control the digital promotion and media advertising inventory before it is transferred to our customers. Our control is evidenced by our sole ability to monetize the digital coupon and media advertising inventory, by being primarily responsible to our customers, by having discretion in establishing pricing for the delivery of the digital coupons and media, or by a combination of these factors.
In other cases (e.g., sponsored search and DOOH offerings), we report revenues on a net basis, that is, the costs for digital advertising inventory and third-party data paid to suppliers are deducted from gross revenues to arrive at net revenues. Our performance obligation in these arrangements is to provide the use of our platforms that enables customers to bid on real-time digital advertising inventory, use of data and other add-on features in designing and executing our campaigns. We charge our customers a platform fee based on a percentage of the digital advertising inventory and data costs purchased through the use of our platforms. We have determined that we are an agent in these arrangements because we do not have control of the digital advertising inventory before it is transferred to the customer and do not set prices. The revenue we recognized on a net basis was not significant during 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Additionally, during the fourth quarter of 2021, we introduced retailer-specific promotion or media campaigns (also known as shopper campaigns). We have determined that we are an agent in these arrangements as the retailer is the customer, the retailer controls the delivery of shopper promotion and media programs on its website and sets the pricing. Our obligation in these arrangements is to provide use of our platforms to the retailers. The retailer determines how shopper promotions and media programs are executed through our platform. Under these arrangements, we report revenue on a net basis.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually, and more frequently upon the occurrence of certain events that may indicate that the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Events or circumstances that could trigger an impairment test include, but are not limited to, a significant adverse change in the business climate or in legal factors; an adverse action or assessment by a regulator; a loss of key personnel; significant changes in our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business; significant negative industry or economic trends; significant underperformance relative to operating performance indicators; downward revisions to internal forecasts; a significant decline in market capitalization; and significant changes in competition. We operate in a single reporting unit, and we typically complete our annual impairment test during the fourth quarter of each year.
In connection with renewal discussions between the parties, we received a letter in October 2021 from Albertsons notifying us of its intent to early terminate the agreement between the parties related to the delivery of promotions and media campaigns, effective December 31, 2021. We informed Albertsons that we disputed Albertsons' right to terminate the agreement prior to March 31, 2022. The parties are currently in litigation. Due to circumstances surrounding the termination of our partnership with Albertsons, we determined a triggering event had occurred during the third quarter of 2021 that required an interim impairment assessment for our goodwill reporting unit and intangible assets and other long-lived assets.
In performing our qualitative interim impairment assessment during the third quarter of 2021, we considered (i) the results of our impairment testing from the most recent testing date, which was in the fourth quarter of 2020 (in particular, the magnitude of the excess of fair value over carrying value observed), (ii) downward revisions to internal forecasts, (iii) trends in market multiples and (iv) declines in market capitalization. The interim test resulted in our determination that the fair values of our reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore our goodwill was not impaired.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed our annual impairment test and based on the results of our assessment, we determined that the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying value and, therefore, our goodwill was not impaired. There were no changes in the carrying value of goodwill and as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, goodwill was $128.4 million. There was no impairment of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. We will continue to monitor the operating results, cash forecasts and challenges from declines in current business and market conditions, as well as impacts of COVID-19 for our reporting unit.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets with a finite life are amortized over their estimated useful lives. Intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of intangible assets may not be recoverable.
We evaluate the need for an impairment charge relating to long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset are compared to the asset’s carrying amount to determine if a write-down to a new depreciable basis is required. If required, an impairment charge is recorded based on an estimate of future discounted cash flows.
We evaluate our intangible assets for potential impairment indicators at least quarterly and more frequently upon the occurrence of events that could impact prior conclusions. Judgment regarding the existence of impairment indicators is based on market conditions as well as the operational performance of our businesses. Additionally, future events could cause us to conclude that impairment indicators exist and that therefore, long-lived assets could be impaired.
We consider the following to be some examples of indicators that may trigger an impairment review: (i) actual undiscounted cash flows significantly below historical or projected future undiscounted cash flows for the associated assets; (ii) significant changes in the manner or use of the assets, or in our overall strategy with respect to the manner or use of the acquired assets or changes in our overall business strategy; (iii) significant negative industry or economic trends; (iv) increased competitive pressures; and (v) a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period of time.
Once we determine that a potential impairment indicator exists, we perform the test for recoverability by comparing the estimated future undiscounted cash flows associated with the intangible assets with the intangible asset’s carrying amount. Where the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds the future undiscounted cash flows associated with the intangible assets, a determination is made that the value of those intangible assets cannot be recovered. For an intangible asset failing the recoverability test, an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value.
As a result of performing our interim intangibles impairment assessment due to the triggering event noted above, we recorded an intangible asset impairment charge of $2.6 million and $6.5 million during the second and third quarter of 2021, respectively, related to promotion service rights, media service rights, and data access rights. The impairment charges were recorded within cost of revenues, on the consolidated statements of operations.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed an updated impairment assessment analysis and determined that impairment did not exist.
The key assumptions used in our estimates of projected cash flow associated with our intangible assets deal largely with forecasts of sales levels, gross margins, and operating costs. These forecasts are typically based on historical trends and take into account recent developments as well as our plans and intentions. Any material change in our assumptions could significantly impact projected future cash flows associated with the intangible assets, and these factors are considered in evaluating impairment. Other factors, such as increased competition or a decrease in the desirability of our products, could lead to lower projected sales levels, which would adversely impact cash flows. A significant decrease in cash flows in the future could result in an impairment of long-lived assets. We will continue to monitor the operating results, cash flow forecasts and challenges from declines in current market conditions, as well as circumstances relating to the termination of our partnership with Albertsons and the impacts of COVID-19, for the possible additional impairment of these intangible assets.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8, Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, and Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the actual and expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on our consolidated results of operations and financial condition, which is incorporated herein by reference.