Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations describes the principal factors affecting the results of our operations, financial condition, and changes in financial condition for the year ended December 31, 2021. This discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements, and the notes thereto set forth in Part I, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a holding company with no material assets other than our limited liability company interests in APW OpCo LLC (“APW OpCo”), the indirect parent of AP WIP Investments, LLC (“AP WIP Investments”) and its consolidated subsidiaries (the “APW Group”). We were incorporated as Landscape Acquisition Holdings Limited (“Landscape”) under the laws of the British Virgin Islands on November 1, 2017 and were formed to undertake an acquisition of a target company or business. On November 20, 2017, Landscape raised approximately $500 million before expenses and its ordinary shares (the “Ordinary Shares”) and warrants (the “Warrants”) were listed on the London Stock Exchange (the “LSE”).
On February 10, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), Landscape completed the acquisition of AP WIP Investments Holdings, LP (“AP Wireless”), the direct parent of AP WIP Investments, from Associated Partners, L.P. (“Associated Partners”), pursuant to a merger agreement entered into on November 19, 2019. Effective as of the Closing Date, we changed our name to Digital Landscape Group, Inc. The acquisition, together with the other transactions contemplated by the merger agreement, are referred to as the “APW Acquisition.” Except as the context otherwise requires, for all dates and periods ending on or before the Closing Date, the historical financial results discussed below with respect to such periods reflect the results of the APW Group, which is considered to be our predecessor for financial reporting purposes (“Predecessor”). We did not own the APW Group during any such periods, and such historical financial results may not be indicative of the results we would expect to recognize for periods after the Closing Date, or that we would have recognized had we owned the APW Group during such periods.
Upon completion of the APW Acquisition on the Closing Date, we acquired a 91.8% interest in APW OpCo, the parent of AP Wireless and the indirect parent of the APW Group, through a merger of one of Landscape’s subsidiaries with and into APW OpCo, with APW OpCo surviving such merger as a majority owned subsidiary of ours. Following the APW Acquisition, we owned 91.8% of APW OpCo, with certain of our executive officers and former partners of Associated Partners who were members of APW OpCo immediately prior to the Closing Date and who elected to roll over their investment in APW OpCo in connection with the APW Acquisition (collectively, the “Continuing OpCo Members”) owning the remaining 8.2% interest in APW OpCo. As a result, the AP Wireless business was and continues to be 100% owned by Radius and the Continuing OpCo Members. Certain securities of APW OpCo issued and outstanding upon completion of the APW Acquisition are subject to time and performance vesting conditions. In addition, all securities of APW OpCo held by persons other than the Company are exchangeable for shares of our Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class A Common Stock”). Assuming the vesting of all APW OpCo securities and no securities being exchanged for Class A Common Stock, we would have owned approximately 87.9% of APW OpCo as of December 31, 2021.
On October 2, 2020, we effected a discontinuance under Section 184 of the BVI Business Companies Act, 2004, as amended, and a domestication under Section 388 of the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware, pursuant to which our jurisdiction of incorporation was changed from the British Virgin Islands to the State of Delaware (the “Domestication”). Effective upon the Domestication, we were renamed “Radius Global Infrastructure, Inc.”
On October 2, 2020, in connection with the Domestication, we delisted the Ordinary Shares and Warrants from trading on the LSE and on October 5, 2020, our Class A Common Stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Market under the symbol “RADI”.
Except as the context otherwise requires, references in the following discussion to the “Company”, “Radius”, “we”, “our” or “us” with respect to periods prior to the Closing Date are to Predecessor and its operations prior to the Closing Date; such references with respect to periods after the Closing Date are to Radius Global Infrastructure, Inc. and its subsidiaries (including the APW Group) (“Successor”) and its operations after the Closing Date. AP Wireless and its subsidiaries (including AP WIP Investments) continue to exist as separate subsidiaries of Radius Global Infrastructure,
Inc. and those entities are separately financed, with each having debt obligations that are not obligations of Radius Global Infrastructure, Inc. For a discussion of our material debt obligations, see “-Contractual Obligations and Material Cash Requirements” below.
The APW Group
The APW Group is one of the largest international aggregators of rental streams underlying wireless and other critical digital infrastructure sites through the acquisition of telecom real property interests and contractual rights. The APW Group typically purchases, primarily for a lump sum, the right to receive future rental payments generated pursuant to an existing lease (and any subsequent lease or extension or amendment thereof) between a property owner and an owner of a wireless tower, antennae, or other digital infrastructure asset (each such lease, a “Tenant Lease”). Typically, the APW Group acquires the rental stream by way of a purchase of a real property interest underlying or containing the wireless tower, antennae or other digital infrastructure asset, most commonly easements, usufructs, leasehold and sub-leasehold interests, or fee simple interests, each of which provides the APW Group the right to receive the rents from the Tenant Lease. In addition, the APW Group purchases contractual interests, such as an assignment of rents, either in conjunction with the property interest or as a stand-alone right. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had interests, respectively, in 8,186 and 7,189 leases that generate rents for us. These leases related to properties that were situated, respectively, on 6,211 and 5,427 different communications sites, throughout the United States and 19 other countries. Revenue was $103.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $62.9 million and $6.8 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, annualized in-place rents were approximately $117.9 million and $84.1 million, respectively. For a definition of annualized in-place rents and a comparison to revenue, the most directly comparable financial measure recorded in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”), see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
The APW Group’s primary objectives are continuously to acquire, aggregate and hold underlying real property interests and revenue streams critical for wireless and other digital communications. The APW Group purchases the right to receive future rental payments generated pursuant to an existing Tenant Lease between a property owner and an owner of a wireless tower, antennae or other essential communications infrastructure either through an up-front payment or on an installment basis from landowners who have leased their property to companies that own telecommunications infrastructure assets. The real property interests (other than fee simple interests which are perpetual) typically have stated terms of 30 to 99 years, although some are shorter, and provide the APW Group with the right to receive the future income from the future Tenant Lease rental payments over a specified duration. In most cases, the stated term of the real property interest is longer than the remaining term of the Tenant Lease, which provides the APW Group with the right and opportunity for renewals and extensions. In addition to real property rights, the APW Group acquires contractual rights by way of an assignment of rents. The rent assignment is a contractual obligation pursuant to which the property owner assigns to the APW Group its right to receive all communications rents relating to the property, including rents arising under the Tenant Lease. A rent assignment relates only to an existing Tenant Lease and therefore would not provide the APW Group the ability automatically to benefit from lease renewals beyond those provided for in the existing Tenant Lease. However, in these cases, the APW Group either limits the purchase price of the asset to the term of the current Tenant Lease or obtains the ability to negotiate future leases and a contractual obligation from the property owner to assign rental streams from future Tenant Lease renewals.
The APW Group’s primary long-term objective is to continue to grow its business organically, through annual rent escalators, the addition of new tenants and/or lease modifications, and acquisitively, as it has done in recent years, and fully take advantage of the established asset management platform it has created.
Impact of the COVID-19 Global Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic and the response thereto has had an impact in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate and has had a negative impact on economic conditions globally. We continue to monitor developments related to the pandemic, and our decisions will continue to be driven by the health and well-being of our employees, business partners and communities. Our offices globally were largely shut down beginning in the middle of March 2020, although in all cases our operations have continued with employees working remotely from their homes and we have begun reopening offices as vaccine and booster availability has become more widespread. In addition, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been and may continue to be short-term impacts on our ability to acquire new
rental streams. Government-imposed restrictions on the opening of offices and/or self-isolation measures, particularly in Latin American countries, have had and may continue to have an adverse impact on the availability of notaries or other legal service providers from time to time. Further, global macro-economic conditions resulted in fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and heightened volatility in foreign currency exchange rates across multiple currencies.
Our revenue and results of operations more generally have not been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, COVID-19 has had a limited impact on our underlying assets and revenue streams. We attribute this in part to the gaining importance of telecom and digital infrastructure usage as a result of the impact of the pandemic. We also experienced no material interruption in rent payment and collections and no material changes in the rate of lease terminations or non-renewals as a result of the effects of COVID-19 on our tenants and business partners. In addition, we believe the fact that substantially all of our essential cash functions are processed electronically and that we were able to rapidly and effectively transition to a remote work environment has helped to minimize the incidence of operational disruptions due to COVID-related lock-downs and restrictions on travel and gatherings. However, there can be no assurance that we will not experience disruptions or negative impacts to our revenues and results of operations as the pandemic continues.
Nevertheless, the extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact our results of operations and financial condition as well as the financial condition of our tenants will depend on numerous evolving factors that we cannot predict, including the duration and scope of the pandemic; governmental, business and individuals’ actions that have been and continue to be taken in response to the pandemic; the availability, distribution, acceptance and efficacy of vaccines; new or mutated strains of COVID-19 (such as the delta or omicron variant) or a similar virus (including vaccine-resistant strains); the impact of the pandemic on global economic activity and financial markets, including the possibility of a continued global economic downturn and volatility in the global capital markets which, among other things, may increase the cost of capital and adversely impact our access to capital. These impacts, individually or collectively, could have a material adverse impact on our results of operations and financial condition as the pandemic continues.
Basis of Presentation
As a result of the APW Acquisition, for accounting purposes, we were the acquirer and the APW Group was the acquiree and, effective as of the Closing Date, our accounting Predecessor , as we had no operations prior to the APW Acquisition. Accordingly, the financial statement presentation set forth herein includes the financial statements of the APW Group as “Predecessor” for periods prior to the Closing Date and Radius Global Infrastructure, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries as “Successor” for periods on and after the Closing Date, including the consolidation of the APW Group. The APW Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination under the scope of the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification Topic 805, Business Combinations.
Except as the context otherwise requires, for all dates and periods ending on or before the Closing Date, the historical financial results discussed below with respect to such periods reflect the results of our Predecessor, the APW Group. We did not own the APW Group during any such periods, and such historical financial results may not be indicative of the results we would expect to recognize for periods after the Closing Date, or that we would have recognized had we owned the APW Group during such periods. For the Successor period from February 10, 2020 through December 31, 2020 and all subsequent periods, we consolidated the financial position and results of operations of AP WIP Investments and its subsidiaries.
Key Factors Affecting Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We operate in a complex environment with several factors affecting our operations in addition to those described above. The following discussion describes key factors and events that may affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Foreign Currency Translation
Our business operates in twelve different functional currencies. Our reporting currency is the U.S. dollar. Our results are affected by fluctuations in currency exchange rates that give rise to translational exchange rate risks. The extent of such fluctuations is determined in part by global economic conditions and macro-economic trends.
Movement in exchange rates have a direct impact on our reported revenues. Generally, the impact on operating income or loss associated with exchange rate changes on reported revenues is partially offset from exchange rate impacts on operating expenses denominated in the same functional currencies.
Additionally, we have debt facilities denominated in Euro and Pound Sterling. Movement to the exchange rates for the Euro and Pound Sterling will impact the amount of our reported interest expense.
Interest Rate Fluctuations
Changes in global interest rates may have an impact on the acquisition price of real property interests. Changes to the acquisition price can impact our ability to deploy capital at company targeted returns. Historically, we have limited interest rate risk on debt instruments through long term debt with fixed interest rates.
Competition
We face varying levels of competition in the acquisition of assets in each operating country. Some competitors are larger and include public companies with greater access to capital and scale of operations than we do. Competition can drive up the acquisition price of real property interests, which would have an impact on the amount of revenue acquired on an annual basis.
Network Consolidation
Most of our Tenant Leases associated with our acquired assets permit the tenant to cancel the lease at any time with limited prior notices. Generally, such lease terminations are permitted with only 30 to 180 days’ notice from the tenant. The risk of termination is greater upon a network consolidation and merger between two MNOs.
Key Statement of Operations Items
Revenue
We generate revenue by acquiring the right to receive future rental payments at operating wireless and other digital infrastructure communications sites generated pursuant to existing Tenant Leases between a property owner and companies that own and operate cellular communication towers and other telecommunications infrastructure. Revenue is generated on in-place existing Tenant Leases, amendments and extensions on in-place existing Tenant Leases, and additional Tenant Leases at the site.
Revenue is recorded as earned over the period in which the lessee is given control over the use of the communication site and recorded over the term of the lease. Rent received in advance is recorded when we receive advance rental payments from the in-place tenants. Contractually owed lease prepayments are typically paid one month to one year in advance.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense predominantly relates to activities associated with the acquisition of real property interest assets and consists primarily of sales and related compensation expense, marketing expense, data accumulation cost, underwriting costs, legal and professional fees, travel and facilities costs.
Share-based compensation expense
Share-based compensation expense is recorded for equity awards granted to employees and nonemployees over the requisite service period associated with the award, based on the grant-date fair value of the award.
Realized and unrealized gain (loss) on foreign currency debt
Our debt facilities are denominated in Euros, Pound Sterling and U.S. dollars, with U.S. dollars being our functional currency. The borrowings under the Facility Agreement (as defined in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements) are denominated in Euros and Pound Sterling and the borrowings under the Subscription Agreement (as defined in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements) are denominated in Euros. The obligation balances of both agreements are translated to U.S. dollars in the balance sheet date and any resulting translation adjustments are reported in our statement of operations as a gain (loss) on foreign currency debt.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense primarily includes interest due under our debt agreements and amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts, net of interest earned on invested cash.
Key Performance Indicators
Leases
Leases is an operating metric that represents each lease we acquire. Each site purchased by us consists of at least one revenue producing lease stream, and many of these sites contain multiple lease streams. We had 8,186 and 7,189 leases as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Sites
Sites is an operating metric that represents each individual physical location where we have acquired a real property interest or a contractual right that generates revenue. We had 6,211 and 5,427 sites as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We identify certain additional financial measures not defined by GAAP that provide supplemental information we believe is useful to analysts and investors to evaluate our financial performance and ongoing results of operations, when considered alongside other GAAP measures such as net income, operating income, gross profit and net cash provided by operating activities. These non-GAAP measures exclude the financial impact of items management does not consider in assessing our ongoing operating performance, and thereby facilitate review of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP measures. EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before net interest expense, income tax expense (benefit), and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by taking EBITDA and further adjusting for non-cash impairment-decommissions expense, realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency debt, share-based compensation expense, realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains/losses associated with non-debt transactions and balances denominated in a currency other than the functional currency, nonrecurring expenses incurred in connection with the Domestication, transaction-related costs recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses incurred for incremental business acquisition pursuit (successful and unsuccessful) and related financing and integration activities, and nonrecurring severance costs included in selling, general and administrative expenses. Management believes the presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides valuable additional information for users of the financial statements in assessing our financial condition and results of operations. Each of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA has important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some, but not all, items that affect net income, therefore the calculation of these financial measures may be different from the calculations used by other companies and comparability may therefore be limited. You should not consider EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA or any of our other non-GAAP financial measures as an alternative or substitute for our results.
The following are reconciliations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), the most comparable GAAP measure:
Acquisition Capex
Acquisition Capex is a non-GAAP financial measure. Our payments for acquisitions of real property interests consist of either a one-time payment upon the acquisition or up-front payments with contractually committed payments made over a period of time, pursuant to each real property interest agreement. In all cases, we contractually acquire all rights associated with the underlying revenue-producing assets upon entering into the agreement to purchase the real property interest and records the related assets in the period of acquisition. Acquisition Capex therefore represents the total cash spent and committed to be spent for the acquisitions of revenue-producing assets during the period measured. Management believes the presentation of Acquisition Capex provides valuable additional information for users of the financial statements in assessing our financial performance and growth, as it is a comprehensive measure of our investments in the revenue-producing assets that we acquire in a given period. Acquisition Capex has important limitations as an analytical tool, because it excludes certain fixed and variable costs related to our selling, marketing, data accumulation, legal and underwriting activities included in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of operations, including corporate overhead expenses. Further, this financial measure may be different from calculations used by other companies and comparability may therefore be limited. You should not consider Acquisition Capex or any of the other non-GAAP measures we utilize as an alternative or substitute for our results.
The following is a reconciliation of Acquisition Capex to the amounts included as an investing cash flow in the consolidated statements of cash flows for investments in real property interests and related intangible assets, the most comparable GAAP measure, which generally represents up-front payments made in connection with the acquisition of these assets during the period. The primary adjustment to the comparable GAAP measure is “committed contractual payments for investments in real property interests and intangible assets”, which represents the total amount of future payments that we were contractually committed to make in connection with our acquisitions of real property interests and intangible assets that occurred during the period. Additionally, foreign exchange translation adjustments impact the determination of Acquisition Capex.
Annualized In-Place Rents
Annualized in-place rents is a non-GAAP measure that measures performance based on annualized contractual revenue from the rents expected to be collected on leases owned and acquired (“in place”) as of the measurement date. Annualized in-place rents is calculated using the implied monthly revenue from all revenue producing leases that are in place as of the measurement date multiplied by twelve. Implied monthly revenue for each lease is calculated based on the most recent rental payment under such lease. Management believes the presentation of annualized in-place rents provides valuable additional information for users of the financial statements in assessing our financial performance and growth. In particular, management believes the presentation of annualized in-place rents provides a measurement at the applicable point of time as opposed to revenue, which is recorded in the applicable period on revenue-producing assets in place as they are acquired. Annualized in-place rents has important limitations as an analytical tool because it is calculated at a particular moment in time, the measurement date, but implies an annualized amount of contractual revenue. As a result, following the measurement date, among other things, the underlying leases used in calculating the annualized in-place rents financial measure may be terminated, new leases may be acquired, or the contractual rents payable under such leases may not be collected. In these respects, among others, annualized in-place rents differs from “revenue”, which is the closest comparable GAAP measure and which represents all revenues (contractual or otherwise) earned over the applicable period. Revenue is recorded as earned over the period in which the lessee is given control over the use of the wireless communication sites or other digital infrastructure and recorded over the term of the lease. You should not consider annualized in-place rents or any of the other non-GAAP measures we utilize as an alternative or substitute for our results. The following is a comparison of annualized in-place rents to revenue, the most comparable GAAP measure:
Results of Operations
Comparison of the results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our selected financial information for the year ended December 31, 2021 and periods from and including February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 (Successor) and from and including January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020 (Predecessor) set out below has been extracted without material adjustment from the consolidated financial information included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Revenue
Revenue was $103.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $62.9 million and $6.8 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable to the additional revenue streams from investments in real property interests, as incremental revenue of $28.7 million was generated in the year ended December 31, 2021 from Acquisition Capex incurred during the twelve-month period subsequent to December 31, 2020. The remaining increase was due primarily to favorable foreign exchange rate effects on revenue and impacts of rent escalations in our Tenant Leases.
Cost of service
Cost of service was $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.6 million and $34 thousand for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. The increase in cost of service was driven primarily by recurring expenses associated with fee simple interests acquired during the twelve-month period subsequent to December 31, 2020.
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative expense was $73.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $60.6 million and $4.3 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. General and administrative expenses associated with servicing our real property interest assets was $7.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $5.7 million and $0.6 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. Selling, general and administrative
expense for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 included expenses for nonrecurring domestication and public company registration activities totaling $8.4 million, transfer taxes resulting from the APW Acquisition of $1.7 million and compensation expense recorded for one-time compensation payments for the benefit of certain AP Wireless employees totaling $3.2 million. Significant factors associated with the remaining increase in selling, general and administrative expenses were increases in legal and professional fees and other expenses primarily associated with enforcing and protecting our rights under our real property interest arrangements of approximately $7.7 million, higher expenses related to being a U.S. public company of approximately $4.6 million and higher compensation expenses associated with AP Wireless of approximately $3.5 million primarily as a result of an increase in headcount associated with the growth of our investments in real property interests. The remainder of the increase in selling, general and administrative expenses was due to incremental expenses associated with increasing staff and other resources necessary for being a U.S. public company and the inclusion of compensation and facilities-related costs associated with the Radius management team and staff for a full twelve months in the year ended December 31, 2021, whereas such costs included in the comparable 2020 period only were incurred for the period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
Share-based compensation
Share-based compensation expense was $15.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $83.4 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020. Our February 2020 grant of awards of LTIP Units to each of our executive officers under the 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (the “Equity Plan”) resulted in share-based compensation expense of $13.3 million and $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020, respectively. Share-based compensation expense recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021 and in the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 for the restricted stock and stock option awards was approximately $2.5 million and $2.2 million, respectively.
In the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020, expense for two share-based compensation awards, totaling $69.9 million, was recognized upon the consummation of the APW Acquisition.
Amortization and depreciation
Amortization and depreciation expense was $64.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $43.0 million and $2.6 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. The increase in amortization and depreciation was due primarily to amortization on the real property interests acquired during the twelve months subsequent to December 31, 2020.
Impairment-decommissions
Impairment-decommissions was $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.0 million and $0.5 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. Tenant decommissions of communications infrastructure sites in 2021 included higher carrying amounts that in the aggregate were higher than those for sites decommissioned in the same period in 2020.
Realized and unrealized gain (loss) on foreign currency debt
Realized and unrealized gain (loss) on foreign currency debt was a gain of $33.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss of $40.4 million and a gain of $11.5 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the unrealized gain resulted primarily from significant weakening of the Euro relative to the U.S. dollar. In the period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020, the Euro and the Pound Sterling increased significantly relative to the U.S. dollar. In the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, the Pound Sterling decreased significantly relative to the U.S. dollar.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net was $47.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $25.2 million and $3.6 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. The increase in interest expense, net was due primarily to additional interest expense incurred as a result of the additional borrowings and the related incremental deferred financing costs incurred during the twelve months subsequent to December 31, 2020.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was expense of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to income of $1.9 million and expense of $0.3 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. Foreign exchange losses recorded in other income (expense), net was $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to losses of $0.6 million and $0.5 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. The remaining change in other income (expense), net was due primarily to lower income in the year ended December 31, 2021 related to receipts from tenants of incremental lease charges owed for periods prior to our acquisitions of the related real property interests for which we are contractually entitled to recover, as compared to receipts recorded in other income (expense), net in the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively.
Income tax expense (benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) was a benefit of $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to income tax expense of $2.8 million and $0.8 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. The decrease in income tax expense was due primarily to an increase in deferred income tax benefits of approximately $3.2 million associated with the tax effects of higher recorded real property interest amortization expense when compared to the related tax deductions associated with such assets and to the decrease in current income tax expense of approximately $0.9 million associated with the net decrease in our unrecognized income tax benefit obligation related to uncertain tax positions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our future liquidity will depend primarily on: (i) the operating cash flows of the APW Group, (ii) our management of available cash and cash equivalents, (iii) cash distributions on sale of existing assets and (iv) the use of borrowings, if any, to fund short-term liquidity needs.
We primarily require cash to pay our operating expenses, service the cash requirements associated with our contractual obligations and acquire additional real property interests and rental streams underlying wireless and other digital infrastructure sites. Our principal sources of liquidity, both short-term and long-term, include revenue generated from our Tenant Leases, our cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and borrowings available under our credit arrangements. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $411.0 million, including $456.1 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, we had $2.1 million and $174.0 million, including $156.6 million available to use in acquiring international assets, in short-term and long-term restricted cash, respectively.
The summary below presents the significant financing activities that occurred in 2021:
•
In December 2021, additional borrowings under the Facility Agreement were made, consisting of loans of €97.2 million and £33.7 million that mature in October 2031 and resulting in an increase in our outstanding debt thereunder of approximately $154.3 million.
•
During 2021, we received approximately $188.7 million of cash proceeds resulting from the cumulative exercises of approximately 49.2 million outstanding Warrants, resulting in the issuance of 16,407,182 shares of Class A Common Stock.
•
In September 2021, we issued convertible notes (the “Convertible Notes”) in an aggregate principal amount totaling $264.5 million. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 2.5% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on March 15, 2022. The Convertible Notes are convertible into cash, shares of Class A Common Stock, or a combination thereof, at our election, and may be settled as described in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. The Convertible Notes will mature on September 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms.
•
In May 2021, we entered into an agreement to issue and sell an aggregate of 14,336,918 shares of Class A Common Stock to certain institutional investors at a purchase price of $13.95 per share (representing a 5-day volume weighted average price per share of $14.68, less a 5% discount) for aggregate gross proceeds of $200.0 million. Total net offering proceeds to us were approximately $191.5 million after deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses.
•
In February 2021, a new tranche of debt was issued under the Subscription Agreement. We added approximately $94 million of USD equivalents (€77 million) of new interest-only secured notes under the existing debt facility.
•
In 2015, AP WIP Domestic Investment II, LLC (“DWIP II”), a wholly owned subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, entered into a loan agreement, which was later amended and restated (the “A&R Mezzanine Loan Agreement”). In April 2021, APW OpCo and DWIP II, amended and restated the A&R Mezzanine Loan Agreement (the “DWIP II Loan Agreement”) to increase the borrowings thereunder to $75.0 million and to modify the interest rate and the maturity date. Contemporaneously with entering into the DWIP II Loan Agreement and additional borrowing, APW OpCo transferred all of the rights to the loans and obligations under the DWIP II Loan Agreement to unrelated third-party lenders for aggregate consideration of $75.0 million.
•
In December 2021, AP WIP ArcCo Investments, LLC (“ArcCo Investments”), a subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, entered into a subscription agreement (the “ArcCo Subscription Agreement”) providing for loans of up to €750 million. The ArcCo Subscription Agreement provides for funding to ArcCo Investments, the sole borrower thereunder, in the form of promissory certificates consisting of tranches in Euros, Pounds Sterling, and U.S. dollars. In January 2022, ArcCo Investments borrowed €225 million ($257.5 USD equivalent) of the amount available under the ArcCo Subscription Agreement. In connection with this borrowing, $5.0 million was funded to the debt service reserve account. The initial borrowing accrues interest at a fixed annual rate of approximately 3.2%, which will be payable quarterly and will mature in January 2030, at which time all outstanding principal amounts shall be repaid.
In addition to the available uncommitted borrowing capacity under our Facility Agreement of $673.7 million, Subscription Agreement of $169.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and the remaining availability under the ArcCo Subscription Agreement, we expect to have access to the worldwide credit and capital markets, subject to market conditions, in order to issue additional debt or equity if needed or desired.
As discussed above under “Impact of the COVID-19 Global Pandemic”, the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely impact our future operating cash flows. Since we do not know the ultimate severity and length of the COVID-19 pandemic, and thus cannot predict the impact it will have on our tenants and on the debt and equity capital markets, we cannot estimate the ultimate impact it will have on our liquidity and capital resources.
Although we believe that our cash on hand, available restricted cash, and future cash from operations of the APW Group, together with our access to and the credit and capital markets, will provide adequate resources to provide both short-term and long-term liquidity, our access to, and the availability of, financing on acceptable terms in the future will be affected by many factors, including: (i) the performance of the APW Group and/or its operating subsidiaries, as applicable; (ii) our credit rating or absence of a credit rating and/or the credit rating of our operating subsidiaries, as applicable; (iii) the provisions of any relevant credit agreements and similar or associated documents; (iv) the liquidity of the overall credit and capital markets; and (v) the current state of the economy. There can be no assurances that we will continue to have access to the credit and capital markets on acceptable terms.
Cash Flows
The tables below summarize our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated and the cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash as of the applicable period end.
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $14.5 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $42.5 million and $3.5 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. Cash used in the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 included payments made for accrued expenses of Landscape for professional fees and other costs incurred prior to the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 of approximately $34.6 million, primarily associated with the APW Acquisition.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $470.7 million, compared to $436.3 million and $22.6 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. Cash paid in the APW Acquisition net of the cash acquired in the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 was $277.1 million. Payments to acquire real property interests were $469.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $175.7 million in the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and $5.1 million in the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively.
Cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $902.8 million, compared to net cash provided by in financing activities of $99.9 million and net cash used in financing activities of $3.4 million for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to February 9, 2020, respectively. In May 2021, we completed an offering of Class A Common Stock, the issuance of which resulted in the receipt of proceeds, net of equity issuance costs, of $191.5 million. In 2021, we received proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes totaling $264.5 million and made borrowings under our Facility Agreement, Subscription Agreement and DWIP II Loan Agreement totaling approximately $154.3 million, $93.9 million and $75.0 million, respectively. During 2021, we received approximately $188.7 million of cash proceeds resulting from the cumulative exercises of approximately 49.2 million outstanding Warrants.
Contractual Obligations and Material Cash Requirements
Below is a summary of our contractual obligations and material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021.
Convertible Notes
In September 2021, we issued the Convertible Notes in an aggregate principal amount totaling $264,500. The Convertible Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by APW OpCo LLC and are senior, unsecured obligations of the Company and APW OpCo.
The Convertible Notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 2.5% per year, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 15 and September 15 of each year, beginning on March 15, 2022. The Convertible Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our Class A Common Stock, or a combination thereof, at our election, and may be settled as described in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. The Convertible Notes will mature on September 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms.
Facility Agreement
Through December 31, 2021, cumulative borrowings under the Facility Agreement consisted of €327,150 and £228,700 ($681.7 million equivalent as of December 31, 2021). Loans under the Facility Agreement accrue interest at approximate annual rates ranging from 2.8% to 4.6%. Outstanding principal amounts due under the Facility Agreement as of December 31, 2021 totaling $365.8 million, $159.8 million and $156.1 million mature in October 2027, August 2030 and October 2031, respectively.
Subscription Agreement
Through December 31, 2021, cumulative borrowings under the Subscription Agreement consisted of €145,000 ($169.1 million equivalent at December 31, 2021), all of which mature in November 2028. Under the Subscription Agreement, the loans made in 2019 bear interest at 4.25% plus 2.0% payment-in-kind interest and the borrowings made in February 2021 accrue interest at a blended current cash interest rate of 3.9% plus 1.75% payment-in-kind interest.
DWIP Loan Agreement
AP WIP Holdings, LLC (“DWIP”), a subsidiary of AP WIP Investments, is the sole borrower under a loan agreement (the “DWIP Loan Agreement”) that provided funding for our U.S. operations in U.S. Dollars. The outstanding principal balance of $102.6 million matures on October 16, 2023. Borrowing under the DWIP Loan Agreement bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.25%.
DWIP II Loan Agreement
Outstanding principal due under the DWIP II Loan Agreement was $75.0 million as of December 31, 2021. Borrowings under the DWIP II Loan Agreement bear interest at 6% and matures in April 2023.
Covenants under Borrowing Agreements
We are subject to certain financial condition and testing covenants (e.g., interest coverage, leverage limits) under each of our borrowing arrangements, which are disclosed in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements. Limitations on the amount of leverage we may maintain as of any testing period end are included in each of our borrowing arrangements. Summarized in the table below are the leverage limitations for each debt agreement, expressed as multiple of the borrowing in relation to the then current annual rents in place or revenue of the borrower as defined under the applicable borrowing arrangement and excludes any other adjustments required or allowable under the borrowing agreement:
Lease and Installment Obligations
As disclosed in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements, under certain circumstances, we are committed to make future payments under our real property interest arrangements, either as payments under unsecured arrangements determined to be finance leases or as noninterest bearing installments for arrangements that do not qualify as leases. As of December 31, 2021, the aggregate committed contractual obligation under these arrangements was $55.3 million, of which $43.9 million is due during the period beginning on January 1, 2022 and ending December 31, 2024. As disclosed in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements, we are lessees under operating leases, primarily for the use of office space. As of December 31, 2021, we are contractually committed to make future payments of $2.3 million under operating lease arrangements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in greater detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies involve critical judgments and estimates that are used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Real Property Interests
Our core business is to contract for the purchase of telecom real property interests and contractual rights, typically as leasehold interests or fee simple interests, either through an up-front payment or on an installment basis from property owners who have leased their property to companies that own digital telecommunications infrastructure assets. The costs of acquiring a real property interest are recorded either as a right-of-use asset, if the arrangement is determined to be a lease at the inception of the agreement under ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”), or as an intangible asset in Telecom real property interests, net in the consolidated balance sheet, if the acquisition meets the definition of an asset acquisition. Telecom real property interests are stated at cost less accumulated amortization, and amortization is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of these real property interests, which is estimated as the lesser of the useful life of the underlying digital infrastructure asset or the term of the arrangement.
ASC 842 requires us to recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability arising from a lease arrangement, which also must be classified as either a financing or an operating lease. This classification determines whether the lease expense associated with future lease payments is recognized based on an effective interest method or on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. We consider an arrangement to be a lease if it conveys the right to control the use of the asset for a specific period of time in exchange for consideration. The determination of the classification of a lease as financing typically depends on whether or not the term of the arrangement covers a major portion of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset, though other factors may apply.
For each arrangement determined to be a lease, we record a lease liability at the present value of the remaining contractually-required payments and right-of-use asset in the same amount plus any upfront payments made under the arrangement and any initial direct costs. The incremental borrowing rate used depends on the country and currency in which the arrangement was consummated and approximates an interest rate we would pay under borrowings to purchase such assets on a collateralized basis over similar payment terms.
Finance lease right-of-use assets are amortized over the lesser of the lease term or the estimated useful life of the underlying asset associated with the leasing arrangement, which is estimated to be twenty-five years. To determine the lease term, we consider all renewal periods that are reasonably certain to be exercised, taking into consideration all economic factors, including the wireless or digital infrastructure asset’s estimated economic life. The Company continually reassesses the estimated useful lives used in determining amortization of its real property interests.
Long-Lived Assets, Including Definite-Lived Intangible Assets
Our primary long-lived assets include real property interests and in-place tenant lease intangible assets. The carrying amount of any long-lived asset group is evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable through the estimated undiscounted future cash flows derived from such assets. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds its fair value.
Share-based Compensation Expense
Share-based compensation expense is recorded for equity awards granted to employees and nonemployees over the requisite service period associated with the award, based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Calculating the fair value of share-based awards requires that we make highly subjective assumptions, as well as making judgments regarding the most acceptable valuation methodology to use in each circumstance. Generally, we use Monte Carlo simulation and Black-Scholes option pricing models. Use of either valuation technique requires that we make assumptions as to the expected volatility of our Class A Common Stock, the expected term associated with the award and the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term.
Income Taxes
The carrying amount of deferred tax assets is reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the available positive and negative evidence, it is more likely than not that such assets will not be realized. This assessment requires judgment and considers, among other matters, the nature and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, and tax planning alternatives. If a history of cumulative losses is incurred for a tax jurisdiction, forecasts of future profitability are not used as positive evidence related to the realization of the deferred tax assets in the assessment.
Additionally, we recognize the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. The recognition or measurement of unrecognized income tax benefit obligations and changes therein requires significant judgement and estimation in each period that related positions are assessed.