Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
OVERVIEW
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on management’s current expectations, estimates and projections about our business and operations. Our actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements.”
We are a diversified manufacturer of railcars and railcar components. We design and manufacture a broad variety of railcar types for transportation of bulk commodities and containerized freight products primarily in North America, including open top hoppers, covered hoppers, and gondolas along with intermodal and non-intermodal flat cars. We and our predecessors have been manufacturing railcars since 1901. Over the last several years, we have introduced a number of new or redesigned railcar types as we continue to diversify our product portfolio.
During 2019, we entered into a joint venture arrangement with Fabricaciones y Servicios de México, S.A. de C.V. (“Fasemex”), a Mexican company with operations in both Mexico and the United States, to manufacture railcars in Castaños, Coahuila, Mexico (“Castaños”), in exchange for a 50% interest in the operation. Production of railcars at the facility began during the third quarter of 2020. On October 16, 2020, we acquired Fasemex’s 50% ownership in the joint venture in exchange for $0.2 million in cash and 2,257,234 shares of the Company's common stock. As of March 2021, we moved all of our production to the Castaños facility.
We ceased operations at the Roanoke Facility and vacated the facility as of March 31, 2020. On September 10, 2020, we announced our plan to permanently close the Shoals Facility in light of the cyclical industry downturn, which was magnified by the COVID-19 pandemic. The closure will reduce costs and align our manufacturing capacity with the current rail car market. We ceased production at the Shoals Facility in February 2021.
Restructuring and impairment charges of $6.5 million related to these actions were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021. Restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $18.3 million primarily included a $17.5 million non-cash impairment charge recorded to reduce the right of use asset for the Shoals Facility lease to its fair value, non-cash impairment charges for property, plant and equipment of $9.5 million and employee severance and retention charges of $3.3 million which were offset by a $15.2 million lease termination gain for the Shoals Facility.
Railcar deliveries totaled 1,731 units, consisting of 1,354 new railcars and 377 rebuilt railcars, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 751 railcars delivered in the year ended December 31, 2020, including 600 new railcars and 151 rebuilt railcars. Our total backlog of firm orders for railcars increased from 1,389 railcars as of December 31, 2020 to 2,323 railcars as of December 31, 2021.
Since first being reported in December 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to present risks to our business. We are closely monitoring and managing the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, as well as the impact on the global economy, and governmental reactions to the pandemic. The United States government and the Mexico Federal Ministry of Health and Federal Ministry of Communications and Transportation cited the railcar industry as critical to the United States and Mexico’s response efforts to the pandemic. The railcar industry is susceptible to a reduction in demand associated with the overall economic slowdown caused by the virus. In addition, public health organizations and national, state and local governments have implemented measures to combat the spread of COVID-19, including restrictions on movement such as quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and social distancing ordinances and restricting or prohibiting some forms of business activity. Accordingly, our ability to predict industry demand and establish forecasts for sales, operating results and cash flows may be impacted. Furthermore, our plant operations and supply chain are potentially susceptible to large-scale outbreaks of the virus within our workforce or that of any of our suppliers.
Our management is focused on mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on our business and the risk to our employees. We have taken a number of precautionary measures including implementing detailed cleaning and disinfecting processes at our facilities, adhering to social distancing protocols, encouraging employees to work remotely, when possible, and scheduling vaccination clinics for our employees.
The Company recognized an increase in revenue compared to the corresponding prior year which we attribute primarily to improvement in the railcar market in the latter half of 2021.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT PRESENTATION
Revenues
Our Manufacturing segment revenues are generated primarily from sales of the railcars that we manufacture. Our Manufacturing segment sales depend on industry demand for new railcars, which is driven by overall economic conditions and the demand for railcar transportation of various products, such as coal, steel products, minerals, cement, motor vehicles, forest products and agricultural commodities. Our Manufacturing segment sales are also affected by competitive market pressures that impact our market share, the prices for our railcars and by the types of railcars sold. Our Manufacturing segment revenues also include revenues from major railcar rebuilds and lease rental payments received with respect to railcars under operating leases. Our Corporate and other revenue sources include parts sales.
We generally recognize revenue at a point in time as we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a customer. Revenue is measured at the transaction price, which is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the customer. Performance obligations are typically completed and revenue is recognized for the sale of new and rebuilt railcars when the finished railcar is transferred to a specified railroad connection point. In certain sales contracts, revenue is recognized when a certificate of acceptance has been issued by the customer and control has been transferred to the customer. At that time, the customer directs the use of, and obtains substantially all of the remaining benefits from the asset. When a railcar sales contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations based on the relative stand-alone selling price of the performance obligation determined at the inception of the contract based on an observable market price, expected cost plus margin or market price of similar items. The variable purchase patterns of our customers and the timing of completion, delivery and customer acceptance of railcars may cause our revenues and income from operations to vary substantially each quarter, which will result in significant fluctuations in our quarterly results.
Cost of sales
Our cost of sales includes the cost of raw materials such as aluminum and steel, as well as the cost of finished railcar components, such as castings, wheels, truck components and couplers, and other specialty components. Our cost of sales also includes labor, utilities, freight, manufacturing depreciation and other operating costs. A portion of the contracts covering our backlog at December 31, 2021 are fixed-rate contracts. Therefore, if material costs were to increase, we will likely not be able to pass on these increased costs to those customers. We manage material price increases by locking in prices where possible.
Operating loss
Operating loss represents revenues less cost of sales, loss on sale of railcars available for lease, impairment on leased railcars, gain on termination of postretirement benefit plan, selling, general and administrative expenses, and restructuring and impairment charges.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Our consolidated revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $203.1 million compared to $108.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Manufacturing segment revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $192.8 million compared to $98.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Manufacturing segment revenues for 2021 compared to 2020 reflects an increase in the number of railcars delivered from 751 railcars in 2020 to 1,731 railcars in 2021, which was partially offset by a lower average selling price for new railcars. Corporate and Other revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $10.2 million compared to $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflecting higher parts sales.
Gross Profit (Loss)
Our consolidated gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11.5 million compared to a gross loss of $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our consolidated gross margin was 5.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to (12.5)% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Manufacturing segment gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.5 million compared to a gross loss of $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $25.0 million increase in consolidated gross profit and $23.8 million increase in Manufacturing segment gross profit reflect a favorable volume variance of $8.7 million a favorable price/mix variance of $15.1 million which primarily consisted of a reduction in overhead costs due to the restructuring of our manufacturing footprint.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $27.5 million compared to $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included decreases in bad debt expense of $1.8 million, salaries and wages of $1.3 million and executive retention bonuses of $1.1 million which were partially offset by increases in stock-based compensation of $1.9 million. Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 13.6% of revenue, compared to 27.5% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Manufacturing segment selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2.6 million compared to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the decrease was primarily due to decreases in allocated costs of $3.6 million and bad debt expense of $1.7 million which were partially offset by increases in consulting costs. Manufacturing segment selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were 1.3% of revenue compared to 7.2% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. Corporate and Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $24.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $22.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Corporate and Other selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included increases in stock-based compensation expenses of $1.9 million and allocated costs of $4.0 million, which were partially offset by decreases in consulting costs of $1.2 million and executive retention bonuses of $1.1 million. Corporate and Other selling, general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 also included decreases in salaries and wages of $0.9 million and medical insurance costs of $0.7 million due to lower headcount.
Impairment on Leased Railcars
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of $0.2 million related to our small cube covered hopper railcars due to renegotiation of certain leases and our settlement agreement with the lender for our leasing companies. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of $19.0 million related to our small cube covered hopper railcars of which $17.0 million related to the railcars which we own and $2.0 million related to the right-of-use asset associated with our leased railcar portfolio See Note 7 - Leased Railcars to our consolidated financial statements.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges
Restructuring and impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $6.5 million compared to $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. On September 10, 2020, we announced our plan to permanently close our Shoals facility in light of the cyclical industry downturn, which had been magnified by the COVID-19 pandemic. On October 8, 2020, we reached an agreement with the Shoals facility owner and landlord to shorten the Shoals lease term by amending the expiration date to the end of February 2021. In addition, the landlord agreed to waive the base rent payable under the original lease for the months of October 2020 through February 2021. Property, plant and equipment with an estimated fair value of $10.1 million was sold or transferred to the Shoals landlord during 2021 as consideration for the landlord’s entry into the lease amendment and the aforementioned rent waiver. Restructuring and impairment charges of $6.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to relocating some of the facility’s equipment to Castaños as well as shutting down the Shoals facility.
Restructuring and impairment charges of $18.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included a $17.5 million non-cash impairment charge recorded to reduce the right of use asset for the Shoals Facility lease to its fair value, non-cash impairment charges for property, plant and equipment of $9.5 million and employee severance and retention charges of $3.3 million which were offset by a $15.2 million lease termination gain for the Shoals Facility.
Operating Loss
Our consolidated operating loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22.8 million compared to $80.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Operating loss for the Manufacturing segment was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $59.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Corporate and Other operating loss was $22.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $21.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflecting increased borrowings on our revolving line of credit, increased costs related to eligible collateral, an additional term loan advance during 2021 and an increase in amortization of deferred financing costs.
Loss on Change in Fair Market Value of Warrant Liability
Loss on change in fair market value of warrant liability was $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the loss is primarily driven by appreciation in the Company’s stock price during the year ended December 31, 2021 which is the primary driver in the valuation of the warrants.
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
Gain on extinguishment of debt of $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily represents PPP Loan forgiveness of all outstanding PPP loan principal and accrued interest.
Income Taxes
Our income tax provision was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our income tax provision for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects pre-tax income for our Mexico subsidiary. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021was (3.5)% compared to (0.4)% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, our net loss was $41.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a net loss of $84.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021 our net loss per share was $2.00 compared to net loss per share of $6.29 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our primary sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalent balances on hand and our credit and debt facilities outlined below.
The Company manufactures and provides essential products and services to a variety of critical infrastructure customers, and it intends to continue providing its products and services to these customers. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by the U.S. and Mexico governments, state and local government officials, and other international governments to prevent disease spread, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Accordingly, our ability to predict industry demand and establish forecasts for sales, operating results and cash flows may be impacted.
Term Loan Credit Agreement
On October 13, 2020, the Company entered into a Credit Agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) by and among the Company, as guarantor, FreightCar North America (“Borrower” and together with the Company and certain other subsidiary guarantors, collectively, the “Loan Parties”), CO Finance LVS VI LLC, as lender (the “Lender”), and U.S. Bank National Association, as disbursing agent and collateral agent (“Agent”). Pursuant to the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Lender committed to the extension of a term loan credit facility in the principal amount of $40.0 million, consisting of a single term loan to be funded upon the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement, including stockholder approval of the issuance of the common stock underlying the Warrant described below (the funding date of such term loan, the “Closing Date”). FreightCar America, Inc. stockholders approved the issuance of the common stock underlying the Warrant at a special stockholders’ meeting on November 24, 2020. The $40.0 million term loan closed and was funded on November 24, 2020. The Company incurred $2.9 million in deferred financing costs related to the Term Loan Agreement. The deferred financing costs are presented as a reduction of the long-term debt balance and amortized to interest expense over the term of the Term Loan Agreement.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement has a term ending five years following the Closing Date. The term loan outstanding under the Term Loan Credit Agreement bears interest, at Borrower’s option and subject to the provisions of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, at Base Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) or Eurodollar Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) plus the Applicable Margin (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) for each such interest rate set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the original advance of $40.0 million under the Term Loan Credit Agreement was 14.0%.
The Term Loan Credit Agreement has both affirmative and negative covenants, including, without limitation, minimum liquidity, limitations on indebtedness, liens and investments. The Term Loan Credit Agreement also provides for customary events of default. Pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement and the related loan documents, each of the Loan Parties granted to Agent a continuing lien upon all of such Loan Parties’ assets to secure the obligations of the Loan Parties under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
On May 14, 2021, FreightCar North America (“Borrower” and together with the Company and certain other subsidiary guarantors, collectively, the “Loan Parties”) entered into an Amendment No. 2 to the Term Loan Credit Agreement (the “Second Amendment” and together with the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) with CO Finance LVS VI LLC, as lender (the “Lender”), an affiliate of a corporate credit fund, and U.S. Bank National Association, as disbursing agent and collateral agent (“Agent”), pursuant to which the principal amount of the term loan credit facility was increased by $16.0 million to a total of $56.0 million, with such additional $16.0 million (the “Additional Loan”) to be funded upon the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent set forth in the Second Amendment. The Additional Loan closed and was funded on May 17, 2021. The Company incurred $0.5 million in deferred financing costs related to the Second Amendment which are presented as a reduction of the long-term debt balance and amortized on a straight-line basis to interest expense over the term of the Second Amendment.
The Additional Loan bears interest, at Borrower’s option and subject to the provisions of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, at the Base Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) or Eurodollar Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) plus the Applicable Margin (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) for each such interest rate set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the Additional Loan was 14.0%.
Pursuant to the Second Amendment, in the event that the Additional Loan is not repaid in full by March 31, 2022, the Company shall issue to the Lender and/or an affiliate of the Lender a warrant (the “March 2022 Warrant”) to purchase a number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, equal to 5% of the Company’s outstanding common stock on a fully-diluted basis at the time the March 2022 Warrant is exercised (after giving effect to such issuance). The March 2022 Warrant, if issued, will have an exercise price of $0.01 and a term of ten years.
Pursuant to the Second Amendment, the Company was required to among other things, i) obtain a term sheet for additional financing of no less than $15.0 million by July 31, 2021 and ii) file a registration statement on Form S-3 registering Company securities, including the shares of Company common stock issuable upon exercise of the March 2022 Warrant, by no later than August 31, 2021. The Company has met each of the aforementioned obligations. The Form S-3 registering Company securities, including the shares of Company stock issuable upon exercise of the March 2022 Warrant was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on August 27, 2021 and became effective on September 9, 2021.
On July 30, 2021, the Loan Parties entered into an Amendment No. 3 to Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment” and together with the Credit Agreement, as amended, the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) with Lender and the Agent, pursuant to which, among other things, Lender obtained a standby letter of credit (as may be amended from time to time, the “Third Amendment Letter of Credit”) from Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., in the principal amount of $25,000 for the account of the Company and for the benefit of Siena Lending Group LLC (the “Revolving Loan Lender”).
Pursuant to the Third Amendment, on July 30, 2021, the Company, the Lender, Alter Domus (US) LLC, as calculation agent, and the Agent entered into a reimbursement agreement (the “Reimbursement Agreement”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Company agreed to reimburse the Agent, for the account of the Lender, in the event of any drawings under the Third Amendment Letter of Credit by the Revolving Loan Lender.
On December 30, 2021, the Loan Parties entered into an Amendment No. 4 to Credit Agreement (the “Fourth Amendment” and together with the Credit Agreement, the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”) with Lender and the Agent, pursuant to which the principal amount of the term loan credit facility was increased by $15.0 million to a total of $71.0 million, with such additional $15.0 million (the “Delayed Draw Loan”) to be funded, at the Borrower’s option, upon the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent set forth in the Fourth Amendment. The Borrower has the option to draw on the Delayed Draw Loan through January 31, 2023 and may choose not to do so.
The Delayed Draw Loan, if funded, will bear interest, at Borrower’s option and subject to the provisions of the Term Loan Credit Agreement, at the Base Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) or Eurodollar Rate (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) plus the Applicable Margin (as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement) for each such interest rate set forth in the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
Pursuant to the Reimbursement Agreement, the Company shall make certain other payments as set forth below, so long as the Third Amendment Letter of Credit remains outstanding:
Letter of Credit Fee
The Company shall pay to Agent, for the account of Lender, an annual fee of $0.5 million, which shall be due and payable quarterly beginning on August 2, 2021, and every three months thereafter.
Equity Fee
Every three months (the “Measurement Period”), commencing on August 6, 2021, the Company shall pay to the Lender (or, so long as Lender is the sole provider of the Third Amendment Letter of Credit, to OC III LVS XII LP, if Lender has timely notified the Company in writing of such designation) a fee (the “Equity Fee”) payable in shares of common stock, par value $0.01 per share, of the Company (the “Common Stock”). The Equity Fee shall be calculated by dividing $1.0 million by the volume weighted average price of the Company’s Common Stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market for the ten (10) trading days ending on the last business day of the applicable Measurement Period. The Company can opt to pay the Equity Fee in cash, in the amount of $1.0 million, if, and only if, (x) the Company has already issued as Equity Fees a number of shares of its Common Stock equal to (I) 5.0% multiplied by (II) the total number of shares of Common Stock outstanding as of July 30, 2021, rounded down to the nearest whole share of Common Stock, and (y) the Company has at least $15.0 million of Repayment Liquidity after giving effect to such payment. The term Repayment Liquidity, as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement, means (a) all unrestricted and unencumbered cash and cash equivalents of the Loan Parties, plus (b) the undrawn and available portion of the commitments under that certain Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement by and among the Loan Parties and the Revolving Loan Lender (as described below), minus (c) all accounts payable of the Loan Parties that are more than 30 days past due.
The Equity Fee shall no longer be paid once the Company has issued to Lender and/or OC III LVS XII LP Equity Fees in an amount of Common Stock equal to 9.99% multiplied by the total number of shares of Common Stock outstanding as of July 30, 2021, rounded down to the nearest whole share of Common Stock (the “Maximum Equity”).
The issuance of each Equity Fee under the Reimbursement Agreement will be made in reliance on the exemption from registration contained in Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act for offers and sales of securities that do not involve a “public offering.”
Cash Fee
The Company shall pay to the Agent, for the account of the Lender (or, so long as the Lender is the sole provider of the Third Amendment Letter of Credit, to OC III LVS XII LP, if the Lender has timely notified the Company in writing of such designation) a cash fee (the “Cash Fee”) which shall be due and payable in cash quarterly beginning on the date that the Maximum Equity has been issued and thereafter on the business day immediately succeeding the last business day of the applicable Measurement Period. The Cash Fee shall be equal to $1.0 million, provided that, in the quarter in which the Maximum Equity is issued, such fee shall be equitably reduced by the value of any Equity Fee issued by the Company that quarter.
Warrant
In connection with the entry into the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the Company issued to an affiliate of the Lender (the “Warrantholder”) a warrant (the “Warrant”), pursuant to that certain warrant acquisition agreement, dated as of October 13, 2020 (the “Warrant Acquisition Agreement”), by and between the Company and the Lender to purchase a number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, equal to 23% of the outstanding common stock on a fully-diluted basis at the time the Warrant is exercised (after giving effect to such issuance). The Warrant is exercisable for a term of ten years from the date of the issuance of the Warrant. The Warrant was issued on November 24, 2020 after the Company received stockholder approval of the issuance of the common stock issuable upon exercise of the Warrant by the Warrantholder. In connection with the issuance of the Warrant, the Company and the Lender entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) as of the Closing Date of November 24, 2020. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Warrant was exercisable for an aggregate of 6,098,217 and 5,307,539 shares, respectively, of common stock of the Company with a per share exercise price of $0.01. The Company determined that the Warrant should be accounted for as a derivative instrument and classified as a liability on its Consolidated Balance Sheets primarily due to the instrument obligating the Company to settle the Warrant in a variable number of shares of common stock. The Warrant was recorded at fair value and is treated as a discount on the term loan. The discount on the associated debt is amortized over the life of the Term Loan Credit Agreement and included in interest expense.
Pursuant to the Second Amendment, in the event that the Additional Loan is not repaid in full by March 31, 2022, the Company shall issue to the Lender and/or an affiliate of the Lender the March 2022 Warrant to purchase a number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, equal to 5% of the Company’s outstanding common stock on a fully-diluted basis at the time the March 2022 Warrant is exercised (after giving effect to such issuance). The March 2022 Warrant, if issued, will have an exercise price of $0.01 and a term of ten years. The Company believes that it is probable that the March 2022 Warrant will be issued and as such has recorded an additional warrant liability of $7.4 million during the third quarter of 2021.
Pursuant to the Fourth Amendment and a warrant acquisition agreement, dated as of December 30, 2021 (the “Warrant Acquisition Agreement”), the Company issued to the Lender a warrant (the “December 2021 Warrant”) to purchase a number of shares of the
Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, equal to 5% of the Company’s outstanding common stock on a fully-diluted basis at the time the December 2021 Warrant is exercised (after giving effect to such issuance). The December 2021 Warrant has an exercise price of $0.01 and a term of ten years. As of December 31, 2021, the December 2021 Warrant was exercisable for an aggregate of 1,325,699 shares of common stock of the Company with a per share exercise price of $0.01
In addition, to the extent the Delayed Draw Loan is funded, the Company has agreed to issue to the Lender a warrant (the “3% Additional Warrant”) to purchase up to a number of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, equal to 3% of the Company’s outstanding common stock on a fully-diluted basis at the time the 3% Additional Warrant is exercised (after giving effect to such issuance). The 3% Additional Warrant, if issued, will have an exercise price of $0.01 and a term of ten years.
Siena Loan and Security Agreement
On October 8, 2020, the Company entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Siena Loan Agreement”) by and among the Company, as guarantor, and certain of its subsidiaries, as borrowers (together with the Company, the “Loan Parties”), and Siena Lending Group LLC, as lender (“Siena”). Pursuant to the Siena Loan Agreement, Siena provided an asset backed credit facility, in the maximum aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million, (the "Maximum Revolving Facility Amount") consisting of revolving loans (the Revolving Loans").
The Siena Loan Agreement replaced the Company’s prior revolving credit facility under the Credit and Security Agreement (the “BMO Credit Agreement”) dated as of April 12, 2019, among the Company and certain of its subsidiaries, as borrowers and guarantors, and BMO Harris Bank N.A., as lender, as amended from time to time, which was terminated effective October 8, 2020 and otherwise would have matured on April 12, 2024.
The Siena Loan Agreement provided for a revolving credit facility with maximum availability of $20.0 million, subject to borrowing base requirements set forth in the Siena Loan Agreement, which generally limited availability under the revolving credit facility to (a) 85% of the value of eligible accounts and (b) up to the lesser of (i) 50% of the lower of cost or market value of eligible inventory and (ii) 85% of the net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory, and as reduced by reserves established by Siena from time to time in accordance with the Siena Loan Agreement.
On July 30, 2021, the Loan Parties and Siena entered into an Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement”), which amended and restated the terms and conditions of the Siena Loan Agreement in its entirety.
Pursuant to the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, the Maximum Revolving Facility Amount was increased to $25.0 million, provided, however, that the outstanding balance of all Revolving Loans may not exceed the lesser of (A) the Maximum Revolving Facility Amount minus the Availability Block and (B) an amount equal to the issued and undrawn portion of the Third Amendment Letter of Credit (as defined above) minus the Availability Block. The term “Availability Block”, as defined in the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, means 3.0% of the issued and undrawn amount under the Third Amendment Letter of Credit.
The Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement has a term ending on October 8, 2023. Revolving Loans outstanding under the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement bear interest, subject to the provisions of the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, at an interest rate of 2% per annum in excess of the Base Rate (as defined in the Siena Loan Agreement). As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on outstanding debt under the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement was 5.26%.
The Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants, including, without limitation, limitations on future indebtedness, liens and investments. The Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement also provides for customary events of default. Pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth in the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, each of the Loan Parties granted Siena a continuing lien upon certain assets of the Loan Parties to secure the obligations of the Loan Parties under the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $24.0 million in outstanding debt under the Siena Loan Agreement and remaining borrowing availability of $0.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had $6.9 million in outstanding debt under the Siena Loan Agreement and remaining borrowing availability of $9.7 million. The Company incurred $1.1 million in deferred financing costs related to the Siena Loan Agreement and incurred $1.0 million in additional deferred financing costs related to the Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement. The deferred financing costs are presented as an asset and amortized to interest expense on a straight-line basis over the term of the Siena Loan Agreement.
On February 23, 2022 we entered into an amendment to the Siena Loan Agreement which, among other things, increased the Maximum Revolving Facility Amount to $35.0 million. See Note 23 Subsequent Events.
SBA Paycheck Protection Program Loan
In March 2020, Congress passed the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”), authorizing loans to small businesses for use in paying employees that they continue to employ throughout the COVID=19 pandemic and for rent, utilities and interest on mortgages. In June 2020, Congress enacted the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act (“PPPFA”), amending the PPP.
Loans obtained through the PPP, as amended, are eligible to be forgiven as long as the proceeds are used for qualifying purposes and certain other conditions are met. On April 16, 2020, the Company received a loan from BMO Harris Bank N.A. in the amount of $10.0 million (the “PPP Loan”). Since the entire PPP Loan was used for payroll, utilities and interest, management anticipated that the majority of the PPP Loan would be forgiven. The Company filed an application for PPP Loan forgiveness on October 28, 2020 along with a request for extension of the term of the PPP Loan to five years. On July 14, 2021, the Company received a notification from BMO Harris Bank N.A. that the Small Business Administration approved the Company’s PPP Loan forgiveness application for the entire $10.0 million balance, together with interest accrued thereon, of the PPP Loan and that the remaining balance of the PPP Loan was zero. The Company recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $10.1 million related to PPP Loan forgiveness during 2021.
M&T Credit Agreement
On April 16, 2019, FreightCar America Leasing 1, LLC, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Freightcar Leasing Borrower”), entered into a Credit Agreement (the “M&T Credit Agreement”) with M & T Bank, N.A., as lender (“M&T”). Pursuant to the M&T Credit Agreement, M&T extended a revolving credit facility to Freightcar Leasing Borrower in an aggregate amount of up to $40.0 million for the purpose of financing railcars which will be leased to third parties.
On April 16, 2019, Freightcar Leasing Borrower also entered into a Security Agreement with M&T (the “M&T Security Agreement”) pursuant to which it granted a security interest in all of its assets to M&T to secure its obligations under the M&T Credit Agreement.
On April 16, 2019, FreightCar America Leasing, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company and parent of Freightcar Leasing Borrower (“Freightcar Leasing Guarantor”), entered into (i) a Guaranty Agreement with M&T (the “M&T Guaranty Agreement”) pursuant to which Freightcar Leasing Guarantor guarantees the repayment and performance of certain obligations of Freightcar Leasing Borrower and (ii) a Pledge Agreement with M&T (the “M&T Pledge Agreement”) pursuant to which Freightcar Leasing Guarantor pledged all of the equity of Freightcar Leasing Borrower held by Freightcar Leasing Guarantor.
The loans under the M&T Credit Agreement are non-recourse to the assets of the Company or its subsidiaries other than the assets of Freightcar Leasing Borrower and Freightcar Leasing Guarantor.
The M&T Credit Agreement had a term ending on April 16, 2021 (the “Term End”). Loans outstanding thereunder will bear interest, accrued daily, at the Adjusted LIBOR Rate (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) or the Adjusted Base Rate (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement). The M&T Credit Agreement has both affirmative and negative covenants, including, without limitation, maintaining an Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.25:1.00, measured quarterly, and limitations on indebtedness, loans, liens and investments. The M&T Credit Agreement also provides for customary events of default.
On August 7, 2020, FreightCar Leasing Borrower received notice (the “First Notice”) from M&T that, based on an appraisal (the “Appraisal”) conducted by a third party at the request of M&T with respect to the railcars in FreightCar Leasing Borrower’s Borrowing Base (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) under the M&T Credit Agreement, the unpaid principal balance under the M&T Credit Agreement exceeded the availability under the M&T Credit Agreement as of the date of the Appraisal by $5.1 million (the “Payment Demand Amount”). In the First Notice, M&T Bank: (a) asserted that an Event of Default under the M&T Credit Agreement has occurred because FreightCar Leasing Borrower did not pay the Payment Demand Amount to M&T within five days of the asserted change in availability; (b) demanded payment of the amount within five days of the date of the First Notice; and (c) terminated the commitment to advance additional loans under the M&T Credit Agreement.
On December 18, 2020, FreightCar Leasing Borrower received a revised notice (the “Second Notice,” and together with the First Notice, the “Notices”) from M&T asserting that: (a) as a result of the continuing Event of Default that M&T alleged to have occurred under the M&T Credit Agreement, M&T has declared a default and accelerated and demands immediate payment by FreightCar Leasing Borrower of $10.1 million (the “Outstanding Amount”); (b) FreightCar Leasing Borrower is liable for all interest that continues to accrue on the Outstanding Amount; and (c) FreightCar Leasing Borrower is liable for all attorneys’ fees, costs and expenses as set forth in the M&T Credit Agreement.
On April 20, 2021, FreightCar Leasing Borrower received a notice from M&T that an Event of Default had occurred due to all amounts outstanding under the M&T Credit Agreement having not be paid by the Term End.
On December 28, 2021 (the “Execution Date”), FreightCar Leasing Borrower, FreightCar Leasing Guarantor (together with the FreightCar Leasing Borrower, the “Obligors”), the Company, FreightCar America Railcar Management, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“FCA Management”), and M&T, entered into a Forbearance and Settlement Agreement (the “Forbearance Agreement”) with respect to the M&T Credit Agreement and its related Credit Documents (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement), as well as certain intercompany services agreements related thereto.
Pursuant to the Forbearance Agreement, the Obligors will continue to perform and comply with all of their performance obligations (as opposed to payment obligations) under certain provisions of the M&T Credit Agreement (primarily related to information obligations and the preservation of the collateral pledged by the Borrower to M&T pursuant to the M&T Security Agreement, between the Borrower and M&T (the “Collateral”)) and all the provisions of the M&T Security Agreement. During the period from Execution Date until the termination of the Forbearance Agreement, M&T may not take any action against the Obligors or exercise or enforce any rights or remedies provided for in the Credit Documents or otherwise available to it. The M&T Credit Agreement is not being amended.
On December 1, 2023, or sooner if requested by M&T (the “Turnover Date”), the Borrower shall execute and deliver to M&T documents required to deliver and assign to M&T all the leased railcars and related leases serving as Collateral for the M&T Credit Agreement.
Upon the Turnover Date and the Obligors’ performance of their respective obligations under the Forbearance Agreement, including the delivery of certain Collateral to M&T upon the Turnover Date, all Obligations (as defined in the M&T Credit Agreement) shall be deemed satisfied in full, M&T shall no longer have any further claims against the Obligors under the M&T Credit Documents and the Credit Documents shall automatically terminate and be of no further force or effect except for the provisions thereof that expressly survive termination.
The Forbearance Agreement contains customary releases at execution for all affiliates of the Company (other than the Obligors) and agreements to deliver final releases with respect to the Obligors upon their performance under the Forbearance Agreement. The Company also agreed to turn over to M&T on the Effective Date certain rents in the amount of $0.7 million that it had previously collected as servicing agent for the Borrower, and to continue to provide such services through the Turnover Date without a service fee, and after the Turnover Date through the return of the railcars serving as Collateral, for a service fee.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, FreightCar Leasing Borrower had $7.9 million and $10.1 million, respectively, in outstanding debt under the M&T Credit Agreement, which was collateralized by leased railcars with a carrying value of $6.6 million and $7.0 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on outstanding debt under the M&T Credit Agreement was 4.25%.
Additional Liquidity Factors
Our restricted cash, restricted cash equivalents and restricted certificates of deposit balances were $5.0 million and $10.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Restricted deposits of $0.3 million and $3.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, relate to a customer deposit for purchase of railcars. Restricted deposits of $4.7 million and $7.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, are used to collateralize standby letters of credit with respect to performance guarantees. The standby letters of credit outstanding as of December 31, 2021 are scheduled to expire at various dates through December 10, 2022.
Based on our current level of operations and known changes in planned volume based on our backlog, we believe that our cash balances will be sufficient to meet our expected liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months. Our long-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance and our ability to continue to meet financial covenants under our revolving credit facilities, our Term Loan Credit Agreement and any other indebtedness and the availability of additional financing if needed. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund working capital as demand for railcars increases, payments for contractual obligations, organic growth opportunities, including new plant and equipment and development of railcars, joint ventures, international expansion and acquisitions, and these capital requirements could be substantial. Additionally, our Value Added Tax ("VAT") receivable has grown over the past year and has become a significant part of the Company’s working capital structure. We continue to work through the return process and have made progress during 2021 in recovering VAT refunds.
Based upon our operating performance and capital requirements, we may, from time to time, be required to raise additional funds through additional offerings of our common stock and through long-term borrowings such as the $40.0 million term loan under the Term Loan Credit Agreement. There can be no assurance that long-term debt, if needed, will be available on terms attractive to us, or at all. Furthermore, any additional equity financing may be dilutive to stockholders and debt financing, if available, may involve
restrictive covenants. Our failure to raise capital if and when needed could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.
Benefits under our pension plan are now frozen and will not be impacted by increases due to future service and compensation increases. The most significant assumptions used in determining our net periodic benefit costs are the discount rate used on our pension obligations and expected return on pension plan assets. As of December 31, 2021, our benefit obligation under our defined benefit pension plan was $50.9 million, which exceeded the fair value of plan assets by $0.04 million. We made no contributions to our defined benefit pension plan during 2021 and are not required to make any contributions to our defined benefit pension plan in 2022. Funding levels will be affected by future contributions, investment returns on plan assets, growth in plan liabilities and interest rates.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash provided by or used in operating activities, investing activities and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities. Our net cash provided by or used in operating activities reflects net loss adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Cash flows from operating activities are affected by several factors, including fluctuations in business volume, contract terms for billings and collections, the timing of collections on our contract receivables, processing of bi-weekly payroll and associated taxes, payments to our suppliers and other operating activities. As some of our customers accept delivery of new railcars in train-set quantities, variations in our sales lead to significant fluctuations in our operating profits and cash from operating activities. We do not usually experience business credit issues, although a payment may be delayed pending completion of closing documentation.
Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $55.4 million compared to $58.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects changes in working capital, including increases in VAT receivable of $24.7 million due to production increases and delays in receiving VAT refunds and inventory of $12.4 million to meet current production needs for the start-up of several new railcar orders. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects changes in working capital, including increases in inventory of $17.9 million and increases in accounts receivable of $6.9 million. Our net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes non-cash restructuring and impairment charges of $11.7 million related to the closure of the Shoals Facility and the Roanoke Facility and a non-cash impairment charge of $19.0 million for leased railcars.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.7 million and primarily represented capital expenditures of $2.3 million which were partially offset by the $0.2 million maturity of restricted certificates of deposit and $0.4 million proceeds from sale of property, plant and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $6.1 million and primarily represented capital expenditures of $9.8 million which were partially offset by the $3.6 million maturity of restricted certificates of deposit (net of purchases).
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.3 million and included proceeds from issuance of long-term debt of $16.0 million and net borrowings on revolving line of credit of $15.0 million which were partially offset by deferred financing costs of $1.7 million. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $52.8 million and primarily represented proceeds from issuance of long-term debt of $50.0 million and net borrowings on revolving line of credit of $6.8 million which were partially offset by deferred financing costs of $3.8 million.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures were $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily related to our new Castaños, Mexico facility. We anticipate capital expenditures during 2022 to be approximately $7.0 million to $8.0 million.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates include, useful lives of long-lived assets, warranty accruals, pension benefit assumptions, evaluation of property, plant and equipment for impairment and the valuation of deferred taxes. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our critical accounting policies include the following:
Impairment of long-lived assets and right-of-use assets
We monitor the carrying value of long-lived assets and right-of-use assets for potential impairment. The carrying value of long-lived assets and right-of-use assets is considered impaired when the asset's carrying value is not recoverable through undiscounted future cash flows and the asset's carrying value exceeds its fair value. For assets to be held or used, we group a long-lived asset or assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. An impairment loss for an asset group reduces only the carrying amounts of a long-lived asset or assets of the group being evaluated. Our estimates of future cash flows used to test the recoverability of a long-lived asset group include only the future cash flows that are directly associated with and that are expected to arise as a direct result of the use and eventual disposition of the asset group. Our future cash flow estimates exclude interest charges.
We test long-lived assets for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. These changes in circumstances may include a significant decrease in the market price of an asset group, a significant adverse change in the manner in or extent to which an asset group is used, a current year operating loss combined with a history of operating losses or a current expectation that, more likely than not, a long-lived asset group will be sold or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. If indicators of impairment are present, we then determine if the carrying value of the asset group is recoverable by comparing the carrying value of the asset group to total undiscounted future cash flows of the asset group. If the carrying value of the asset group is not recoverable, an impairment loss is measured based on the excess of the carrying amount of asset group over the estimated fair value of the asset group.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we performed a cash flow recoverability test of our small cube covered hopper railcars because we believed our renegotiation of certain leases and our settlement agreement with the lender for our leasing companies constituted an impairment triggering event. This analysis indicated that the carrying value exceeded the estimated undiscounted cash flows, and therefore, we were required to measure the fair value of our fleet of small cube covered hopper railcars and determine the amount of an impairment loss, if any. The results of our analysis indicated an estimated fair value of the asset group of approximately $6.6 million, in comparison to the asset group's carrying amount of $6.8 million. As a result of this analysis we recorded a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of $0.2 million related to our small cube covered hopper railcars during the fourth quarter of 2021.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the oil and gas proppants (or “frac sand”) industry continued to experience economic pressure created by low oil prices, reduced fracking activity, and the ongoing economic impact of COVID-19. In particular, small cube covered hopper railcars are primarily used in North America to serve the frac sand industry. Given the decline in global oil prices, reduced fracking activity, and pressure on the oil and gas industry to maintain a low-cost structure, fracking operations, have increasingly shifted away from the use of Northern White sand and towards the use of in-basin sand, which can be sourced locally rather than transporting by rail. Consequently, the cash flows and profitability of the frac sand industry continued to decline during the fourth quarter. As a result, certain small cube covered hopper customers requested rent relief that were renegotiated.
We believe that the events and circumstances that arose during the fourth quarter of 2020 constituted an impairment triggering event related to the small cube covered hopper car type in our leased railcar portfolio.
We performed a cash flow recoverability test of our small cube covered hopper railcars and compared the undiscounted cash flows to the carrying value of the assets. This analysis indicated that the carrying value exceeded the estimated undiscounted cash flows, and therefore, we were required to measure the fair value of our fleet of small cube covered hopper railcars and determine the amount of an impairment loss, if any.
The fair value of the asset group was determined using both a market and cost approach, which we believe most accurately reflects a market participant's viewpoint in valuing these railcars. The results of our analysis indicated an estimated fair value of the asset group of approximately $13.2 million, in comparison to the asset group's carrying amount of $30.1 million. As a result, during the fourth
quarter of 2020, we recorded a pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of $17.0 related to our small cube covered hopper railcars. Additionally, we evaluated the right-of-use asset associated with our leased railcar portfolio of small cube covered hopper railcars and determined that these assets were impaired based on consideration of an expected decline in future cash flows over the remaining lease term, which resulted in an additional pre-tax non-cash impairment charge of approximately $2.0 million. The aggregate impairment charge of $19.0 million is reflected in the impairment of leased railcars line of our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Significant management judgment was used to determine the key assumptions utilized in our impairment analysis, the substantial majority of which represent unobservable (Level 3) inputs. These assumptions include, but are not limited to: estimates regarding the remaining useful life over which the railcars are expected to generate cash flows; average lease rates; and discount rate. Management selected these estimates and assumptions based on our railcar industry expertise. Although we believe the estimates utilized in our analysis were reasonable, any change in these estimates could materially affect the amount of the impairment charge.
Due to the closure of our Shoals Facility, we tested the long-lived assets and right-of-use assets at our Shoals Facility for impairment during the third quarter of 2020. In connection with the announcement, we estimated the fair value of the related asset group because it determined that an impairment trigger had occurred due to the shortened asset recoverability timeframe. Non-cash restructuring and impairment charges totaling $26.6 million were allocated to the asset group and recognized during 2020. These non-cash charges for 2020 related to the right of use (“ROU”) asset were $17.5 million and non-cash impairment charges for property, plant and equipment at the Shoals Facility were $9.0 million. In connection with the impairment the Company reassessed the estimated useful lives of equipment that will continue to be used by the Company (primarily in Castaños) and are depreciating it over their useful lives in accordance with the Company’s policies.
The fair value of the ROU asset for our Shoals Facility was estimated using an income valuation approach known as the “sublease” discounted cash flow (“DCF”) model in which the cash flows were based on current market-based lease pricing over the remaining term of the Shoals Facility lease. The cash flows were discounted to present value using a market-derived rate of return of 6.50%.
The Shoals Facility personal property was abandoned in place at the facility, sold, transferred to another FCA facility (primarily Castaños), or scrapped. The assets abandoned in place represent property, plant and equipment to be transferred to the Shoals landlord as consideration for the landlord’s entry into the lease amendment. The premise of fair value differs for each type of asset disposition. The fair value of the personal property assets to be abandoned in place at the Shoals Facility were analyzed under a fair value in continued use (“In-Use”) premise. This premise assumes that the assets will continue to be used in the ongoing operation of the facility and therefore includes installation, other assembly, freight, engineering, electrical set-up and process piping costs that would be required to make the assets fully operational. Assets to be sold or transferred were analyzed under the In-Exchange (“In-Exchange”) premise of fair value. Under this premise, we considered the value of the assets assuming an orderly sale on a stand-alone basis. It is assumed the assets will be sold on an as-is, where-is basis and alternative uses for the assets from the originally designed purpose are considered. Any remaining personal property assets that will neither be abandoned in place nor sold/transferred were considered unmarketable and were valued under a scrap value premise.
For both the aforementioned In-Use and In Exchange premises, in instances where an asset was found to have no active secondary market, we utilized the cost approach. For assets in which there was an active secondary market where recent comparable sales exist, the market approach was utilized. In instances where market data was available but deemed too incomplete to apply a complete market approach, we used the market relationship data available to influence, confirm, or adjust the cost approach results.
Pensions and postretirement benefits
We historically provided pension and retiree welfare benefits to certain salaried and hourly employees upon their retirement. Benefits under our pension plan are now frozen and will not be impacted by increases due to future service. The most significant assumptions used in determining our net periodic benefit costs are the discount rate used on our pension and postretirement welfare obligations and expected return on pension plan assets.
In 2021, we assumed that the expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets would be 5.00%. As permitted under ASC 715, the assumed long-term rate of return on assets is applied to a calculated value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets in a systematic manner over five years. This produces the expected return on plan assets that is included in our net periodic benefit cost. The difference between this expected return and the actual return on plan assets is deferred. The net deferral of past asset gains (losses) affects the calculated value of plan assets and, ultimately, future net periodic benefit cost. We review the expected return on plan assets annually and would revise it if conditions should warrant. A change of one hundred basis points in the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets would have the following effect for the year ended December 31, 2021:
At the end of each year, we determine the discount rate to be used to calculate the present value of our pension plan liability. The discount rate is an estimate of the current interest rate at which our pension liabilities could be effectively settled at the end of the year. In estimating this rate, we look to rates of return on high-quality, fixed-income investments that receive one of the two highest ratings given by a recognized ratings agency. At December 31, 2021, we determined this rate on our pension plan to be 2.84% an increase of 0.36% from the 2.48% rate used at December 31, 2020. A change of one hundred basis points in the discount rate would have the following effect:
In October 2021, the Society of Actuaries issued base mortality table Pri-2012 which is split by retiree and contingent survivor tables and includes mortality improvement assumptions for U.S. plans, scale (MP-2021with COVID adjustment), which reflects additional data that the Social Security Administration has released since prior assumptions (MP-2020) were developed. The Company has historically utilized the Society of Actuaries’ published mortality data in its plan assumptions. Accordingly, the Company adopted Pri-2012 with MP-2021 for purposes of measuring its pension obligations at December 31, 2021.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized consolidated pre-tax pension benefit cost (income) of $(0.8) million and $(0.4) million, respectively. We are not required to make any contributions to our pension plan during 2022. However, we may elect to adjust the level of contributions based on a number of factors, including performance of pension investments and changes in interest rates. The Pension Protection Act of 2006 provided for changes to the method of valuing pension plan assets and liabilities for funding purposes as well as requiring minimum funding levels. Our defined benefit pension plan is in compliance with minimum funding levels established in the Pension Protection Act. Funding levels will be affected by future contributions, investment returns on plan assets, growth in plan liabilities and interest rates. Once the plan is Fully Funded as that term is defined within the Pension Protection Act, we will be required to fund the ongoing growth in plan liabilities on an annual basis. We anticipate funding pension contributions with cash from operations.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method prescribed by ASC 740, Income Taxes. We provide for deferred income taxes based on differences between the book and tax bases of our assets and liabilities and for items that are reported for financial statement purposes in periods different from those for income tax reporting purposes. The deferred tax liability or asset amounts are based upon the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax liability or asset is expected to be settled or realized.
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. Management judgment is required in developing our provision for income taxes, including the determination of deferred tax assets, liabilities and any valuation allowances recorded against the deferred tax assets. We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets will more likely than not be realized. In evaluating whether it is more likely than not that our net deferred tax assets will be realized, we consider both positive and negative evidence including the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carryback years if carryback is permitted under the tax law and such taxable income has not previously been used for carryback, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards based on near-term and longer-term projections of operating results and the length of the carryforward period. We evaluate the realizability of our net deferred tax assets and assess the valuation allowance on a quarterly basis, adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income might affect the ultimate realization of the net deferred tax assets. Factors that may affect our ability to achieve sufficient forecasted taxable income include, but are not limited to, increased competition, a decline in sales or margins and loss of market share.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we concluded that, based on evaluation of the positive and negative evidence, primarily our history of operating losses, it is not more likely than not that we will realize the benefit of our deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred tax assets of $72.0 million for which there was a valuation allowance of $67.2 million and we had total net deferred tax liabilities of $0.05 million.
Product warranties
Warranty terms are based on the negotiated railcar sales contracts. We generally warrant that new railcars will be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use and service identified for a period of up to five years from the time of sale. We also provide limited warranties with respect to certain rebuilt railcars. The warranty costs are estimated using a two-step approach. First, an engineering estimate is made for the cost of all claims that have been asserted by customers. Second, based on historical claims experience, a cost is accrued for all products still within a warranty period for which no claims have been filed. We provide for the estimated cost of product warranties at the time revenue is recognized related to products covered by warranties and assess the adequacy of the resulting reserves on a quarterly basis.
Revenue recognition
We generally recognize revenue at a point in time as we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control over a product or service to a customer. Revenue is measured at the transaction price, which is based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to the customer. Performance obligations are typically completed and revenue is recognized for the sale of new and rebuilt railcars when the finished railcar is transferred to a specified railroad connection point. In certain sales contracts, revenue is recognized when a certificate of acceptance has been issued by the customer and control has been transferred to the customer. At that time, the customer directs the use of, and obtains substantially all of the remaining benefits from, the asset. When a railcar sales contract contains multiple performance obligations, we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations based on the relative stand-alone selling price of the performance obligation determined at the inception of the contract based on an observable market price, expected cost plus margin or market price of similar items. We treat shipping costs that occur after control is transferred as fulfillment costs. Accordingly, gross revenue is recognized, and shipping cost is accrued, when control transfers to the customer. We generally do not provide discounts or rebates in the normal course of business. As a practical expedient, we recognize the incremental costs of obtaining contracts, such as sales commissions, as an expense when incurred since the amortization period of the asset that we otherwise would have recognized is one year or less. Performance obligations are satisfied and we recognize revenue from most parts sales when the parts are shipped to customers. We recognize operating lease revenue on Railcars Available for Lease on a straight-line basis over the contract term. We recognize revenue from the sale of Railcars Available for Lease on a net basis as Gain (Loss) on Sale of Railcars Available for Lease since the sale represents the disposal of a long-term operating asset.
We recognize a loss against related inventory when we have a contractual commitment to manufacture railcars at an estimated cost in excess of the contractual selling price.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS (See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements)
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements including, in particular, statements about our plans, strategies and prospects. We have used the words “may,” “will,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “plan,” “likely,” “unlikely,” “intend” and similar expressions in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to identify forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. However, forward-looking statements inherently involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties relate to, among other things, the potential financial and operational impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic; the cyclical nature of our business, the competitive nature of our industry, our reliance upon a small number of customers that represent a large percentage of our sales, the variable purchase patterns of our customers and the timing of completion, delivery and customer acceptance of orders, fluctuating costs of raw materials, including steel and aluminum, and delays in the delivery of raw materials, the risk of lack of acceptance of our new railcar offerings by our customers and other competitive factors. The factors listed above are not exhaustive. Other sections of this Form 10-K include additional factors that could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. New factors emerge from time to time and it is not possible for management to predict the impact of all of these factors on our business, financial condition or results of operations or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Given these risks and uncertainties, investors should not rely on forward-looking statements as a prediction of actual results. We expressly disclaim any duty to provide updates to forward-looking statements, and the estimates and assumptions associated with them, in order to reflect changes in circumstances or expectations or the occurrence of unanticipated events except to the extent required by applicable securities laws.