ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should review the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements described in the following discussion and analysis.
OVERVIEW
Rubicon Technology, Inc. (“Rubicon” or the “Company”) currently consists of one operating subsidiary, Rubicon Technology Worldwide LLC (“RTW”). In June 2021 the operations of Rubicon DTP LLC (“Direct Dose Rx” or DDRX”) were discontinued.
RTW is an advanced materials provider specializing in monocrystalline sapphire for applications in optical and industrial systems. Sapphire is a desirable material for high-performance applications due to its hardness and strength, transparency in the visible and infrared spectrum, thermal conductivity, thermal shock resistance, abrasion resistance, high melting point and chemical inertness. As a result, it is ideally suited for extreme environments in a range of industries where material durability is just as important as optical clarity. We believe that we continue to have a reputation as one of the highest quality sapphire sources in the market. We provide optical and industrial sapphire products in a variety of shapes and sizes, including round and rectangular windows, blanks, domes, tubes and rods.
Historically, we have also provided sapphire products to the LED and mobile device markets, which are the largest markets for sapphire. However, given competitive pressures in those markets, in the fourth quarter of 2016 we announced our decision to focus on the optical and industrial sapphire markets and exit the LED market. Following this decision, we closed our Malaysia facility and scaled down and consolidated our remaining operations in the U.S. In the succeeding years we have completed individual sales and held auctions for assets located in Malaysia and at each of our U.S. properties, resulting in the sale of certain of our excess equipment and consumable assets. In December 2019 we entered into a purchase and sale agreement to sell our manufacturing facility located in Malaysia. In June 2020, the Company completed the sale of its Malaysian facility for net proceeds of approximately $4,800,000 after the payment of consent fees, real estate taxes, brokerage and legal fees, transfer and other expenses. The Company recorded a gain on the disposal of the Malaysian facility of approximately $1,800,000. In December 2020, Rubicon sold all of the outstanding shares of capital stock of its wholly owned subsidiary Rubicon Sapphire Technology (Malaysia) SDN BHD. The Company recorded a gain on the sale of $261,000. In February 2022, we entered into a real estate sale contract to sell our parcel of land in Batavia, Illinois (see Footnote 13). The closing of the sale of the Property is subject to certain conditions precedent. There is currently no anticipated closing date.
We manage our operations and ship from our owned facility located in Bensenville, Illinois.
Our sapphire business operates in a very competitive market. Our ability to expand our optical and industrial business and the acceptance of new product offerings are difficult to predict. Our total sales backlog was approximately $1,735,000 and $747,000 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In June 2021 the operations of Direct Dose Rx were discontinued. The costs associated with such closure were not material. Direct Dose Rx was a specialized pharmacy that provided prescription medications, over-the-counter drugs and vitamins to patients being discharged from skilled nursing facilities and hospitals and directly to retail customers who want such medications delivered to their home. The delivered products were sorted by the dose, date, and time to be taken, and came in easy-to-use, perforated strip-packaging as opposed to separate pill bottles. Direct Dose Rx was licensed to operate in 11 states. The services offered by Direct Dose Rx benefited patients, skilled nursing facilities and hospitals by reducing the risk of hospital readmissions.
Rubicon is actively evaluating the acquisition of profitable companies in order to utilize our substantial net operating loss (“NOL”) tax carryforwards.
Rubicon Technology, Inc. is a Delaware corporation and was incorporated on February 7, 2001. Our common stock is listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the ticker symbol “RBCN.”
Historically, we have earned, and believe that in the future we will continue to earn, a substantial portion of our revenue from a small number of customers. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had three customers individually that accounted for approximately 22%, 12%, and 12% of our revenue from our continuing operations. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had four customers individually that accounted for approximately 21%, 13%, 11%, and 10% of our revenue from our continuing operations. Our principal customers have been defense subcontractors, industrial manufacturers, fabricators and resellers. Although we are attempting to diversify and expand our customer base, we expect our sales to continue to be concentrated among a small number of customers. However, we also expect that our significant customers may change from time to time. No other customer accounted for 10% or more of our revenues from our continuing operations during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 other than those referred to above.
We sell our products on a global basis and historically derived a significant portion of our revenue from customers outside of North America, with the majority of our sales to the Asian and European markets. Following the decision to limit our focus to the optical and industrial sapphire markets, a major source of our revenue is derived from the North American market. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the North American and other markets accounted for 90% and 10% of our revenue, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the North American and other markets accounted for 88% and 12% of our revenue of continuing operations, respectively. All our revenue and corresponding accounts receivable are denominated in U.S. dollars. For more information about our revenues by geographic region, see Note 2 - Segment Information of our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial operations
Revenue. RTW’s revenue consists of sales of optical and industrial sapphire products sold as blanks or polished windows. Products are made to varying specifications, such as crystal planar orientations and thicknesses. With the focus on smaller optical and industrial markets and the consolidation of our operations in the U.S., we expect in future periods our revenue will continue to be primarily from the sale of optical materials. We recognize revenue once the performance obligation is satisfied, when the product is manufactured to the customer’s specification and based upon shipping terms, title, and control of the product and risk of loss transfer to the customer. Delays in product orders or changes to the timing of shipments could cause our quarterly revenue to vary significantly. All of our revenue and corresponding accounts receivable are denominated in U.S. dollars. Substantially all our revenue is generated by our direct sales team and we expect this to continue in the future.
Cost of goods sold. Our cost of goods sold consists primarily of manufacturing materials, labor, manufacturing related overhead such as utilities, depreciation, rent, provisions for excess and obsolete inventory reserves, idle plant charges, outsourcing costs, freight and warranties. We purchase materials and supplies to support current and future demand for our products. We are subject to variations in the cost of consumable assets from period to period because we do not have long-term fixed-price agreements with our suppliers. We currently outsource some of our production processes and needs.
Gross profit (loss). Our gross profit (loss) has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including average sales prices of our products, product mix, our ability to reduce manufacturing costs, idle plant charges and fluctuations in the costs of electricity, production supplies and other manufacturing overhead costs.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses (“G&A”) consist primarily of compensation and associated costs for employees in finance, information technology and administrative activities, charges for accounting, legal services, insurance and stock-based compensation.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and associated costs for employees engaged in sales activities, product samples, charges for participation in trade shows and travel.
(Gain) loss on sale or disposal of assets. (Gain) loss on sale or disposal of assets represents the difference between the amount of proceeds from sale of our property, equipment and consumable assets and their respective net book values. When the amount of proceeds exceeds the net book value of an underlying asset, we record this favorable variance as a gain on sale or disposal of assets. Alternatively, when the net book value of an asset exceeds the amount of proceeds recovered from sale or disposal of this asset, such unfavorable variance is recorded as a loss on sale or disposal of assets.
Other income (expense). Other income (expense) consists of interest income, gains and losses on investments, and currency translation.
Provision for income tax. We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method whereby the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the book value and the tax basis of assets and liabilities are recognized as deferred tax assets and liabilities, using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to be recognized. Our analysis of ownership changes that limit the utilization of our NOL carryforwards as of December 31, 2021, shows no impact on such utilization. We are in a cumulative loss position for the past three years which is considered significant negative evidence that is difficult to overcome on a “more likely than not” standard through objectively verifiable data. Based on an evaluation in accordance with the accounting standards, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, a valuation allowance has been recorded against the net U.S. and Malaysia deferred tax assets in order to measure only the portion of the deferred tax assets that are more likely than not to be realized based on the weight of all the available evidence. Until an appropriate level of sustained profitability is attained, we expect to maintain a full valuation allowance on our U.S. and Malaysia net deferred tax assets. Any U.S. and Malaysia tax benefits or tax expense recorded on the Consolidated Statement of Operations will be offset with the corresponding adjustment from the use of the NOL carryforward asset which currently has a full valuation allowance. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Stock-based compensation. The majority of our stock-based compensation relates primarily to our Board of Directors, executive and administrative personnel and is accounted for as a G&A expense. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our stock-based compensation expense was $371,000 and $199,000, respectively.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of continuing operations for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our statements of operations as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue. Revenue from continuing operations was $4,061,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $3,616,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $445,000. This increase was due to an increase in sapphire sales. These sales are impacted by demand fluctuations as well as the timing of purchase orders and shipments.
Revenue from discontinued operations was $370,000 and $851,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease of $481,000 was primarily due to the discontinuation of operations in June 2021.
Gross profit (loss). Gross profit from continuing operations was $1,263,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $1,008,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $255,000. The gross profit increase was due to the increase in revenue and efficiencies achieved by outsourcing various aspects of our production processes.
Gross profit from discontinued operations was $33,000 and $233,000, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease of $200,000 was due primarily to increased inventory cost and decreased reimbursement rates from plan benefit managers, as well as the discontinuation of operations.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses from continuing operations were $2,130,000 and $1,942,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, an increase of $188,000 which was primarily due to an increase in legal, audit, and other consulting fees of $87,000, an increase in insurance expense of $54,000, and an increase in employee compensation of $87,000, offset by a decrease in other administrative costs of $46,000.
General and administrative expenses from discontinued operations were $285,000 and $528,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease of $243,000 was primarily attributable to a reduction in personnel expenses and the winding down of operations.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses from continuing operations were $210,000 and $280,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $70,000. This was primarily due to a decrease in staffing.
Sales and marketing expenses from discontinued operations were $10,000 and $45,000, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This decrease of $35,000 was primarily due to a decrease in staffing and the discontinuation of operations.
(Gain) loss on sale or disposal of assets. During 2021, the Company recorded a gain of $613,000 from the sale of excess equipment and consumable assets of continuing operations.
In June 2020, the Company completed the sale of its Malaysian facility resulting in net proceeds of approximately $4,800,000 million after the payment of consent fees, real estate taxes, brokerage and legal fees, transfer and other expenses. The Company recorded a gain on the disposal of the Malaysian facility of approximately $1,800,000. In December 2020, Rubicon sold all of the outstanding shares of capital stock of its wholly owned subsidiary Rubicon Sapphire Technology (Malaysia) SDN BHD for gross proceeds of approximately $775,000. The Company recorded a gain from such stock sale of $261,000.
The Company recorded a loss on the sale of assets from discontinued operations of $9,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Long-lived asset impairment charges. We did not record any additional asset impairment expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. We will continue to assess our long-lived assets to ensure the carrying amount of these assets is still appropriate given any changes in the asset usage, marketplace and other factors used in determining the current fair value.
Other income (expense). Other income (expense) from continuing operations was $5,000 and $(1,580,000) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, an increase of $1,585,000. Other income in 2021 was comprised of interest income of $5,000. Other (expense) in 2020 was comprised of realized (loss) on investments of ($1,824,000) offset by interest income and a gain on foreign currency translation of $108,000 and $136,000, respectively, resulting in the net increase of $1,585,000.
Income tax (expense) benefit. We are subject to income taxes in the United States. On an annual basis, we assess the recoverability of deferred tax assets and the need for a valuation allowance. For the year ended December 31, 2021, a valuation allowance has been included in the 2021 forecasted effective tax rate. At December 31, 2021, we continue to be in a three-year cumulative loss position; therefore, as of December 31, 2021, we maintained a full valuation allowance on our United States net deferred tax assets and until an appropriate level of profitability is attained, we expect to maintain a full valuation allowance going forward. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”) which, among other provisions, reduced the U.S. corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018. The SEC issued guidance, Staff Accounting Bulletin 118, on accounting for the tax effects of the Act. The guidance allowed us to record provisional amounts for those impacts, with the requirement that the accounting be completed in a period not to exceed one year from the date of enactment. We have completed our accounting for the tax effects of the enactment of the Act. The deemed inclusion from the repatriation tax was $5.0 million at the time the calculation was finalized for the tax return. As we are in a full valuation allowance position (as described above), an equal benefit adjustment was recorded for the impact of the increase of the deemed repatriation tax. The tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is based on an estimated combined statutory effective tax rate. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a tax expense of $0 and $13,000, respectively, for an effective tax rate of 0.0% and 1.0%, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the difference between our effective tax rate and the U.S. federal 21% statutory rate and state 7.4% (net of federal benefit) statutory rate was primarily related to the change in our U.S. and Malaysia NOL valuation allowances, U.S. R&D credit, Malaysia foreign tax rate differential and Malaysia withholding taxes.
At December 31, 2021, we had separate Federal, Illinois and Indiana NOL carryforwards of $189 million, $181 million, and $655,000, respectively. The Federal and Illinois NOLs began to expire in 2021 and the Indiana NOL will begin to expire in 2039. With the adoption of ASU 2016-09 in 2017, we recorded a deferred tax asset related to $26,400,000 of unrecorded Federal and State NOLs attributable to stock option exercises. NOLs attributable to the stock option exercise were fully offset by the valuation allowance (as described above). We have recorded an uncertain tax position of $2,600,000 that further reduces the net operating loss deferred tax assets reported in the financial statements. In addition, at December 31, 2021, we had Federal research and development credits of $662,000, which will begin to expire in 2028.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We have historically funded our operations using a combination of issuances of common stock and cash generated from our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash equivalents and short-term investments totaling $26,011,000, including cash of $8,123,000 held in deposits at major banks, $3,137,000 invested in money market funds and $14,751,000 of short-term investments in U.S. Treasury securities.
We plan to limit our capital expenditures primarily to only those required under existing obligations or as otherwise necessary to realize value from the development, commercialization or sale of products.
Cash used in operating activities of continuing operations was $61,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company generated a net loss of $459,000, including non-cash items of $102,000, and an increase in cash from a decrease in net working capital of $500,000. The net working capital decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in inventories of $356,000, was a decrease in prepaid assets and other current assets of $108,000, and an increase in accrued payroll of $215,000. Additionally, there was an increase in accounts receivable of $236,000, which was the result of an increase in 3rd party trade receivables of $447,000 offset by a $211,000 decrease in amounts due from Direct Dose Rx.
Cash provided from operating activities of continuing operations was $181,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2020, there was a net loss of $723,000, including non-cash items of $91,000, and an increase in cash from a decrease in net working capital of $813,000. The net working capital decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in accounts receivable of $257,000, which was the result of a decrease in 3rd party trade receivables of $737,000 offset by a $480,000 increase in amounts due from Direct Dose Rx. Additionally, there was a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $199,000 from refunded security deposits and purchases against a vendor credit partially offset by increased insurance premiums, as well as a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $401,000 primarily from a $400,000 payment on hold at the end of the prior year.
Cash used in discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $262,000 was primarily the result of a net loss from discontinued operations of $271,000, as well as a decrease in inventories of $59,000 and an increase in accounts payable of $29,000. There was also a decrease in 3rd party trade receivables of $113,000, as well as a decrease in amounts owed to Rubicon of $211,000.
Cash provided by discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $116,000 was primarily the result of a net loss from discontinued operations of $340,000, an increase in accounts payable of $23,000, in addition to an increase in 3rd party trade receivables of $71,000, as well as an increase in amounts owed to Rubicon of $480,000.
Net cash provided from investing activities of continuing operations of $640,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 was from the sale of excess equipment and consumable assets.
Net cash provided from investing activities of continuing operations was $4,536,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in net cash was the result of the sale of the Company’s Malaysian facility for net proceeds of approximately $4,800,000 after the payment of consent fees, real estate taxes, brokerage and legal fees, transfer and other expenses assets, the sale of our Malaysia subsidiary for net proceeds of $744,000, the receipt by the Company of $1,700,000 from the sales of investments, offset by the use of $2,800,000 to purchase U.S. Treasury securities and marketable securities.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $187,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting from cash used to settle net equity awards of $187,000.
Net cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $2,447,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by purchases of our treasury stock of $2,400,000 and cash used to settle net equity awards of $48,000.
Future liquidity requirements
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, anticipated cash flows from operating activities and proceeds from sales or lease of fixed assets will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next twelve months from the date of filing of this report. However, if our ability to generate sufficient operating cash flow or our use of cash in the next twelve months were to significantly adversely change, we may not have enough funds available to continue operating at our current level in future periods. Our cash needs include cash required to fund our operations. If the assumptions underlying our business plan regarding future revenues and expenses change, or if unexpected opportunities or needs arise, we may seek to raise additional cash by selling equity or convertible debt securities. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, the percentage ownership of our stockholders could be significantly diluted, and these newly issued securities may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of existing stockholders.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with the accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in our financial statements and the accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. Although these estimates are based on our present best knowledge of the future impact on the Company of current events and actions, actual results may differ from these estimates, assumptions and judgments.
We consider to be critical those accounting policies that require our most subjective or complex judgments, which often result from a need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain, and that are among the most important of our accounting policies in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. We believe the following to be our critical accounting policies, including the more significant estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our financial statements.
Foreign currency translation and transactions.
We have determined that the functional currency of Rubicon Sapphire Technology (Malaysia) SDN BHD (“RST”), which was sold in December 2020, is the U.S. dollar. RST’s assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars using the re-measurement method. Non-monetary assets are translated at historical exchange rates and monetary assets are translated at exchange rates existing at the respective balance sheet dates. Translation adjustments for RST are included in determining net income (loss) for the period. The results of operations are translated into U.S. dollars at the average exchange rates during the respective period. We record these gains and losses in other income (expense).
Foreign currency transaction gains and losses are generated from the effects of exchange rate changes on transactions denominated in a currency other than our functional currency, which is the U.S. dollar. Gains and losses on foreign currency transactions are generally required to be recognized in the determination of net income (loss) for the period. We record these gains and losses in other income (expense).
Revenue recognition.
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”) which was adopted on January 1, 2018. We recognize revenue when performance obligations under a purchase order or signed quotation are satisfied. Our business practice commits us to manufacture and deliver product upon acceptance of a customer’s purchase order or signed quotation (“agreement”). The agreement with the customer includes specifications of the product to be delivered, price, expected ship date and payment terms. Our agreements generally do not contain variable, financing, rights of return or non-cash components. There are no up-front costs to develop the production process. The performance obligation is satisfied at the point in time (single performance obligation) when the product is manufactured to the customer’s specification, as performance does not create an asset with an alternative use to us. Accordingly, revenue is recognized when product is shipped, and control of the product, title and risk of loss transfer to a customer. We grant credit terms considering normal collection risk. If there is doubt about collection, full prepayment for the order is required. Any payments received prior to shipment are recorded as deferred revenue and included in Advance Payments in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We do not provide maintenance or other services and we do not have sales that involve multiple elements or deliverables.
All of our revenue is denominated in U.S. dollars.
Inventory valuation
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value is determined based on an estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less reasonably predictable costs of completion and disposal. Raw materials cost is determined using the first-in, first-out method, and work-in-process and finished goods costs are determined on a standard cost basis which includes materials, labor and overhead. We establish inventory reserves when conditions exist that suggest inventory may be in excess of anticipated demand or is obsolete based on customer required specifications. We evaluate the ability to realize the value of our inventory based on a combination of factors, including forecasted sales, estimated current and future market value and changes in customers’ product specifications. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we consumed inventory that had previously been reflected as excess or obsolete and recorded a reduction in the inventory reserve of $159,000 and a reduction to cost of goods sold for the same amount. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we consumed inventory that had previously been reflected as excess or obsolete and recorded a reduction in the inventory reserve of $44,000 and a reduction to cost of goods sold for the same amount. In addition, in 2021 we sold inventory that was valued at the lower of cost or market resulting in a reduction in both the lower of cost or market inventory reserve and cost of goods sold of $27,000. In 2020, we sold inventory that was valued at the lower of cost or market resulting in a reduction in both the lower of cost or market inventory reserve and cost of goods sold of $21,000. The excess and obsolete inventory reserve at December 31, 2021 was $7,749,000 compared to $7,908,000 at December 31, 2020.
We did not record any additional write-downs of consumable inventories for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We did not record any additional adjustments of raw materials for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as we sold some of such raw materials at a price exceeding its book value.
Our method of estimating excess and obsolete inventory has remained consistent for all periods presented. If our recognition of excess or obsolete inventory is, or if our estimates of our inventory’s potential utility become, less favorable than currently expected, additional inventory reserves may be required.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company made the determination that raw material inventories were such that the likelihood of significant usage within the current year was doubtful and reclassified such raw material inventories as non-current in the reported financial statements.
We determine our normal operating capacity and record as an expense costs attributable to lower utilization of equipment and staff. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, such expenses were $99,000 and $132,000, respectively.
Investments
We invest our available cash primarily in U.S. Treasury securities, investment grade commercial paper, FDIC guaranteed certificates of deposit, common stock, equity-related securities and corporate notes. Investments classified as available-for-sale debt securities are carried at fair value with unrealized gains and losses recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Investments in equity securities are reported at fair value, with both realized and unrealized gains and losses recorded in other income (expense), in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Investments in which we have the ability and intent, if necessary, to liquidate in order to support our current operations are classified as short-term.
We review our available-for-sale debt securities investments at the end of each quarter for other-than-temporary declines in fair value based on the specific identification method. We consider various factors in determining whether an impairment is other-than-temporary, including the severity and duration of the impairment, changes in underlying credit ratings, forecasted recovery, our ability and intent to hold the investment for a period of time sufficient to allow for any anticipated recovery in market value and the probability that the scheduled cash payments will continue to be made. When we conclude that an other-than-temporary impairment has resulted, the difference between the fair value and carrying value is written off and recorded as a charge on the Consolidated Statement of Operations. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, no impairment was recorded.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
We estimate the allowance for doubtful accounts based on an assessment of the collectability of specific customer accounts. The determination of risk for collection is assessed on a customer-by-customer basis considering our historical experience and expected future orders with the customer, changes in payment patterns and recent information we have about the current status of our accounts receivable balances. If we determine that a specific customer is a risk for collection, we provide a specific allowance for credit losses to reduce the net recognized receivable to the amount we reasonably believe will be collected. If a receivable is deemed uncollectible, and the account balance differs from the allowance provided, the specific amount is written off to bad debt expense. We believe that based on the customers to whom we sell and the nature of our agreements with them, our estimates are reasonable. Our method of estimating collectability has remained consistent for all periods presented and with past collections experience.
Assets held for sale and long-lived assets
When circumstances, such as adverse market conditions, indicate that the carrying value of a long-lived asset may be impaired, we perform an analysis to review the recoverability of the asset’s carrying value using estimates of the undiscounted cash flows (excluding interest charges) from the expected future operations of the asset. These estimates consider factors such as expected future operating income, operating trends and prospects, as well as the effects of demand, competition and other factors. If the analysis indicates that the carrying value is not recoverable from future cash flows, an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value. The estimated fair value of assets is determined using appraisal techniques which assume the highest and best use of the asset by market participants, considering the use of the asset that is physically possible, legally permissible, and financially feasible at the measurement date. Any impairment losses are recorded as operating expenses, which reduce net income.
In June 2020, the Company completed the sale of its Malaysian facility for a net sale price of approximately $4,800,000 (based on the exchange rate on June 30, 2020 of $1=MYR4.27) after the payment of consent fees, real estate taxes, brokerage and legal fees, transfer and other expenses. The Company recorded a gain on the disposal of the Malaysian facility of approximately $1,800,000. In December 2020, the Company completed the sale of all of the outstanding shares of capital stock of its wholly owned subsidiary Rubicon Sapphire Technology (Malaysia) SDN BHD. The company recorded a gain on such stock sale of $261,000.
On February 7, 2022, we entered into a real estate sale contract to sell our parcel of land in Batavia, Illinois for $722,000 and expect our net proceeds, if the sale is consummated, after the payment of fees, real estate taxes, brokerage and legal fees, transfer and withholding taxes and other expenses to be approximately $600,000. The closing of the sale of the property is subject to certain conditions precedent. While there is currently no anticipated closing date, we expect to complete the sale within the next twelve-month period. As such, this property was classified as current assets held for sale at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Stock-based compensation
We grant stock-based compensation in the form of stock options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and restricted stock. We expense stock options based upon the fair value on the date of grant. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The determination of the fair value of stock-based payment awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables. These variables include our expected stock volatility over the term of the awards, actual and projected employee stock option exercise behaviors, risk-free interest rates, forfeitures and expected dividends.
The expected term represents the weighted-average period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding and is based upon five years of historical data. We estimate the volatility of our common stock based on a five-year historical stock price. We base the risk-free interest rate that we use in the option pricing model on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining terms similar to the expected term on the options. We do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future and, therefore, use an expected dividend yield of zero in the option pricing model. We are required to estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. The current forfeiture rate of 36.13% was based on our past history of forfeitures.
All stock options are granted at an exercise price per share equal to the closing market price of our common stock on the last market trading day prior to the date of grant. Therefore, there is no intrinsic value because the exercise price per share of each option was equal to the fair value of the common stock on the date of grant.
We used a Monte Carlo simulation model valuation technique to determine the fair value of RSUs granted to a key executive pursuant to an employment agreement, because the awards vest based upon achievement of market price targets of our common stock. The Monte Carlo simulation model utilizes multiple input variables that determine the probability of satisfying the market condition stipulated in the award and calculates the fair value of each RSU. The daily expected stock price volatility is based on a four-year historical volatility of our common stock. The daily expected dividend yield is based on annual expected dividend payments. The average daily risk-free interest rate is based on the three-year treasury yield as of the grant date. Each of the tranches is calculated to have its own fair value and requisite service period. The fair value of each tranche is amortized over the requisite or derived service period, which is up to four years.
We allocate stock-based compensation costs relating to options using a straight-line method which amortizes the fair value of each option on a straight-line basis over the service period, but in no event less than the amount vested.
All option grants are granted at an exercise price per share equal to the closing market price of our common stock on the day before the date of grant. Therefore, there is no intrinsic value because the exercise price per share of each option was equal to the fair value of the common stock on the date of grant. Based on the fair value of the common stock on December 31, 2021, there was $7,000 of intrinsic value arising from 4,050 stock options exercisable or outstanding.
For more information on stock-based compensation, see Note 7 - Stock Incentive Plans to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income tax valuation allowance
Evaluating the need for and amount of a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets often requires significant judgment and extensive analysis of all the positive and negative evidence available to determine whether all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. A valuation allowance must be established for deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not (a probability level of more than 50%) that they will not be realized. In general, “realization” refers to the incremental benefit achieved through the reduction in future taxes payable or an increase in future taxes refundable from the deferred tax assets, assuming that the underlying deductible differences and carryforwards are the last items to enter into the determination of future taxable income. In determining our valuation allowance, we consider the source of taxable income including taxable income in prior carryback years, future reversals of existing temporary differences, the required use of tax planning strategies, and future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards. We are in a cumulative loss position for the past three years which is considered significant negative evidence that is difficult to overcome on a “more likely than not” standard through objectively verifiable data. Under the accounting standards, verifiable evidence will have greater weight than subjective evidence such as our projections for future growth. Based on an evaluation in accordance with the accounting standards, as of December 31, 2021, a valuation allowance has been recorded against the net U.S. deferred tax assets in order to measure only the portion of the deferred tax assets that are more likely than not to be realized based on the weight of all the available evidence. Any U.S. and Malaysia tax benefit or tax expense recorded on the Consolidated Statement of Operations will be offset with a corresponding adjustment from the use of the NOL carryforward asset which currently has a full valuation allowance. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Accounting for uncertainty in income taxes
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had $1.1 million of unrecognized tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return that have been recorded on our financial statements as an offset to the valuation allowance related to tax positions taken in 2012. We recognize interest and/or penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense. There were no interest or penalties related to income taxes that have been accrued or recognized as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and in a U.S. state jurisdiction. Due to the existence of NOL carryforwards, tax years ended December 31, 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2012 through 2020 are open to examination by tax authorities for Federal purposes. Due to NOL carryforwards at the State level, tax years ended 2012 through 2020 are open to examination by state tax authorities.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of new accounting standards.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
None.