ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis provides information which management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our condensed consolidated results of operations and financial condition. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Unless the context otherwise requires, references to “we”, “us”, “our”, and “the Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of Vicarious Surgical Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
We are combining advanced miniaturized robotics, computer science and 3D visualization to build a new category of intelligent and affordable, single-incision surgical robot that virtually transports surgeons inside the patient to perform minimally invasive surgery, or MIS. With our next-generation robotics technology and proprietary human-like surgical robots, we are seeking to improve patient outcomes, as well as the cost and efficacy of surgical procedures. Led by a visionary team of engineers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, or MIT, we intend to deliver the next generation in robotic surgery, designed to solve the shortcomings of both open surgery, as well as current manual and robot-assisted MIS.
We estimate there are over 39 million soft tissue surgical procedures addressable by our technology. Of these procedures, it is estimated that more than 50% are performed using open surgery, and less than 5% are performed by current robot-assisted MIS.
We believe this slow adoption of robot-assisted surgery has occurred because of several factors, including the following:
● Significant Capital Investment. Existing robotic systems require a high upfront cost and burdensome annual service contracts that are often prohibitively expensive, especially in outpatient settings. These capital costs are estimated to be up to $2.0 million per system upfront, plus an additional 10-20% annually for maintenance and service contracts.
● Low Utilization. In addition to the significant acquisition costs, existing robotic systems create inefficiencies and increase costs to medical facilities considering adoption. Due to their large size and limited portability, existing robotic systems require the construction of a dedicated operating room, occupying valuable real estate within the hospital. Once in place, these robotic systems require extensive set-up and operating room turnover times, which limits the number of procedures that can be performed with the robotic system.
● Limited Capabilities. Existing robotic systems have limited capabilities and are ill-suited for many outpatient procedures. Due to their limited degrees of freedom inside the abdomen, they depend on significant, complicated, robotic motion outside the body, and they have limited ability to operate in multiple quadrants, difficulty operating on the “ceiling” of the abdomen, create collisions inside and outside of the patient’s abdomen, and restrict overall access of the operating team to the patient.
● Difficult to Use. Existing robotic systems necessitate device-specific training requiring the surgeon to “design the robotic motion” for each procedure. In choosing the incision sites, the surgeon must effectively design the kinematic motion of the robot for every procedure to operate well and avoid collisions inside and outside of the patient’s abdomen. They must design this kinematic motion with fewer degrees of freedom than they would employ using open surgery, restricting their natural movements. To become proficient at manipulating these legacy robotic systems to perform the procedures they otherwise were trained to perform via open surgery requires extensive training and several dozen procedures on live patients. As these systems are maintained in dedicated, expensive, operating rooms, obtaining access to train on the system becomes a significant impediment to adoption, resulting in more open surgeries.
Our single-port system with advanced, miniaturized robotics and advanced visualization is designed to address the significant limitations of open surgery and existing single- and multi-port robotic surgical approaches to improve patient outcomes and enhance adoption by hospitals and other medical facilities. The Vicarious System is designed with a fundamentally different architecture, and proprietary “de-coupled actuators,” to overcome many of the limitations of open surgery or existing robot-assisted surgical procedures with a minimally invasive and more capable robotic system. This architecture enables unprecedented dexterity inside the abdomen through an ultra-thin support tube, providing significant improvement over existing legacy robotic systems and minimizing the complications and trauma associated with open surgery.
Financial Highlights
We are pre-revenue generating as of December 31, 2021.
We incurred a net loss of $35.2 million and $12.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a period-over-period loss of 173%. The 2021 net loss is inclusive of a gain of $3.1 million related to the decrease in the fair value of our warrant obligations due to our stock price decrease during Q4. Our loss from operations prior to the warrant gain and other income and expense items was $38.2 million and $13.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a period-over-period loss of 194%, which was primarily due to a 70% increase in our average headcount and a 467% increase in our G&A expenses which was primarily related to expenses associated with our becoming a public company during 2021. Our increase in average headcount was driven almost entirely by our ramp up in R&D personnel for which our average headcount increased by 65% from an average of 51 people in the year ended December 31, 2020 to an average of 84 people for the year ended December 31, 2021.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the global outbreak of COVID-19 to be a pandemic. We continue to closely monitor the recent developments surrounding the continued spread and potential resurgence of COVID-19. The COVID-19 pandemic has had, and is expected to continue to have, an adverse impact on our operations, particularly as a result of preventive and precautionary measures that we, other businesses, and governments are taking. Refer to “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information. We are unable to predict the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our future results of operations, liquidity and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties, including the duration of the pandemic, the actions that may be taken by government authorities across the United States. However, COVID-19 is not expected to result in any significant changes in costs going forward. We will continue to monitor the performance of our business and reassess the impacts of COVID-19.
Business Combination
On September 17, 2021, we completed the Business Combination. The Business Combination was approved by D8’s stockholders at its special meeting held on September 15, 2021. The transaction resulted in the combined company being renamed “Vicarious Surgical Inc.,” Legacy Vicarious being renamed “Vicarious Surgical Operating Co.” and the combined company’s Class A common stock and warrants to purchase Class A common stock commencing trading on the NYSE on September 20, 2021 under the symbol “RBOT” and “RBOT WS”, respectively. As a result of the Business Combination, we received gross proceeds of approximately $142.0 million. On October 6, 2021, Legacy Vicarious changed its name from “Vicarious Surgical Operating Co.” to “Vicarious Surgical US Inc.”
Factors Affecting Results of Operations
The following factors have been important to our business and we expect them to impact our results of operations and financial condition in future periods:
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue. We do not expect to generate revenue until at least 2023 and only if it receives FDA approval of our product. Any revenue from initial sales of a new product is difficult to predict and in any event will initially only modestly reduce our continued net losses resulting from our increasing research and development and marketing activities.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses consist primarily of engineering, product development, clinical studies to develop and support our products, regulatory expenses, medical affairs, and other costs associated with products and technologies that are in development. These expenses include employee compensation, including stock-based compensation, supplies, consulting, prototyping, testing, materials, travel expenses, depreciation and an allocation of facility overhead expenses. Additionally, R&D expenses include costs associated with our clinical studies, including clinical trial design, clinical trial site initiation and study costs, data management, related travel expenses and the cost of products used for clinical trials, internal and external costs associated with our regulatory compliance and quality assurance functions and overhead costs. We expect R&D expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trial and other related activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative, or G&A, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, related to executive, finance and accounting, information technology and human resource functions. Other G&A expenses include travel expenses, professional services fees (including legal, audit and tax fees), insurance costs, general corporate expenses and allocated facilities-related expenses. We expect G&A expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our infrastructure to both drive and support the anticipated growth due to additional legal, accounting, insurance and other expenses associated with being a public company.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing, or S&M, expenses consist primarily of compensation for personnel, including stock-based compensation, related to selling and marketing functions and physician education programs. Other S&M expenses include training, travel expenses, promotional activities, marketing initiatives, market research and analysis, conferences and trade shows, professional services fees and allocated facilities-related expenses. We expect S&M expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we increase potential customers’ awareness of our presence and prepares our sales and marketing function for our product launch at a future, yet undetermined date.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liability represents the mark-to-market fair value adjustments to the outstanding public and private placement warrants assumed as part of the consummation of the Business Combination on September 17, 2021. The change in fair value of our Private Warrants is primarily the result of the change in the underlying stock price of our stock used in the Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model while the Public Warrants are marked to market based on their price on the NYSE. The warrant liability was measured at fair value initially on September 17, 2021 and is remeasured at exercise, and for warrants that remain outstanding at the end of the reporting period.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest incurred on our outstanding term and equipment loans.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased $12.3 million, or 125%, to $22.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to increases of $7.9 million of personnel-related expenses, $1.4 million in professional services, $1.3 million in facility expenses, $1.0 million in materials and supplies, $0.3 million in equipment and depreciation costs, $0.1 million for travel and $0.3 million of other operating expense. The increase in personnel-related expense was due primarily to an increase in average headcount of 65%, from an average of 51 people in 2020 to an average of 84 people in 2021.
Sales and Marketing Expenses. Sales and marketing expenses increased $2.1 million, or 244%, from $0.9 million in the year ended 2020 to $3.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in sales and marketing costs was primarily due to increases of $1.6 million in personnel-related expenses, $0.3 million in advertising, $0.1 million in facility expense, and $0.1 million in travel expense. The increase in personnel-related expense was due to an average headcount increase of 50%, from an average of 4 people in 2020 to an average of 6 people in 2021 with the remainder of the increase attributable to increases in wages and benefits.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased $10.9 million, or 467%, to $13.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $2.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative costs was due to an increase of $4.5 million in personnel-related expenses, an increase of $2.7 million in professional fees, $1.8 million in insurance as a result of becoming a public company, $1.0 million of facilities expenses associated with our expansion and new lease, $0.2 million in computer equipment, $0.1 million in travel and $0.6 million of other expense. The increase in professional fees resulted from consulting, audit and legal fees associated with work performed in the year ended December 31, 2021 to produce public company financial statements for the past two years and with becoming a public company.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities. The change in fair value of warrant liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was a $3.1 million gain. The change in fair value of warrant liability resulted from the remeasurement of the public and private placement warrant liabilities between September 17, 2021 and the end of the reporting period, December 31, 2021.
Interest Income. Interest income decreased by $0.1 million, or 82% during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income was primarily due to a decrease in average short-term investments during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased by $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to having the $1.5 million term loan outstanding for nine months in 2021.
Income Taxes. Our income tax provision consists of an estimate for U.S. federal and state income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax law. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our U.S. and state deferred tax assets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, our primary sources of capital had been private placements of preferred stock prior to the Business Combination and recapitalization with D8. We have incurred a net loss in each of our annual periods since our inception. We incurred net losses of $35.2 million and $12.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we held cash and cash equivalents of $173.5 million and had an accumulated deficit of $66.8 million.
We expect net losses to continue in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to invest in commercialization and new product development. We believe our current cash balance of $173.5 million will be sufficient to support our operations beyond the next twelve months.
We may seek to sell additional common or preferred equity or convertible debt securities, enter into an additional credit facility or another form of third-party funding or seek other debt financing. The sale of equity and convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders and, in the case of preferred equity securities or convertible debt, those securities could provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our common stock. The terms of debt securities issued or borrowings pursuant to a credit agreement could impose significant restrictions on our operations. If we raise funds through collaborations and licensing arrangements, we might be required to relinquish significant rights to our platform technologies or products or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
Cash
Our cash and cash equivalents balance as of December 31, 2021 was $173.5 million. Our future capital requirements may vary from those currently planned and will depend on various factors, including the timing and extent of R&D spending and spending on other strategic business initiatives.
Cash Flows Summary
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31,
Cash flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $33.3 million, attributable to a net loss of $35.2 million and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million and non-cash items that generated a change of $0.9 million. Non-cash items consisted of $3.7 million in stock-based compensation and $0.3 million of depreciation and amortization, partially offset by a $3.1 million gain due to the change in fair value of our warrant liabilities. The $1.0 million change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $3.7 million increase in accrued expenses, a $1.1 million increase in accounts payable, and a $0.8 million increase in deferred rent partially offset by a $4.6 million increase in prepaid and other assets.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $12.0 million, attributable to a net loss of $12.9 million and a net change in our net operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million and non-cash items of $0.6 million. Non-cash items consisted of $0.4 million in stock-based compensation and $0.2 million in depreciation. The $0.3 million change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $0.2 million increase in accounts payable and a $0.1 million increase in accrued expenses.
Cash flows used in Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.3 million for equipment purchases.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.2 million and related to the sales and maturities of short-term investments of $13.3 million, offset by purchases of property and equipment of $0.1 million.
Cash flows provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $192.2 million resulting from $190.4 million of proceeds from the reverse recapitalization and $1.5 million related to proceeds from a term loan, $0.4 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options and warrants, partially offset by $0.2 million of cash used to pay back a portion of the outstanding term and equipment loans and $0.1 million for other items.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $13.5 million and related to proceeds of $13.5 million from the issuance of our Series A3 convertible preferred stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the consolidated balance sheet date, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be reasonable, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from those estimates, and such differences could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our historical financial statements (see Note 2 of the accompanying financial statements), we believe the following critical accounting policy requires significant judgment and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements:
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based compensation, including stock options and warrants, at fair value and recognize stock-based compensation expense for those equity awards, net of actual forfeitures, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award.
The fair value of our stock options and warrants on the date of grant is determined by a Black-Scholes pricing model utilizing key assumptions such as the fair value of the common stock, expected volatility and expected term. Our estimates of these assumptions are primarily based on the fair value of our stock, historical data, peer company data and judgment regarding future trends. The fair value of our common stock has been determined by our board of directors at each award grant date based upon a variety of factors, including the results obtained from an independent third-party valuation, our financial position and historical financial performance, the status of technological developments within our proposed products, the illiquid nature of the common stock, arm’s length sales of our capital stock, including convertible preferred stock, the effect of the rights and preferences of the preferred shareholders, and the prospects of a liquidity event, among others, as our common stock is not actively traded. We use the simplified method when calculating the expected term due to insufficient historical exercise data. Our stock is currently publicly traded, the volatility is based on a benchmark of comparable companies within the automotive and energy storage industries. The dividend yield used is zero, as we have never paid any cash dividends and does not anticipate doing so in the foreseeable future.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in our condensed financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company
Following the Business Combination, we became an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Pursuant to the JOBS Act, an emerging growth company is provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting standards that may be issued by FASB or the SEC either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We intend to take advantage of the exemption for complying with new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies.
We also intend to take advantage of some of the reduced regulatory and reporting requirements of emerging growth companies pursuant to the JOBS Act so long as we qualify as an emerging growth company, including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and exemptions from the requirements of holding non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments.