ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on April 5, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities, which we refer to as a “target business.” Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to a particular industry or geographic location, although we intend to focus our search for target businesses in the
cannabis industry. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues. All activity for the period from April 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the initial public offering. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We have generated and will continue to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the initial public offering.
From April 5, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $155,240, which primarily resulted from state franchise tax of $65,282 as well as the change in fair market value of the over-allotment option of $58,062.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,844,672 in cash and working capital of $860,971.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity needs had been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs, and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of $189,789. The promissory note was paid in full on January 11, 2022. Subsequent to the consummation of the initial public offering and private placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor, initial shareholders, officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
Public and Private Warrants
The Company accounted for the 13,300,000 warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering (including 7,500,000 Public Warrants and 5,800,000 Private Placement Warrants assuming the underwriters' over-allotment option is not exercised) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40. The Company concluded that the Public and Private Placement Warrants are considered indexed to the entity's own stock and meet other equity classification requirements. Therefore, Public and Private Placement Warrants are considered equity instruments and are classified as such.
Net Loss Per Share of Class A Common Stock
We have two categories of shares, which are referred to as redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two categories of shares.
Shares of Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 15,000,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of the units contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the business combination and in connection with certain amendments to our second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of us require shares of Class A common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all 15,000,000 shares of Class A common stock were classified outside of permanent equity as of December 31, 2021.
We recognized changes in redemption value immediately as they occur upon the IPO and will adjust the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable shares of Class A common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.