ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Discussion and Analysis
The following discussion and analysis is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. In addition, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those discussed in “Forward Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a development-stage biotechnology and medical device company focusing on the research, development and commercialization of autologous (using a patient's own cells) cellular therapies that can be used for medical and aesthetic applications. The Company does not have any commercialized products. The Company's activities have consisted principally of performing research and development activities, business development efforts, and raising capital to support such activities.
The Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, RenovaCare Sciences Corp., owns the CellMist™ System which is a cell isolation procedure that enzymatically renders stem cells from the patient’s own skin or other tissues. The resulting stem cell suspension is administered topically with our SkinGun™ spray device as a cell therapy onto wounds including burns to facilitate healing. The CellMist™ System also includes our unique, closed, automated cell isolation device (the “CID”) to harvest stem cells from tissues which is in prototype development.
Currently, our proprietary technologies are the subject of forty-four (44) U.S. and foreign granted or pending patents or patent applications and seventeen (17) U.S. and foreign trademarks. Of the issued patents, five (5) are U.S. patents and seventeen (17) have issued or are allowed in Australia, Canada, China, Europe, Germany, France, Italy, Japan, Korea, Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland/Lichtenstein, and the United Kingdom. The Company has six (6) allowed trademarks in the United States, two (2) European registered trademarks, two (2) United Kingdom trademarks, two (2) Japan trademarks, and two (2) pending in Canada.
In May 2021, the Company announced that the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) fully approved the Company’s Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) application to conduct a clinical trial, designated CELLMIST 1, designed to evaluate the safety and feasibility of autologous skin and pluripotent stem cells rendered by its manual CellMist™ System from donor skin and applied topically with the electronic SkinGun™ spray device for treatment of acute burn wounds. The clinical trial protocol is an open-label, single-arm clinical study designated to enroll 14 adult human burn subjects with partial-thickness, second-degree deep thermal burn wounds covering between 10% and 30% total body surface area. The Company may engage up to four (4) U.S. burn centers to conduct the clinical study.
Subsequent to year end, the Board decided to stop enrollment of patients into the clinical trial and take other measures to reduce the Company’s overhead in an effort to conserve financial resources as it continues to defend against the Lawsuits. The Company hopes to restart the clinical trial at a future date upon the occurrence of a favorable outcome against the Lawsuits and additional financing.
Research, development and commercialization of new technologies generally requires significant financial resources, involves a high degree of risk, and there is no assurance that development activities will result in a commercially viable product. The Company has not generated any revenue and has sustained recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations since inception. The Company expects to incur losses as it continues development of its products and technologies and defends itself against the Lawsuits. The Company will need to raise additional capital through partnerships or the sale of securities to accomplish its business plan. Failing to secure such additional funding poses a significant risk. The Company's ability to meet its financial obligations, including to fund the development of its cellular therapies depends on the amount and timing of cash receipts from future financing activities. There can be no assurance as to the availability or terms upon which such financing and capital might be available.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date we have not generated any product revenues and do not expect to generate any revenue for the foreseeable future. Our ability to generate revenue and become profitable depends upon our ability to obtain marketing approval and successfully commercialization of our CellMistTM System.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our CellMistTM System and include:
· design, pilot-scale manufacturing and pre-clinical testing of our cell isolation and SkinGunTM spray devices.
· employee-related expenses associated with our research and development activities, including salaries, benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expenses.
·
costs associated with quality management systems including device verification and validation testing, and regulatory operations and regulatory compliance.
· expenses incurred under agreements related to our clinical trial.
· other research and development costs including contract consulting fees and non-cash stock-based compensation to contract research organizations (CROs) and other third parties.
We do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total expenses required for us to reach commercialization of our CellMistTM System. In the future, we expect that research and development expenses will increase due to our ongoing product development and approval efforts. We expense research and development costs as incurred.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation related to directors and employees, professional service costs including legal, accounting, and other consulting fees and other general and administrative expenses including investor relations, insurance, and facilities costs. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in the future as we hire personnel and incur additional costs to support the expansion of our research and development activities, our operation as a public company and to defend against the Lawsuits.
Stock-Based Compensation
Expense associated with equity-based transactions is calculated and expensed in our financial statements as required pursuant to various accounting rules and is non-cash in nature. Stock compensation represents the expense associated with the amortization of our stock options.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income consists of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and the reimbursement of legal fees from our Directors & Officers insurance policy.
Income Taxes
We have yet to generate taxable income. We have historically incurred operating losses resulting in carry forward tax losses totaling approximately $21,945,000 as of December 31, 2021. We anticipate that we will continue to generate tax losses for the foreseeable future and that we will be able to carry forward these tax losses indefinitely to future taxable years. Accordingly, we do not expect to pay taxes until we have taxable income after the full utilization of our carry forward tax losses. We have provided a full valuation allowance with respect to the deferred tax assets related to these carry forward losses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31,
Research and Development Expenses
(1) Manufacturing clinical supplies decreased due to completion of the pilot-scale manufacturing and validation testing of the components of the CellMist™ System and the electronic SkinGun™ spray device to be used in our clinical trial.
(2) Personnel related expenses increased due to the allocation of Stem Cell Systems personnel in support of the development of our CellMist™ System.
(3) Stock compensation expense decreased due primarily to the completion of vesting in 2020 of prior issued stock options in excess of the amounts recognized in the current year upon the continued vesting of other R&D related stock option grants.
(4) Clinical trial expenses increased due to the addition of clinical professionals, clinical site activation costs and costs related to the preparation of our clinical trials which began in the second quarter of 2021. We expect clinical trial expenses to decrease moving forward due to the suspension of patient enrollment resulting from the need to conserve funds.
(5) All other expenses decreased as validation testing for the electronic SkinGun ™ concluded and we transitioned to prototype development of the cell isolation device at StemCell Systems.
General and Administrative
(1) Personnel related costs decreased due to lower headcount starting mid-year 2021.
(2) Stock compensation expense decreased due to the forfeiture and cancellation of 2,805,571 stock options as a result of the resignation of the Company’s former Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, the Company’s former Chief Financial Officer, and two members of the Company’s Board of Directors. Compensation expense was recorded on these options prior to their full vesting. As a result, the Company recognized a $1,314,705 reversal of the prior recognized compensation expense related to the cancelled options. The G&A expense recognized for options still in their vesting period totaled $192,604.
(3) Professional and consultant fees increased primarily due to an $1,180,000 increase in legal fees related to the Lawsuits, $125,000 increase in fees related to our patents and trademarks, offset by a $229,000 decrease in accounting and consulting fees. Legal and other costs related specifically to the Lawsuits totaled $1,094,000 and $1,708,000 during the fourth quarter and year ended 2021, respectively, and are expected to be mostly offset by insurance proceeds paid directly from AIG pursuant to our D&O Policy. The available insurance to defend the Company and its officers and directors is expected to be depleted in our first quarter of 2022. On March 18, 2022, our Chairman loaned the Company $800,000 to be used towards the payment of legal fees related to the Lawsuits. The Company is obligated, pursuant to its bylaws, to indemnify its directors and officers. As a result, all legal costs related to the Lawsuits are recorded to the books of the Company.
(4) All other costs decreased primarily due to the absence of the charitable contribution to the Office of Research at the University of Pittsburgh which the Company recognized $125,000 in 2020 in addition to decreases in investor relations and insurance offset by an increase in rent.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company does not have any commercialized products, has not generated any meaningful revenue since inception and has sustained recurring losses and negative cash flows since inception. The Company has incurred operating losses of $5,409,000 and $9,677,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company has used cash in operating activities of $4,564,000 and $4,723,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company expects to incur losses as it continues to fund its legal defense and scaled-back development of its products and technologies.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had current and total liabilities of $1,305,000, including $855,000 of liabilities related to reimbursable legal fees, $2,800,000 of cash on hand, and $1,070,000 available under its D&O Policy with AIG to offset legal fees. Subsequent to 2021 and through February 28, 2022, the Company has incurred legal fees related to the Lawsuits of approximately $350,000 and has effectively depleted the amounts available under its D&O policy. In order to preserve its cash resources, the Company has taken measures to streamline operations, including ending enrollment of patients into its clinical trial, renegotiate certain agreements and service arrangements and entered into a loan agreement with our Chairman for $800,000. As a result of the actions taken, the Company estimates cash on hand will be sufficient for the twelve months following the date these financial statements are issued. Historically, the Company has been funded through the sale of equity securities and debt financings. The future of the Company will depend on its ability to successfully raise capital from external sources to fund operations. If the Company is unable to obtain adequate funds, or if such funds are not available to it on acceptable terms, the Company's ability to continue its business to develop its cellular therapies will be significantly impaired and it may cause the Company to curtail operations. Although the Company has instituted cost savings measures, it will continue to assess its ongoing expenses, including, but not limited to its research and development efforts through its agreement with StemCell Systems.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As part of our ongoing business, we do not participate in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities (SPEs), which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually limited purposes. As of December 31, 2021, we were not involved in any SPE transactions.
Critical Accounting Policies
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results of operations and requires management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Our consolidated financial statements are presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”). All applicable U.S. GAAP accounting standards effective as of December 31, 2021 have been taken into consideration in preparing the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. Some of those estimates are subjective and complex, and, consequently, actual results could differ from those estimates. The following accounting policies and estimates have been highlighted as significant because changes to certain judgments and assumptions inherent in these policies could affect our consolidated financial statements:
● share-based compensation expenses.
We base our estimates, to the extent possible, on historical experience. Historical information is modified as appropriate based on current business factors and various assumptions that we believe are necessary to form a basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis and make changes when necessary. Actual results could differ from our estimates. For a complete discussion of our significant accounting policies and estimates, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (2), Significant Accounting Policies.”