ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer RCF Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on June 9, 2021 as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, engaged in any substantive discussions directly or indirectly, with any business combination target with respect to an initial business combination with us. While we may pursue an initial business combination target in any industry, we intend to target assets or businesses of scale across the critical minerals value chain that are poised to benefit over the long-term from the substantial market opportunity created by the global energy transition. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our Public Offering and the Private Placement of the Private Placement Warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the Public Offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the Public Offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preference shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of our Class A ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, we had $700,293 held outside the trust account that is available to us to fund our working capital requirements and $234,602,251 held inside the trust account. We cannot assure you that our plan to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Our registration statements for the Public Offering became effective on November 9, 2021. On November 15, 2021, we consummated the Public Offering of 23,000,000 Units, including the issuance of 3,000,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $230,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 11,700,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant with the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $11,700,000.
Upon the closing of the Public Offering and the Private Placement, $234,600,000 (or $10.20 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to the Company to pay its taxes and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses, if any, the funds held in the Trust Account would not be released from the Trust Account until the earliest of (i) the completion of the Company’s initial business combination, (ii) the redemption of our public shares if we are unable to complete our initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering, subject to applicable law, (iii) the redemption of the Company’s public shares properly submitted in connection with a shareholder vote to approve an amendment to our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association (A) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to allow redemption in connection with our initial business combination or to redeem 100% of our public shares if we have not consummated our initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering or (B) with respect to any other provisions relating to shareholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity. The proceeds held in the Trust Account will be invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. The proceeds deposited in the Trust Account could become subject to the claims of the Company’s creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of its public shareholders.
If we are unable to complete our initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering or May 23, 2021, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
For the period from June 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $8,727,235, and a loss from operations of $347,235, which was comprised of general and administrative expenses, and non-operating income of $9,074,757, which was comprised of a change in fair value of warrant liability of $9,744,000 and interest earned in trust account of $2,251 less offering costs associated with warranty liability of $671,494. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2021, have been organizational activities and preparation for our public offering. Since the consummation of our Public Offering through December 31, 2021, our activity has been limited to the evaluation of potential initial business combination candidates, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after the public offering. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. We are incurring increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the consummation of our Public Offering, our only sources of liquidity were an initial purchase of Founder Shares for $25,000 by the Sponsor, and a total of $296,235 of loans and advances from the Sponsor.
On November 15, 2021, we consummated our Public Offering in which we sold 23,000,000 of the Company’s Units (“Units”, held by “Public Shareholders”), each consisting of one Class A ordinary share (“Public Share”) and one-half warrant (“Redeemable Warrant”) to purchase one Class A ordinary share at an exercise price of $11.50, at a price of $10.00 per Unit generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000 before underwriting fees and expenses. Simultaneously with the consummation of our Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 11,700,000 Private Placement Warrants, each Private Placement Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, to the Sponsor, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of $11,700,000.
In connection with our Initial Public Offering, the Company incurred offering costs of $13,267,977, consisting of $12,650,000 of underwriters fees of which $8,050,000 was recorded as Deferred underwriting commissions and $617,977 of other offering costs. Other offering costs consisted principally of formation and preparation fees related to our Initial Public Offering. Of the total offering costs, $671,494 of which was allocated to the Warrants, were immediately expensed and $12,596,483 was allocated to redeemable Class A ordinary shares, reducing the carrying amount of such shares.
Of the $241,700,000 total proceeds from the Public Offering and Private Placement, $234,600,000 was placed in a U.S.-based trust account, established for the benefit of our public shareholders. Prior to the closing of our Public Offering, the Sponsor had made $296,235 in loans and advances to the Company. The loans and advances were non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the completion of our Public Offering. The loans of $296,235 were fully repaid upon the consummation of our Public Offering on November 15, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us $700,293 of cash on our balance sheet and working capital of $1,559,788. We will use these funds primarily to find and evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. The interest income earned on the investments in our trust account are unavailable to fund operating expenses.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with the initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used to repay such loaned amounts. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants issued to the Sponsor. Except as set forth above, the terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing.
As of December 31, 2021, we have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial assets.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On June 9, 2021, the Sponsor purchased 5,750,000 Founder Shares of the Company’s Class B ordinary shares for an aggregate price of $25,000. The Sponsor subsequently transferred an aggregate of 402,500 Founder Shares to members of the Company’s board of directors, management team, board of advisors and/or their estate planning vehicles for the same per-share consideration that it originally paid for such shares, resulting in the Sponsor holding 5,347,500 Founder Shares. The Founder shares will automatically convert into shares of Class A ordinary shares at the time of the Company’s initial business combination.
Our initial shareholders have agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Founder Shares and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon conversion thereof until the earlier to occur of (A) one year after the completion of our initial business combination and (B) subsequent to our initial business combination, (x) if the closing price of our Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after our initial business combination, or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our public shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Related Party Loans
On June 17, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Public Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). This loan was non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of December 31, 2021, or the completion of the Public Offering. On October 21, 2021, the Sponsor amended and restated the Note to increase the principal to $600,000. The balance of the Note was $296,235 and repaid in full to the Sponsor at the Closing Date.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
At December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Service and Administrative Fees
We agreed, commencing on November 10, 2021, to pay an affiliate of our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services provided to our management team. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has incurred $17,000 in these fees. Upon completion of a business combination or the Company’s liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Underwriters Agreement
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering, or $4,600,000. Additionally, the underwriters will be entitled to a Deferred underwriting commission of 3.5% or $8,050,000 of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering held in the Trust Account upon the completion of the Company’s initial business combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to the registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Income Per Ordinary Share
The Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income per share for redeemable ordinary shares in a manner similar to the two-class method in calculating net income per ordinary share. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted, for Class A redeemable ordinary shares is computed by dividing the pro rata net income between the Class A ordinary share and the Class B ordinary share by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period, adjusted for the effects of deemed dividend under the assumption that they represent dividends to the holders of Class A redeemable ordinary shares. Net income per ordinary share, basic and diluted, for Class B non-redeemable ordinary shares is computed by dividing the pro rata net income between the Class A ordinary share and the Class B ordinary share by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the period.
The calculation of diluted income per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants and rights issued in connection with the Public Offering since the exercise of the warrants and rights are contingent upon the occurrence of future events. For the period from June 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive warrants, securities or other contracts that could potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares. As a result, diluted income per ordinary share is the same as basic income per ordinary share for the period from June 9, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
Derivative Liabilities
The Company evaluated the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants (collectively, “Warrant Securities”) in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” and concluded that the Warrant Securities could not be accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrant Securities meet the definition of a derivative in accordance with ASC 815, the Warrant Securities are recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair value at inception (the Closing Date) and remeasured at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change. The valuation methodology used in the determination of the fair value of financial instruments for which inputs were used at December 31, 2021 was Black-Scholes model and Monte-Carlo Simulation. The key inputs for the valuation models used to calculate the fair value includes implied volatility, risk-free interest rate, exercise price and expected term. The expected volatility assumption was based on the implied volatility based on the traded price of the warrant. An increase in the expected volatility, in isolation, would result in an increase in the fair value measurement of the warrant liabilities and vice versa. The risk-free interest rate assumption was performed in a risk-neutral framework, which requires a risk-free rate assumption as a primary input and relied upon constant maturity treasury yields. The expected term was based on the maturity of the warrant, which is five years following the expected merger date.
Redeemable Shares
All of the 23,000,000 Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with a business combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s second amended and restated certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in retained earnings, or in the absence of retained earnings, in additional paid-in capital. On December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an adjustment to present the redeemable Class A ordinary shares at redemption value of $28,926,483, of which $24,425 was recorded against additional paid-in capital and $28,902,058 was recorded in accumulated deficit.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in the Trust Account is comprised of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities are included in net gain from investments held in Trust Account on the statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statement.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is applicable for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective June 9, 2021 (inception). The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement.