ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") describes the matters that we consider to be important to understanding the results of our operations for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and our capital resources and liquidity as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Use of the terms "Rocky," the "Company," "we," "us" and "our" in this discussion refer to Rocky Brands, Inc. and its subsidiaries. Our fiscal year begins on January 1 and ends on December 31. We analyze the results of our operations for the last two years (including the trends in the overall business), followed by a discussion of our cash flows and liquidity, our credit facilities, and contractual commitments. We then provide a review of the critical accounting judgments and estimates that we have made that we believe are most important to an understanding of our MD&A and our consolidated financial statements. We conclude our MD&A with information on recent accounting pronouncements which we adopted during the year, as well as those not yet adopted that are expected to have an impact on our financial accounting practices.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, included elsewhere herein. The forward-looking statements in this section and other parts of this document involve risks and uncertainties including statements regarding our plans, objectives, goals, strategies, and financial performance. Our actual results could differ materially from the results anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of factors set forth under the caption "Safe Harbor Statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995" below. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a "safe harbor" for forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
We are a leading designer, manufacturer and marketer of premium quality footwear and apparel marketed under a portfolio of well recognized brand names including Rocky, Georgia Boot, Durango, Lehigh, Muck, XTRATUF, Servus, NEOS, Ranger and the licensed brand Michelin.
On January 24, 2021, we entered into a Purchase Agreement (the "Purchase Agreement") with certain subsidiaries of Honeywell International Inc. (collectively, "Honeywell"), to purchase Honeywell's performance and lifestyle footwear business, including brand names, trademarks, assets and liabilities associated with Honeywell's performance and lifestyle footwear business (the "Acquisition") for an aggregate purchase price of $212 million. We closed on the Acquisition on March 15, 2021 for preliminary aggregate closing price of approximately $207 million, net of cash acquired, based on preliminary working capital and other adjustments. Upon a final agreement of net working capital as of the Acquisition Date, we owed Honeywell an additional $5.4 million. The Acquisition was funded through cash on hand and borrowings under two new credit facilities. See Note 8 for information regarding the two new credit facilities.
The Acquisition expanded our brand portfolio to include Muck, XTRATUF, Servus, NEOS and Ranger brands (the "Acquired Brands").
Our brands have a long history of representing high quality, comfortable, functional and durable footwear and our products are organized around six target markets: outdoor, work, duty, commercial military, military, and western. Our footwear products incorporate varying features and are positioned across a range of suggested retail price points from $20.00 for our value priced products to $462.00 for our premium products. In addition, as part of our strategy of outfitting consumers from head-to-toe, we market complementary branded apparel and accessories that we believe leverage the strength and positioning of each of our brands
Our products are distributed through three distinct business segments: Wholesale, Retail and Contract Manufacturing. In our Wholesale business, we distribute our products through a wide range of distribution channels representing over 10,000 retail store locations in the U.S., Canada, U.K., and other international markets such as Europe. Our Wholesale channels vary by product line and include sporting goods stores, outdoor retailers, independent shoe retailers, hardware stores, catalogs, mass merchants, uniform stores, farm store chains, specialty safety stores, specialty retailers and online retailers. Our Retail business includes direct sales of our products to consumers through our business to business web platform, e-commerce websites, third party marketplaces and our Rocky outlet store. Our contract manufacturing segment includes sales to the U.S. military, private label sales and any sales to customers in which we are contracted to manufacture or source a specific footwear product for a customer.
During the quarterly period ended June 30, 2021, we made a change to our reporting segments to change our "Military" reporting segment to "Contract Manufacturing" and to change the composition thereof to continue to include sales to the U.S. military ("Military Contracts") and to include sales under manufacturing contracts for private label or other specific footwear products sold through our Wholesale and Retail channels ("Private Contracts"). Previously, only Military Contracts were included in this segment. There has been no change in our total consolidated financial condition, results of operations, or segment information previously reported, as the result of the change in our reportable segments, as we had no Private Contract sales during the quarterly period ended March 31, 2021 or the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 17 for further information.
Our growth strategy is founded substantially on the expansion of our brands into new footwear and apparel markets. New products that we introduce may not be successful with consumers or one or more of our brands may fall out of favor with consumers. If we are unable to anticipate, identify or react appropriately to changes in consumer preferences, we may not grow as fast as we plan to grow or our sales may decline, and our brand image and operating performance may suffer.
Furthermore, achieving market acceptance for new products will likely require us to exert substantial product development and marketing efforts, which could result in a material increase in our operating expenses and there can be no assurance that we will have the resources necessary to undertake such efforts. Material increases in our operating expenses could adversely impact our results of operations and cash flows.
We may also encounter difficulties in producing new products that we did not anticipate during the development stage. Our development schedules for new products are difficult to predict and are subject to change as a result of shifting priorities in response to consumer preferences and competing products. If we are not able to efficiently manufacture newly-developed products in quantities sufficient to support retail distribution, we may not be able to recoup our investment in the development of new products. Failure to gain market acceptance for new products that we introduce could impede our growth, reduce our profits, adversely affect the image of our brands, erode our competitive position and result in long term harm to our business.
The impact of COVID-19 and the related economic, business and market disruptions were wide-ranging. These impacts have had and may continue to cause disruptions from both a manufacturing and distribution standpoint. As a result of COVID-19, we were required to temporarily close our manufacturing facilities in both the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico for several weeks spanning through both the first and second quarters of 2020. In response to COVID-19, we have incurred incremental costs associated with protecting the health and safety of our global workforce, enhanced sanitization of our global operating facilities, and information technology capabilities for employees operating remotely. Beginning in March 2020, restrictions imposed by various governmental authorities on both domestic and international shipping and travel have caused a disruption to the timing of delivery of raw materials and finished goods resulting in negative impacts to our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. The duration and severity of the outbreak and its long-term impact on our business are uncertain at this time. We are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our future financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Net sales. Net sales and related cost of goods sold are recognized at the time products are shipped to the customer and title transfers. Net sales are recorded net of estimated sales discounts and returns based upon specific customer agreements and historical trends. Net sales include royalty income from licensing our brands.
Cost of goods sold. Our cost of goods sold represents our costs to manufacture products in our own facilities, including raw materials costs and all overhead expenses related to production, as well as the cost to purchase finished products from our third-party manufacturers. Cost of goods sold also includes the cost to transport these products to our distribution center.
Operating expenses. Our operating expenses consist primarily of selling, marketing, wages and related payroll and employee benefit costs, travel and insurance expenses, depreciation, amortization, professional fees, software licensing fees, facility expenses, bank charges, warehouse and outbound freight expenses. We also incurred significant operating expenses associated with the Acquisition during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Percentage of Net Sales
The following table sets forth consolidated statements of operations data as percentages of total net sales:
Results of Operations
December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Included in Wholesale net sales is $160.0 million of net sales attributed to the Acquisition. Additionally, Wholesale sales increased due to strong demand for our products as consumers continued to respond favorably to our recent product introductions and we were able to capitalize on our strong inventory position which allowed us to gain additional market share and shelf space.
Included in Retail net sales is $17.6 million of net sales attributed to the Acquired Brands. Retail sales with our legacy brands increased primarily due to strong growth in our direct to consumer e-Commerce and marketplace businesses in the first half of the year. We have increased our targeted marketing efforts and brand awareness, which led to increased traffic on our branded websites.
Included in Contract Manufacturing net sales is $1.4 million of net sales attributed to the Acquisition. Contract Manufacturing net sales increased as we continued to fulfill our military contracts and we filled orders under multiple private label programs during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Wholesale gross margins remained flat year over year. On an adjusted basis, to exclude the one-time inventory fair value adjustment associated with the Acquisition of $3.5 million, Wholesale gross margins for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately 36.7%. On an adjusted basis, to exclude one-time COVID-19 related expenses of $1.3 million, Wholesale gross margins were 36.5% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The slight pick-up in adjusted margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the Acquired Brands carrying a higher margin than our legacy brands. This is partially offset with increased shipping and freight costs.
Retail gross margins increased primarily due to sales mix. Our direct to consumer business, which carries higher margins, increased at a faster pace than our Lehigh business, which carries lower margins, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Contract Manufacturing gross margin increased year-over-year due to higher margin on certain military and private label contracts.
Operating expenses increased year-over-year due the Acquisition. We incurred significant one-time operating expenses as we integrated the businesses. We incurred approximately $11.9 and $0.7 million of operating expenses related to the Acquisition during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other expenses increased due to higher interest expense in connection with the debt we incurred to fund the Acquisition.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased primarily due to the one-time benefit arising from the release of valuation allowances on state net operating losses and an increase in foreign tax credits.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
Our principal sources of liquidity have been our income from operations and borrowings under our credit facilities.
Over the last several years, our principal uses of cash have been for working capital and capital expenditures to support our growth, as well as dividend payments and share repurchases. Our working capital consists primarily of trade receivables and inventory, offset by accounts payable and accrued expenses. Our working capital fluctuates throughout the year as a result of our seasonal business cycle and business expansion and is generally lowest in the months of January through March of each year and highest during the months of May through October of each year. We historically utilize our revolving credit facility to fund our seasonal working capital requirements. As a result, balances on our revolving credit facility could fluctuate significantly throughout the year. Our working capital increased to $235.1 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $123.2 million at the end of the prior year.
Our capital expenditures relate primarily to projects relating to our corporate offices, property, merchandising fixtures, molds and equipment associated with our manufacturing and distribution operations and for information technology. Capital expenditures were $25.8 million for 2021 and $11.6 million in 2020. Capital expenditures for 2022 are anticipated to be approximately $11.5 million.
We lease certain machinery, equipment, and manufacturing facilities under operating leases that generally provide for renewal options. Future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases are outlined in further detail in Note 9.
We believe that our credit facilities coupled with cash generated from operations will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months. Our continued liquidity, however, is contingent upon future operating performance, cash flows and our ability to meet financial covenants under our credit facility. For more information regarding our credit facilities please see Note 8. Refer to Note 3 for additional information regarding our recent Acquisition.
Cash Flows and Material Cash Requirements
Operating Activities. The principal use of net cash in 2021 was increased inventories and accounts receivable, partially offset by increased accounts payable. The principal sources of net cash in 2020 included increases to accounts payable and accrued liabilities. These sources of net cash were partially offset by an increase in trade receivables and inventories.
Investing Activities. The principal use of net cash in 2021 was to fund the Acquisition. The principal uses of cash in 2020 were related to investments in molds and equipment associated with our manufacturing operations, investments in information technology and improvements made to our distribution facility.
Financing Activities. Our financing activities during 2021 mainly consisted of proceeds from and payments on our two new debt facilities that we incurred to fund the Acquisition and other working capital requirements. During 2020, principal uses of financing activities were payments of dividends, proceeds from stock option issuances and repurchases of our common stock.
On March 8, 2021, we announced a new $7,500,000 share repurchase program, which expired on March 4, 2022. For additional information regarding this share repurchase program, see Note 12.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 resulting from financial contracts and commitments. These amounts are generally consistent from year to year, closely reflect our levels of production, and are not long-term in nature (less than three months). The following table does not include information on our recurring purchases of materials for in our manufacturing operations.
Contractual Obligations at December 31, 2021:
From time to time, we enter into purchase commitments with our suppliers under customary purchase order terms. Any significant losses implicit in these contracts would be recognized in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. At December 31, 2021, no such losses existed.
Our ongoing business activities continue to be subject to compliance with various laws, rules and regulations as may be issued and enforced by various federal, state and local agencies. With respect to environmental matters, costs are incurred pertaining to regulatory compliance. Such costs have not been, and are not anticipated to become, material.
We are contingently liable with respect to lawsuits, taxes and various other matters that routinely arise in the normal course of business. We do not have off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities, also known as "Variable Interest Entities." Additionally, we do not have any related party transactions that materially affect the results of operations, cash flow or financial condition.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to establish accounting policies and make estimates that affect amounts reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated by reference into this MD&A, describes the significant accounting policies we use in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
An accounting estimate requires assumptions and judgments about uncertain matters that could have a material effect on the Consolidated Financial Statements. Estimates are made under facts and circumstances at a point in time, and changes in those facts and circumstances could produce results substantially different from those estimates. The most significant accounting policies and estimates and their related application are discussed below.
Revenue recognition
Revenue principally consists of sales to customers, and, to a lesser extent, license fees. See Note 15 for additional information regarding revenues.
Accounts receivable allowances
Management maintains allowances for uncollectible accounts and estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. If the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, additional allowances may be required. The allowance for uncollectible accounts is calculated based on the relative age and status of trade receivable balances.
Sales returns and allowances
We record a reduction to gross sales based on estimated customer returns and allowances. These reductions are influenced by historical experience, based on customer returns and allowances. The actual amount of sales returns and allowances realized may differ from our estimates. If we determine that sales returns or allowances should be either increased or decreased, then the adjustment would be made to net sales in the period in which such a determination is made.
Sales returns and allowances as a percentage of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 2.6% and 4.8%, respectively.
Inventories
Management identifies slow moving inventories and estimates appropriate loss provisions related to these inventories. Historically, these loss provisions have not been significant as the vast majority of our inventories are considered saleable and we have been able to liquidate slow moving or obsolete inventories at amounts above cost through our factory outlet stores or through various discounts to customers and e-commerce channels. Should management encounter difficulties liquidating slow moving or obsolete inventories, additional provisions may be necessary. Management regularly reviews the adequacy of our inventory reserves and makes adjustments as required. See Note 4 for additional information regarding inventories.
Intangible assets
Intangible assets, including trademarks and patents, are reviewed for impairment annually, and more frequently, if necessary. We perform such testing of indefinite-lived intangible assets in the fourth quarter of each year or as events occur or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the asset below its carrying amount. See Note 6 for additional information regarding intangible assets and the annual impairment analysis.
Income taxes
Management records a valuation allowance to reduce its deferred tax assets for a portion of state and local income tax net operating losses that it believes may not be realized. We have considered future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance, however, in the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or part of our net deferred tax assets in the future, an adjustment to the deferred tax assets would be charged to income in the period such determination was made. For additional information see Note 11.
RECENT FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Note 2 to Consolidated Financial Statements discusses new accounting pronouncements adopted during 2021 and the expected impact of accounting pronouncements recently issued but not yet required to be adopted. To the extent the adoption of new accounting standards materially affect financial condition, results of operations, or liquidity, the impacts are discussed in the applicable section of this MD&A and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
SAFE HARBOR STATEMENT UNDER THE PRIVATE SECURITIES LITIGATION REFORM ACT OF 1995
This report, including Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, which are intended to be covered by the safe harbors created thereby. Those statements include, but may not be limited to, all statements regarding our and management’s intent, belief, expectations, such as statements concerning our future profitability and our operating and growth strategy. Words such as "believe," "anticipate," "expect," "will," "may," "should," "intend," "plan," "estimate," "predict," "potential," "continue," "likely," "would," "could" and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Investors are cautioned that all forward-looking statements involve risk and uncertainties including, without limitations, dependence on sales forecasts, changes in consumer demand, seasonality, impact of weather, competition, reliance on suppliers, risks inherent to international trade, changing retail trends, the loss or disruption of our manufacturing and distribution operations, cyber security breaches or disruption of our digital systems, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, economic changes, as well as other factors set forth under the caption "Item 1A, Risk Factors" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and other factors detailed from time to time in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Although we believe that the assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements contained herein are reasonable, any of the assumptions could be inaccurate. Therefore, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements included herein will prove to be accurate. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by us or any other person that our objectives and plans will be achieved. We assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements.