Item 7.A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk.
We are a smaller reporting company as defined by Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act and are not required to provide the information otherwise required under this item.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
ROSECLIFF ACQUISITION CORP I
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Stockholders and the Board of Directors of
Rosecliff Acquisition Corp I
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Rosecliff Acquisition Corp I (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related statements of operations, changes in stockholders’ (deficit) equity and cash flows for year ended December 31, 2021 and for period from November 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for year ended December 31, 2021 and for period from November 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1 to the financial statements, if the Company is unable to raise additional funds to alleviate liquidity needs as well as complete a Business Combination by the close of business on February 17, 2023, then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. The liquidity concerns and date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the entity’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ WithumSmith+Brown, PC
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2020.
New York, New York
March 30, 2022
PCAOB ID Number 100
ROSECLIFF ACQUISITION CORP I
BALANCE SHEETS
(1) At December 31, 2020, included up to 825,000 shares subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or in part by the underwriters (see Note 4).
(2) On February 11, 2021, the Company effected a 1:1.1 stock split of its Class B common stock, resulting in an aggregate of 6,325,000 shares outstanding. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the stock split.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
ROSECLIFF ACQUISITION CORP I
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
ROSECLIFF ACQUISITION CORP I
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY (DEFICIT)
(1) At December 31, 2020, included up to 825,000 shares subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised in full or in part by the underwriters (see Note 4).
(2) On February 11, 2021, the Company effected a 1:1.1 stock split of its Class B common stock, resulting in an aggregate of 6,325,000 shares outstanding. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the stock split.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
ROSECLIFF ACQUISITION CORP I
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
NOTE 1. DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS
Rosecliff Acquisition Corp I (the “Company”) is a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on November 17, 2020. The Company was formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”).
The Company is not limited to a particular industry or sector for purposes of consummating a Business Combination. The Company is an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from November 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to the Company’s formation and the initial public offering (“Initial Public Offering”), which is described below, and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. The Company will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. The Company will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. The Company has selected December 31 as its fiscal year end.
The registration statement for the Company’s Initial Public Offering was declared effective on February 11, 2021. On February 17, 2021 the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,300,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 3,300,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $253,000,000, which is described in Note 3.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the sale of 4,706,667 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to Rosecliff Acquisition Sponsor I LLC (the “Sponsor”) generating gross proceeds of $7,060,000, which is described in Note 4.
Transaction costs amounted to $14,373,127, consisting of $5,060,000 in cash underwriting fees, $8,855,000 in deferred underwriting fees, and $458,127 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on February 17, 2021, an amount of $253,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”), located in the United States and was invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the funds held in the Trust Account, as described below.
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. There is no assurance that the Company will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully. The Company must complete one or more initial Business Combinations with one or more operating businesses or assets that together have a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the assets held in the Trust Account (as defined below) (excluding any deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the income earned on the Trust Account). The Company will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target business sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”). There is no assurance that the Company will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully.
The Company will provide the holders of the outstanding Public Shares (the “Public Stockholders”) with the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their Public Shares upon the completion of a Business Combination either (i) in connection with a stockholder meeting called to approve the Business Combination or (ii) by means of a tender offer. The decision as to whether the Company will seek stockholder approval of a Business Combination or conduct a tender offer will be made by the Company. The Public Stockholders will be entitled to redeem their Public Shares for a pro rata portion of the amount then held in the Trust Account (initially $10.00 per Public Share, plus any pro rata interest then in the Trust Account, net of taxes payable). There will be no redemption rights upon the completion of a Business Combination with respect to the Company’s warrants.
The Company will only proceed with a Business Combination if the Company has net tangible assets of at least $5,000,001 following any related redemptions and, if the Company seeks stockholder approval, a majority of the shares voted are voted in favor of the Business Combination. If a stockholder vote is not required by applicable law or stock exchange listing requirements and the Company does not decide to hold a stockholder vote for business or other reasons, the Company will, pursuant to its Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation (the “Certificate of Incorporation”), conduct the redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and file tender offer documents with the SEC prior to completing a Business Combination. If, however, stockholder approval of the transaction is required by applicable law or stock exchange listing requirements, or the Company decides to obtain stockholder approval for business or other reasons, the Company will offer to redeem shares in conjunction with a proxy solicitation pursuant to the proxy rules and not pursuant to the tender offer rules. If the Company seeks stockholder approval in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor has agreed to vote its Founder Shares (as defined in Note 5) and any Public Shares purchased during or after the Initial Public Offering in favor of approving a Business Combination. Additionally, each Public Stockholder may elect to redeem their Public Shares without voting, and if they do vote, irrespective of whether they vote for or against the proposed transaction.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Company seeks stockholder approval of a Business Combination and it does not conduct redemptions pursuant to the tender offer rules, the Certificate of Incorporation will provide that a Public Stockholder, together with any affiliate of such stockholder or any other person with whom such stockholder is acting in concert or as a “group” (as defined under Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)), will be restricted from redeeming its shares with respect to more than an aggregate of 15% of the Public Shares, without the prior consent of the Company.
The Sponsor has agreed (a) to waive its redemption rights with respect to the Founder Shares and Public Shares held by it in connection with the completion of a Business Combination and (b) not to propose an amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation (i) to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to allow redemptions in connection with a Business Combination or to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period (as defined below) or (ii) with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-business combination activity, unless the Company provides the Public Stockholders with the opportunity to redeem their Public Shares in conjunction with any such amendment.
The Company will have until February 17, 2023 to complete a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). If the Company has not completed a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to pay taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s remaining stockholders and the Company’s board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the Company’s warrants, which will expire worthless if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
The Sponsor has agreed to waive its rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to the Founder Shares it will receive if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. However, if the Sponsor or any of its respective affiliates acquire Public Shares, such Public Shares will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period. The underwriters have agreed to waive their rights to their deferred underwriting commission (see Note 6) held in the Trust Account in the event the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, and in such event, such amounts will be included with the other funds held in the Trust Account that will be available to fund the redemption of the Public Shares. In the event of such distribution, it is possible that the per share value of the assets remaining available for distribution will be less than the Initial Public Offering price per Unit ($10.00).
In order to protect the amounts held in the Trust Account, the Sponsor has agreed to be liable to the Company if and to the extent any claims by a third party for services rendered or products sold to the Company, or a prospective target business with which the Company has discussed entering into a transaction agreement, reduce the amount of funds in the Trust Account to below the lesser of (i) $10.00 per Public Share and (ii) the actual amount per Public Share held in the Trust Account as of the date of the liquidation of the Trust Account, if less than $10.00 per Public Share due to reductions in the value of the trust assets, less taxes payable, provided that such liability will not apply to any claims by a third party or prospective target business who executed a waiver of any and all rights to monies held in the Trust Account nor will it apply to any claims under the Company’s indemnity of the underwriters of the Initial Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”). Moreover, in the event that an executed waiver is deemed to be unenforceable against a third party, the Sponsor will not be responsible to the extent of any liability for such third-party claims. The Company will seek to reduce the possibility that the Sponsor will have to indemnify the Trust Account due to claims of creditors by endeavoring to have all vendors, service providers (except for the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm), prospective target businesses and other entities with which the Company does business, execute agreements with the Company waiving any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to monies held in the Trust Account.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concerns
On February 17, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,300,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $253,000,000 which is described in Note 3. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the sale of 4,706,667 Private Placement Warrant at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,060,000, which is described in Note 4.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $825,593. Net loss of $2,148,278 was affected by transaction costs associated with Initial Public Offering of $438,283, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $1,683,358 and interest income on investment held in the Trust Account of $27,240. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,595,000 of cash for operating activities.
For the period November 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $675 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $675 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. Treasury Funds held in the Trust Account of $253,027,240 consisting of fixed income securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 30, 2021, we had cash of $769,432. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 205-40, “Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until February 17, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. Additionally, the Company may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company through one year from the issuance of these financial statements. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. The Company intends to complete the proposed Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate any Business Combination by February 17, 2023. In addition, the Company may need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from its Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors or third parties. The Company’s officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet the Company’s working capital needs. Accordingly, the Company may not be able to obtain additional financing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, the Company may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through the liquidation date of February 17, 2023
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in above to the financial statements, if the Company is unable to raise additional funds to alleviate liquidity needs as well as complete a Business Combination by the close of business on February 17, 2022, then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. This date for mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
NOTE 2. SUMMARY OF SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying financial statements are presented in U.S. dollars and have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and pursuant to the accounting and disclosure rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”).
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the independent registered public accounting firm attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public company that is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. One of the more significant accounting estimates included in these financial statements is the determination of the fair value of the warrant liabilities. Such estimates may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Investment Held in Trust Account
At December 31, 2021, the majority of the assets held in the Trust Account were held in money market funds, which are invested primarily in U.S. Treasury securities. At December 31, 2020, there were no assets held in the Trust Account. The Company presents its investments in treasury securities on the balance sheet at amortized cost and adjusted for the amortization or accretion of premiums or discounts. The Company presents its investments in money market funds on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities are included in interest income in the accompanying statements of operations. The estimated fair value of investments held in the Trust Account is determined using available market information.
Offering Costs
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs were allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs allocated to warrant liabilities were expensed as incurred in the statements of operations. Offering costs associated with the Class A common stock issued were initially charged to temporary equity and then accreted to common stock subject to redemption upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering.
Class A common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, 25,300,000 and no Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, respectively, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheets.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
At December 31, 2021, the Class A common stock reflected in the balance sheets are reconciled in the following table:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The Company accounts for warrants in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480 and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”) and determined that the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder. The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Accordingly, the Company recognizes the 8,433,333 Public Warrants and 4,706,667 Private Placement Warrants as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The Public Warrants are valued by the closing price of the observable market quote in an active market. The Private Placement Warrants are valued using an observable market quote for a similar asset in an active market. See Notes 8 and 10.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under ASC 740, “Income Taxes.” Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that included the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
ASC 740 prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. There were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from its position. The Company is subject to income tax examinations by major taxing authorities since inception.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. The Company has two classes of ordinary shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock.. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stocks is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering and (ii) the private placement since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 13,140,000 shares of Class A common stock in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could potentially be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net loss per share of common stock is the same as basic net loss per share of common stock for the periods presented.
The following table reflects the calculation of basic and diluted net loss per share of common stock (in dollars, except per share amounts):
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist of cash accounts in a financial institution, which, at times may exceed the Federal Depository Insurance Corporation coverage limit of $250,000. The Company has not experienced losses on these accounts and management believes the Company is not exposed to significant risks on such account.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities which qualify as financial instruments under ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” approximate the carrying amounts represented in the accompanying balance sheets, primarily due to their short-term nature, other than the warrant liabilities (see Note 10)
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid for transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
● Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
● Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
In some circumstances, the inputs used to measure fair value might be categorized within different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In those instances, the fair value measurement is categorized in its entirety in the fair value hierarchy based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging.” For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value on the grant date and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is evaluated at the end of each reporting period. Derivative liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s unaudited condensed financial statements.
NOTE 3. INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERING
Pursuant to the Initial Public Offering, the Company sold 25,300,000 Units, which includes a full exercise by the underwriter of its overallotment option in the amount of 3,300,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit. Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one-third of one redeemable warrant (each, a “Public Warrant”). Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment (see Note 10).
NOTE 4. PRIVATE PLACEMENT
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor has purchased an aggregate of 4,706,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant ($7,060,000 in the aggregate) from the Company in a private placement. Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment (see Note 10). A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If the Company does not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
NOTE 5. RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Founder Shares
During the period ended December 31, 2020, the Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain of the Company’s offering costs in exchange for 5,750,000 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock (the “Founder Shares”). On February 11, 2021, the Company effected a 1:1.1 stock split of its Class B common stock, resulting in an aggregate of 6,325,000 shares outstanding. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the stock split. The Founder Shares included an aggregate of up to 825,000 shares subject to forfeiture to the extent that the underwriters’ over-allotment was not exercised in full or in part, so that the number of Founder Shares would equal, on an as-converted basis, approximately 20% of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. As a result of the underwriter’s election to fully exercise its over-allotment option, no Founder Shares are currently subject to forfeiture.
The Sponsor has agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination and (B) subsequent to a Business Combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after a Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Amount Due to Sponsor
At December 31, 2021 the Company had advances owed to the Sponsor in the amount of $16,152. At December 31, 2020, there were no advances owed to the Sponsor.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on February 11, 2021 through the earlier of the Company’s consummation of a Business Combination and its liquidation, the Company agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, support and administrative services. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company accrued $110,000 in fees for these services, respectively, of which such amount is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying balance sheet.
Related Party Loans
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under the Working Capital Loans.
NOTE 6. COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial position, results of its operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Registration Rights
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on February 11, 2021, the holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) will be entitled to registration rights requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to shares of Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination and rights to require the Company to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. However, the registration rights agreement provides that the Company will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidated damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,855,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Termination of the Previously Announced Business Combination Agreement
On March 11, 2022, Rosecliff, GT Gettaxi Listco, GT Gettaxi Limited, GT Gettaxi SPV, GT Gettaxi Merger Sub 1, Gett Merger Sub, Inc., and Dooboo Holding Limited, and Merger Sub entered into a Termination of the Business Combination Agreement pursuant to which the parties mutually agreed to terminate the Business Combination Agreement, effective immediately. As per the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on November 11, 2021, Rosecliff requested that the Target’s management undertake a thorough analysis of its financial projections. Following the conclusion of that process, and extensive mutual efforts to negotiate an appropriate valuation adjustment, both parties agreed to terminate the Business Combination Agreement.
As a result of the termination of the Business Combination Agreement, the Business Combination Agreement is of no further force and effect, and certain transaction agreements entered into in connection with the Business Combination Agreement, including, but not limited to, the Investors’ Rights Agreement, dated as of November 9, 2021 and to be effective as of the closing of the Business Combination, by and among Rosecliff, a Delaware limited liability company, and certain holders, will either be terminated or no longer be effective, as applicable, in accordance with their respective terms.
Rosecliff intends to continue to pursue the consummation of a business combination with an appropriate target.
NOTE 7. STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Preferred Stock - The Company is authorized to issue 1,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a par value of $0.0001 per share with such designations, voting and other rights and preferences as may be determined from time to time by the Company’s board of directors. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no shares of preferred stock issued or outstanding.
Class A Common Stock - The Company is authorized to issue 80,000,000 shares of Class A common stock with a par value of $0.0001 per share. Holders of Class A common stock are entitled to one vote for each share. At December 31, 2021, there were 25,300,000 shares of Class A common stock issued and outstanding, which are presented as temporary equity. At December 31, 2020, there were no shares of Class A common stock issued or outstanding.
Class B Common Stock - The Company is authorized to issue 20,000,000 shares of Class B common stock with a par value of $0.0001 per share. Holders of Class B common stock are entitled to one vote for each share. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were 6,325,000 shares of Class B common stock issued and outstanding.
Holders of Class A common stock and holders of Class B common stock will vote together as a single class on all matters submitted to a vote of our shareholders, except as otherwise required by law.
The shares of Class B common stock will automatically convert into Class A common stock at the time of a Business Combination, or earlier at the option of the holder, on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like, and subject to further adjustment as provided herein. In the case that additional shares of Class A common stock, or equity-linked securities, are issued or deemed issued in excess of the amounts issued in the Initial Public Offering and related to the closing of a Business Combination, the ratio at which the shares of Class B common stock will convert into shares of Class A common stock will be adjusted (unless the holders of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of Class B common stock agree to waive such anti-dilution adjustment with respect to any such issuance or deemed issuance) so that the number of shares of Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of all shares of Class B common stock will equal, in the aggregate, on an as-converted basis, 20% of the sum of all shares of common stock issued and outstanding upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering plus all shares of Class A common stock and equity-linked securities issued or deemed issued in connection with the initial Business Combination, excluding any shares or equity-linked securities issued, or to be issued, to any seller in the initial Business Combination.
NOTE 8. WARRANTS
As of December 31, 2021, there were 8,433,333 Public Warrants outstanding. As of December 31, 2020, there were no Public Warrants outstanding. Public Warrants may only be exercised in whole and only for a whole number of shares. The Public Warrants will become exercisable on the later of (a) 30 days after the completion of a Business Combination and (b) 12 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The Public Warrants will expire five years after the completion of a Business Combination or earlier upon redemption or liquidation.
The Company will not be obligated to deliver any shares of Class A common stock pursuant to the exercise of a warrant and will have no obligation to settle such warrant exercise unless a registration statement under the Securities Act covering the issuance of the shares of Class A common stock underlying the warrants is then effective and a prospectus relating thereto is current, subject to the Company satisfying its obligations with respect to registration, or a valid exemption from registration is available. No warrant will be exercisable for cash or on a cashless basis, and the Company will not be obligated to issue any shares to holders seeking to exercise their warrants, unless the issuance of the shares upon such exercise is registered or qualified under the securities laws of the state of the exercising holder, or an exemption is available.
The Company has agreed that as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 15 business days after the closing of a Business Combination, the Company will use its commercially reasonable efforts to file a registration statement covering the issuance, under the Securities Act, of the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants, and the Company will use its commercially reasonable efforts to cause the same to become effective within 60 business days after the closing of a Business Combination and to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement, and a current prospectus relating thereto, until the expiration of the warrants in accordance with the provisions of the warrant agreement.
Notwithstanding the above, if the shares of Class A common stock are, at the time of any exercise of a warrant, not listed on a national securities exchange such that they satisfy the definition of a “covered security” under Section 18(b)(1) of the Securities Act, the Company may, at its option, require holders of Public Warrants who exercise their warrants to do so on a “cashless basis” in accordance with Section 3(a)(9) of the Securities Act and, in the event the Company so elects, the Company will not be required to file or maintain in effect a registration statement, but will use its commercially reasonable efforts to register or qualify the shares under applicable blue sky laws to the extent an exemption is not available.
Redemption of Warrants When the Price per share of Class A common stock Equals or Exceeds $18.00 - Once the warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem the warrants (except as described herein with respect to the Private Placement Warrants):
● in whole and not in part;
● at a price of $0.01 per warrant;
● upon not less than 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption to each warrant holder; and
● if, and only if, the last reported sale price of the Class A common stock for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which the Company sends the notice of redemption to the warrant holders (the “Reference Value”) equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted).
If and when the warrants become redeemable by the Company, the Company may exercise its redemption right even if it is unable to register or qualify the underlying securities for sale under all applicable state securities laws.
Redemption of Warrants When the Price per share of Class A common stock Equals or Exceeds $10.00 - Once the warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem the outstanding warrants:
● in whole and not in part;
● at $0.10 per warrant upon a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption, provided that holders will be able to exercise their warrants on a cashless basis prior to redemption and receive that number of shares based on the redemption date and the fair market value of the shares of Class A common stock;
● if, and only if, the Reference Value equals or exceeds $10.00 per share (as adjusted); and
● if the Reference Value is less than $18.00 per share (as adjusted), the Private Placement Warrants must also be concurrently called for redemption on the same terms as the outstanding Public Warrants, as described above.
The exercise price and number of shares of Class A common stock issuable upon exercise of the Public Warrants may be adjusted in certain circumstances including in the event of a share dividend, extraordinary dividend or recapitalization, reorganization, merger or consolidation. However, except as described below, the Public Warrants will not be adjusted for issuances of Class A common stock at a price below its exercise price. Additionally, in no event will the Company be required to net cash settle the Public Warrants. If the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period and the Company liquidates the funds held in the Trust Account, holders of Public Warrants will not receive any of such funds with respect to their Public Warrants, nor will they receive any distribution from the Company’s assets held outside of the Trust Account with respect to such Public Warrants. Accordingly, the Public Warrants may expire worthless.
In addition, if (x) the Company issues additional shares of Class A common stock or equity-linked securities for capital raising purposes in connection with the closing of its initial Business Combination at an issue price or effective issue price of less than $9.20 per share of Class A common stock (with such issue price or effective issue price to be determined in good faith by the Company’s board of directors and, in the case of any such issuance to the Sponsor or its affiliates, without taking into account any Founder Shares held by the Sponsor or such affiliates, as applicable, prior to such issuance) (the “Newly Issued Price”), (y) the aggregate gross proceeds from such issuances represent more than 60% of the total equity proceeds, and interest thereon, available for the funding of the Company’s initial Business Combination on the date of the consummation of such initial Business Combination (net of redemptions), and (z) the volume weighted average trading price of the Company’s common stock during the 20 trading day period starting on the trading day prior to the day on which the Company consummates its initial Business Combination (such price, the “Market Value”) is below $9.20 per share, the exercise price of the warrants will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 115% of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued Price, the $18.00 and $10.00 per share redemption trigger price described above will be adjusted (to the nearest cent) to be equal to 180% and 100%, respectively, of the higher of the Market Value and the Newly Issued Price.
At December 31, 2021, there were 4,706,667 Private Placement Warrants outstanding. As of December 31, 2020 there were no Private Placement Warrants outstanding. The Private Placement Warrants are identical to the Public Warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering, except that the Private Placement Warrants and the Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants will not be transferable, assignable or salable until 30 days after the completion of a Business Combination, subject to certain limited exceptions. Additionally, the Private Placement Warrants will be exercisable on a cashless basis and be non-redeemable, except as described above, so long as they are held by the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees. If the Private Placement Warrants are held by someone other than the initial purchasers or their permitted transferees, the Private Placement Warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants.
NOTE 9. INCOME TAX
The Company’s net deferred tax assets are as follows:
The Company did not have any significant deferred tax assets or liabilities as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The income tax provision consists of the following:
Income tax provision
$ -
$ -
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had $198,091 and $675, respectively, of U.S. federal and state net operating loss carryovers available to offset future taxable income.
In assessing the realization of the deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion of all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which temporary differences representing net future deductible amounts become deductible. Management considers the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income and tax planning strategies in making this assessment. After consideration of all of the information available, management believes that significant uncertainty exists with respect to future realization of the deferred tax assets and has therefore established a full valuation allowance. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from November 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, the change in the valuation allowance was $142 and $712,604, respectively.
A reconciliation of the federal income tax rate to the Company’s effective tax rate at December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction in various state and local jurisdictions and is subject to examination by the various taxing authorities.
NOTE 10. FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS
The fair value of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities reflects management’s estimate of amounts that the Company would have received in connection with the sale of the assets or paid in connection with the transfer of the liabilities in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In connection with measuring the fair value of its assets and liabilities, the Company seeks to maximize the use of observable inputs (market data obtained from independent sources) and to minimize the use of unobservable inputs (internal assumptions about how market participants would price assets and liabilities). The fair value hierarchy (see Note 2) is used to classify assets and liabilities based on the observable inputs and unobservable inputs used in order to value the assets and liabilities.
At December 31, 2021, assets held in the Trust Account were comprised of $253,027,240 in a U.S. Fixed income securities fund. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company did not withdraw any interest income from the Trust Account.
The following table presents information about the Company’s assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2021 and indicates the fair value hierarchy of the valuation inputs the Company utilized to determine such fair value.
The Warrants were accounted for as liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40 and are presented within warrant liabilities on our accompanying December 31, 2021 balance sheets. The warrant liabilities are measured at fair value at inception and on a recurring basis, with changes in fair value presented within change in fair value of warrant liabilities in the statement of operations.
The Company initially valued its Private Placement Warrants utilizing a lattice model, specifically a binomial lattice model incorporating the Cox-Ross-Rubenstein methodology and subsequently valued the Private Placement Warrants through December 31, 2021, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations. The estimated fair value of the warrant liabilities was determined using Level 3 inputs. Inherent in a binomial options pricing model are assumptions related to expected share-price volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The Company estimates the volatility of its shares of common stock based on historical volatility that matches the expected remaining life of the Private Placement Warrants. The risk-free interest rate was based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the Private Placement Warrants. The expected life of the warrants were assumed to be equivalent to their remaining contractual term. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero.
The measurement of the Public Warrants after the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units is classified as Level 1 due to the use of an observable market quote in an active market. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the closing price of the Public Warrant was used as the fair value for the Warrants as of each relevant date. At December 31, 2021 the Private Placement Warrants transferred to Level 2 due to the use of an observable market quote for a similar asset in an active market.
The following table presents the key inputs to value the warrants under the Binomial Lattice valuation model as of February 17, 2021, and as of December 31, 2021:
The following table presents the changes in the fair value of the warrant liabilities (Level 3 measurements):
Transfers to/from Levels 1, 2 and 3 are recognized at the end of the reporting period in which a change in valuation technique or methodology occurs. The estimated fair value of the Public Warrants previously transferred from a Level 3 measurement to a Level 1 fair value measurement for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6,831,000. The estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants transferred from a Level 3 measurement to a Level 2 fair value measurement for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,588,667. The Company did not have any level 3 Financial Instruments during the period-ended December 31, 2020.
NOTE 11. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The Company evaluated subsequent events and transactions that occurred after the balance sheet date up to the date that the financial statements were issued. Based upon this review, other than described below, the Company did not identify any subsequent events that would have required adjustment or disclosure in the financial statements.
On March 11, 2022, Rosecliff, GT Gettaxi Listco, GT Gettaxi Limited, GT Gettaxi SPV, GT Gettaxi Merger Sub 1, Gett Merger Sub, Inc., and Dooboo Holding Limited, and Merger Sub entered into a Termination of the Business Combination Agreement pursuant to which the parties mutually agreed to terminate the Business Combination Agreement, effective immediately. See Note 6 for further detail.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure.
None.
Item 9.A. Controls and Procedures.
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Disclosure controls and procedures are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in our Exchange Act reports is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms, and that such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our principal executive officer and our principal financial and accounting officer or persons performing similar functions, as appropriate, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
As required by Rules 13a-15 and 15d-15 under the Exchange Act, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer carried out an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021. Based on this evaluation, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act) were not effective, solely due to the material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting related to the Company’s accounting for complex financial instruments. As a result, we performed additional analysis as deemed necessary to ensure that our financial statements were prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. Accordingly, management believes that the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K present fairly in all material respects our financial position, results of operations and cash flows for the period presented.
Changes in Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
We made changes in our internal control processes over financial reporting (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act), other than the circumstances described above, to issues that have materially affected, or, in anticipation, to reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting. Management implemented steps to improve our internal control over financial reporting. Specifically, we expanded and improved our review process for complex securities and related accounting standards. The foregoing actions, were completed as of September 30, 2021.
In light of the material weakness, we enhanced our processes to identify and appropriately apply applicable accounting requirements to better evaluate and understand the nuances of the complex accounting standards that apply to our financial statements, including providing enhanced access to accounting literature, research materials and documents and increased communication among our personnel and third-party professionals with whom we consult regarding complex accounting applications. We will continue to evaluate whether additional measures should be implemented with respect to such material weakness. As we continue to evaluate and improve our financial reporting process, we may take additional actions to modify certain of the measures described above. We cannot assure you that the measures we have taken to date, or any measures we may take in the future, will be sufficient to avoid potential future material weaknesses.
Internal Control over Financial Reporting
This Annual Report on Form 10-K does not include a report of management’s assessment regarding internal control over financial reporting or an attestation report of our registered public accounting firm due to a transition period established by rules of the SEC for newly public companies.
Item 9.B. Other Information.
None.
Item 9.C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspection.
Not Applicable.
PART III.
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance.
Our current directors and executive officer are as follows:
Directors and Officers
Executive Officers
Michael P. Murphy has served as our Chief Executive Officer and a member of our Board of Directors since our inception. Mr. Murphy began his investing career over 25 years ago. His career has been focused on being an entrepreneur in the investing and financial service industry. In the past, he was the Founder of a wealth management firm, hedge fund and multiple commercial real estate portfolios. In 2016, Mr. Murphy founded Rosecliff Venture and has served as its Managing Partner since its inception. Over the past four years, Rosecliff Venture has made over 80 investments, raised over $800 million in assets under management, launched seven investment funds and experienced multiple portfolio company exits. A few select transactions from the Rosecliff Venture portfolio include; Allbirds, Casper, Postmates, Ro, Thirty Madison, Petal and Wheels Up. Mr. Murphy is currently a board member of multiple private, venture capital backed companies including Cargo Systems, Squarefoot, ForDays and Agile Stacks. Mr. Murphy previously was a contributor on CNBC and regularly appeared on the network’s FASTMONEY segment. Currently, Mr. Murphy is a regular contributor on Fox Network and makes appearances each week on Varney & Co, Mornings with Maria & Cavuto. Mr. Murphy earned a Bachelor of Arts in Business Administration from Hofstra University.
We believe that Mr. Murphy’s significant investment experience, contacts and relationships make him well qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Jordan Zimmerman has served as our President and a member of our Board of Directors since our inception. Mr. Zimmerman currently serves as the Chairman and Founder of Zimmerman Advertising, which he founded in 1984. Mr. Zimmerman trademarked his advertising strategy, “Brandtailing®,” a maverick combination of long-term brand building and short-term sales boosting that delivers measurable results. Highly respected within the advertising world, Mr. Zimmerman is often asked to address industry groups and participate in panel discussions across the country. Zimmerman Advertising has worked with highly recognizable and successful businesses in the consumer sector, such as Nissan, McDonald’s, Dunkin’ Donuts, Five Below, Party City, Kay Jewelers, AutoNation, Michaels, Advance America, TBC/Tire Kingdom, Office Depot, and Carfax. The agency works with these companies to help increase brand awareness, market share and overall company growth.
Outside of work, Mr. Zimmerman is an author, a philanthropist, a Horatio Alger Award recipient and a Golden Circle Member of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
In March 2015, with a donation of $10 million dollars from the Jordan Zimmerman Family Foundation, Mr. Zimmerman established the University of South Florida Zimmerman School of Advertising and Mass Communications and its highly regarded Zimmerman Advertising Program. Mr. Zimmerman was appointed by the Governor of Florida for a second term to sit on the Board of Trustees at the University of South Florida where he has served as the Chairman of the Board since 2019. Mr. Zimmerman earned a Bachelor of Arts in Advertising and an MBA from the University of South Florida and was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Business Administration from Nova Southeastern University.
We believe Mr. Zimmerman’s entrepreneurial and senior leadership experience as well as his broad network makes him well qualified to serve on our board of directors.
Kieran Goodwin has served as our Chief Financial Officer since our inception. Mr. Goodwin previously founded Panning Capital Management, L.P. (“Panning”) in 2012 and was Co-Managing Partner and Portfolio Manager until 2018. Panning was a long/short credit hedge fund with a peak AUM of $2.5 billion during Mr. Goodwin’s tenure. From 2004 to 2010, Mr. Goodwin was the Head of Trading and one of five partners and four members of the Global Investment Committee at King Street Capital Management (“King Street”). As Head of Trading, Mr. Goodwin was responsible for managing King Street’s twenty traders. During his time at King Street, the firm’s AUM grew from $4 billion to approximately $20 billion. Mr. Goodwin previously was a Managing Director at both UBS and Merrill Lynch, where he ran proprietary trading books. Since 2018, Mr. Goodwin has invested his own capital in both private and public markets. He is an investor in many early-stage companies and currently serves on the board of directors of Tradewell Technologies Inc. and Zoomi Inc. Additionally, he serves on the board of directors Voya Prime Rate Trust, a public closed-end loan fund. Mr. Goodwin received a Bachelor of Arts in Computer Science, cum laude, from Duke University in 1991.
Board of Directors
Brian Radecki has served as the Chairman of our Board of Directors since our inception. Mr. Radecki currently serves as the Founder, Chief Executive Officer and member of the Board of Directors of Rapa Therapeutics (“Rapa”), a clinical stage start-up biotechnology company, spun out of the National Cancer Institute in September 2017. Mr. Radecki is an active angel investor in, or advisor to, several companies across various industries - from start-ups with zero revenue, to pre-IPO and large public companies. He has over 20 years of experience building both small private and large public companies. He works closely with many top-tier private equity, venture capital and institutional investors along with entrepreneurs, boards of directors and senior management teams to build disruptive and innovative platform companies by executing strategic plans to get things done.
Mr. Radecki is currently an investor and director on the board of Wheels Up. Previously, Mr. Radecki was an early investor in, and served on the board of directors of, Rain King Software, Inc., a leading sales and marketing intelligence platform, when it was acquired in August 2017 by Zoom Info (NASDAQ: ZI) (formerly DiscoverOrg); Docutech, a document, eSign, eClosing and compliance technology provider, when it was acquired by First American (NYSE: FAF) for $350 million in March 2020; and Optimal Blue, a digital marketplace in the residential mortgage industry, which was recently acquired by Black Knight, Inc. (NYSE: BKI). Also, Mr. Radecki invested pre-IPO in other companies including Beyond Meat (NASDAQ: BYND) and Skillz Inc. (NYSE: SKLZ), which is merging (via SPAC) with Flying Eagle Acquisition Corp. (NASDAQ: FEAC). After working approximately 20 years at public companies, Mr. Radecki retired in 2016 from CoStar Group Inc. (“CoStar”) (NASDAQ: CSGP), a provider of commercial real estate information, analytics and online marketplaces, where he held several senior operational and financial roles over 18 years, including Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and VP of Research Operations (the company’s largest operating area). While at CoStar, Mr. Radecki oversaw or played a major role in CoStar’s accounting and finance operations in the U.S. and U.K. - from internal audit, tax and budgeting to SEC reporting, Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and due diligence. Additionally, Mr. Radecki helped lead CoStar’s 1998 Initial Public Offering, multiple follow on equity offerings and international expansion, as well as leading several acquisitions and the integration of public companies, including Comps.com (NASDAQ: CDOT) in 2000 for $102 million, and LoopNet (NASDAQ: LOOP) in 2012 for $860 million. Also, Mr. Radecki was named the Washington Business Journal’s “CFO of the Year” in the large company category for 2012. During 2014, he led and raised nearly $1.1 billion of debt and equity. Mr. Radecki also played a major role in acquisitions of Apartments.com in 2014 for $585 million and ApartmentFinder in 2015 for $170 million, which allowed CoStar to successfully enter a new strategic vertical and significantly expanded CoStar’s total addressable market. Mr. Radecki was instrumental in building CoStar from a small pre-IPO start-up to a multi-billion dollar public company. Before joining CoStar, Mr. Radecki worked at Axent Technologies, Inc. (Nasdaq: AXNT), an international security software company; Azerty, Inc. and the public accounting firm, Lumsden & McCormick, LLP, both based in Buffalo, NY.
Mr. Radecki earned a Bachelor of Science from University of New York at Buffalo, with a dual degree in Accounting and Finance.
We believe Mr. Radecki’s qualifications to serve on our board of directors include his extensive experience working at public companies in senior level operational, business development, accounting and financial roles, coupled with his substantial experience as a private angel investor, entrepreneur and advisor to organizations and executives, along with his track record in deal making and capital markets.
Heather Bellini has served as one of our directors since February 2021. She has been the Chief Financial Officer of Deep Instinct, a New York and Israeli based cyber security software company since 2020. Prior to Deep Instinct, Ms. Bellini was a Partner at Goldman Sachs since 2012. At Goldman Sachs, she was the Business Unit Leader of the Technology Research Group, as well as an equity research analyst covering the Software sector and select Internet-related companies. Ms. Bellini’s universe of research coverage had a significant market capitalization. Ms. Bellini was also responsible on the research side in bringing to market 20 of the companies in her coverage universe through their Initial Public Offerings, including Anaplan, Atlassian, Cloudflare, Crowdstrike, Dropbox, Dynatrace, Elastic NV, Facebook, MongoDB, Okta, Ping Identity, Rackspace Holdings, Salesforce, Slack Technologies, Snowflake, Solarwinds, Twilio, Unity, VMware, Workday and Zoom Video Communications. Ms. Bellini was named to the inaugural Barron’s 100 Most Influential Women in Finance in 2020.
Prior to joining Goldman Sachs, Ms. Bellini was a senior managing director and head of technology research at International Strategy and Investment from 2009 to 2011. Earlier, she was head of technology research as well as a software analyst at UBS from 2003 to 2009. Ms. Bellini earned a BA in Economics from Denison University and an MBA in Finance from Columbia University. Ms. Bellini is a CFA charterholder.
We believe that Ms. Bellini’s significant investment and Initial Public Offering experience, research background and relationships make her well qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Frank S. Edmonds has served as one of our directors since February 2021. He has been a Partner at Panning Capital Management, L.P. since 2013, where he served as Co-Managing Partner and Head of Research from 2013 to 2018. From 2002 to 2012, Mr. Edmonds was a Senior Research Analyst at King Street, where he served as one of five partners and four members of the Global Investment Committee. Prior to King Street, Mr. Edmonds was a research analyst at Oak Hill Advisors. He serves on the boards of Shane’s Rib Shack, a fast casual barbeque restaurant business with 65 locations in the southeast United States, as well as the Darden Graduate School of Business and the Jefferson Scholars Foundation. He is currently the Chair of the Investment Committee at Woodberry Forest School. Mr. Edmonds received a B.A. in History/American Studies and joint M.B.A. / J.D. degrees from the University of Virginia.
We believe that Mr. Edmonds’ significant investment experience, contacts and relationships make him well qualified to serve as a member of our board of directors.
Director Independence
Nasdaq listing rules require that a majority of our board of directors be independent within one year of our Initial Public Offering. An “independent director” is defined generally as a person that, in the opinion of the company’s board of directors, has no material relationship with the listed company (either directly or as a partner, stockholder or officer of an organization that has a relationship with the company). We have two “independent directors” as defined in the Nasdaq listing rules and applicable SEC rules. Our board has determined that each of Frank S. Edmonds and Heather Bellini is an independent director under applicable SEC and Nasdaq listing rules. Our independent directors will have regularly scheduled meetings at which only independent directors are present.
Number, Terms of Office and Election of Officers and Director
Our board of directors consists of five members.
Prior to our initial Business Combination, holders of our Founder Shares will have the right to elect all of our directors and remove members of the board of directors for any reason, and holders of our Public Shares will not have the right to vote on the election of directors during such time. Our directors are appointed for a term of two years. These provisions of our amended and restated certificate of incorporation may only be amended if approved by holders of a majority of at least 90% of the issued and outstanding shares of our common stock voting at a stockholder meeting. Approval of our initial Business Combination will require the affirmative vote of a majority of our board directors, which must include a majority of our independent directors. Subject to any other special rights applicable to the stockholders, prior to our initial Business Combination, any vacancies on our board of directors may be filled by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors present and voting at the meeting of our board of directors, or by holders of a majority of the issued and outstanding shares of our Class B common stock.
Our officers are appointed by the board of directors and serve at the discretion of the board of directors, rather than for specific terms of office. Our board of directors is authorized to appoint persons to the offices set forth in our bylaws as it deems appropriate. Our bylaws provide that our officers may consist of a Chief Executive Officer, a President, a Chief Financial Officer, Vice Presidents, a Secretary, Assistant Secretaries, a Treasurer and such other offices as may be determined by the board of directors.
Committees of the Board of Directors
Our board of directors has three standing committees: an audit committee; a compensation committee; and a nominating and corporate governance committee. Each of our audit committee, compensation committee and nominating and corporate governance committee are composed solely of independent directors. Each committee operates under a charter that was approved by our board of directors and has the composition and responsibilities described below. The charter of each committee is available on our website.
Audit Committee
The members of our audit committee are Brian Radecki, Frank S. Edmonds and Heather Bellini. Brian Radecki serves as chairman of the audit committee.
Each member of the audit committee is financially literate and our board of directors has determined that qualifies as an “audit committee financial expert” as defined in applicable SEC rules and has accounting or related financial management expertise.
We have adopted an audit committee charter, which details the purpose and principal functions of the audit committee, including:
● assisting board oversight of (1) the integrity of our financial statements, (2) our compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, (3) our independent registered public accounting firm’s qualifications and independence, and (4) the performance of our internal audit function and independent registered public accounting firm;
● the appointment, compensation, retention, replacement, and oversight of the work of the independent registered public accounting firm and any other independent registered public accounting firm engaged by us;
● pre-approving all audit and non-audit services to be provided by the independent registered public accounting firm or any other registered public accounting firm engaged by us, and establishing pre-approval policies and procedures;
● reviewing and discussing with the independent registered public accounting firm all relationships the auditors have with us in order to evaluate their continued independence;
● setting clear hiring policies for employees or former employees of the independent registered public accounting firm;
● setting clear policies for audit partner rotation in compliance with applicable laws and regulations;
● obtaining and reviewing a report, at least annually, from the independent registered public accounting firm describing (1) the independent registered public accounting firm’s internal quality-control procedures and (2) any material issues raised by the most recent internal quality-control review, or peer review, of the audit firm, or by any inquiry or investigation by governmental or professional authorities, within the preceding five years respecting one or more independent audits carried out by the firm and any steps taken to deal with such issues;
● meeting to review and discuss our annual audited financial statements and quarterly financial statements with management and the independent registered public accounting firm, including reviewing our specific disclosures under “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”;
● reviewing and approving any related party transaction required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 404 of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC prior to us entering into such transaction; and
● reviewing with management, the independent registered public accounting firm, and our legal advisors, as appropriate, any legal, regulatory or compliance matters, including any correspondence with regulators or government agencies and any employee complaints or published reports that raise material issues regarding our financial statements or accounting policies and any significant changes in accounting standards or rules promulgated by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the SEC or other regulatory authorities.
Compensation Committee
The members of our compensation committee are Brian Radecki, Frank S. Edmonds and Heather Bellini. Ms. Bellini serves as chair of the compensation committee.
We have adopted a compensation committee charter, which details the purpose and responsibility of the compensation committee, including:
● reviewing and approving on an annual basis the corporate goals and objectives relevant to our Chief Executive Officer’s compensation, evaluating our Chief Executive Officer’s performance in light of such goals and objectives and determining and approving the remuneration (if any) of our Chief Executive Officer based on such evaluation;
● reviewing and making recommendations to our board of directors with respect to the compensation, and any incentive-compensation and equity-based plans that are subject to board approval of all of our other officers;
● reviewing our executive compensation policies and plans;
● implementing and administering our incentive compensation equity-based remuneration plans;
● assisting management in complying with our proxy statement and annual report disclosure requirements;
● approving all special perquisites, special cash payments and other special compensation and benefit arrangements for our officers and employees;
● producing a report on executive compensation to be included in our annual proxy statement; and
● reviewing, evaluating and recommending changes, if appropriate, to the remuneration for directors.
The charter also provides that the compensation committee may, in its sole discretion, retain or obtain the advice of a compensation consultant, independent legal counsel or other adviser and is directly responsible for the appointment, compensation and oversight of the work of any such adviser. However, before engaging or receiving advice from a compensation consultant, external legal counsel or any other adviser, the compensation committee will consider the independence of each such adviser, including the factors required by Nasdaq and the SEC.
Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee
The members of our nominating and corporate governance committee are Brian Radecki, Frank S. Edmonds and Heather Bellini. Mr. Edmonds serves as chair of the nominating and corporate governance committee.
We have adopted a nominating and corporate governance committee charter, which details the purpose and responsibilities of the nominating and corporate governance committee, including:
● identifying, screening and reviewing individuals qualified to serve as directors, consistent with criteria approved by the board of directors, and recommending to the board of directors candidates for nomination for election at the annual stockholder meeting or to fill vacancies on the board of directors;
● developing and recommending to the board of directors and overseeing implementation of our corporate governance guidelines;
● coordinating and overseeing the annual self-evaluation of the board of directors, its committees, individual directors and management in the governance of the Company; and
● reviewing on a regular basis our overall corporate governance and recommending improvements as and when necessary.
The charter also provides that the nominating and corporate governance committee may, in its sole discretion, retain or obtain the advice of, and terminate, any search firm to be used to identify director candidates, and is directly responsible for approving the search firm’s fees and other retention terms.
We have not formally established any specific, minimum qualifications that must be met or skills that are necessary for directors to possess. In general, in identifying and evaluating nominees for director, the board of directors considers educational background, diversity of professional experience, knowledge of our business, integrity, professional reputation, independence, wisdom, and the ability to represent the best interests of our stockholders. Prior to our initial Business Combination, holders of our Public Shares will not have the right to recommend director candidates for nomination to our board of directors.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethics and business conduct (our “Code of Ethics”) applicable to our directors, officers and employees. We have filed a copy of our form of our Code of Ethics as an exhibit to this Annual Report. We have also posted a copy of our Code of Ethics and the charters of our audit committee, compensation committee and nominating and corporate governance committee on our website under https://rosecliffspac.com/governance/ . Our website and the information contained on, or that can be accessed through, the website is not deemed to be incorporated by reference in, and is not considered part of, this Annual Report. You are able to review this document by accessing our public filings at the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. In addition, a copy of our Code of Ethics will be provided without charge upon request from us. We intend to disclose any amendments to or waivers of certain provisions of our Code of Ethics in a Current Report on Form 8-K.
Conflicts of Interest
Our management team, in their capacities as directors, officers or employees of our Sponsor or its affiliates or in their other endeavors, may choose to present potential Business Combinations to the related entities described below, current or future entities affiliated with or managed by our Sponsor, or third parties, before they present such opportunities to us. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that we renounce our interest in any corporate opportunity offered to any director or officer unless such opportunity is expressly offered to such person solely in his or her capacity as a director or officer of the Company and it is an opportunity that we are able to complete on a reasonable basis.
In addition, our officers or directors may be investors, or have other direct or indirect interests, in a business with which we may enter into a Business Combination agreement and/or in certain funds or other persons that may purchase shares in the Initial Public Offering or that may otherwise purchase shares of our Class A common stock in the public market.
Our officers, directors and any of their respective affiliates may sponsor or form, or, in the case of individuals, serve as a director or officer of, other blank check companies similar to ours during the period in which we are seeking an initial Business Combination. Any such companies may present additional conflicts of interest in pursuing an acquisition target. However, we do not believe that any such potential conflicts would materially affect our ability to complete our initial Business Combination.
Each of our officers and directors presently has, and any of them in the future may have additional, fiduciary or contractual obligations to other entities pursuant to which such officer or director is or will be required to present a Business Combination opportunity to such entity. Accordingly, if any of our directors or officers becomes aware of a Business Combination opportunity that is suitable for an entity to which he or she has then-current fiduciary or contractual obligations, he or she may need to honor these fiduciary or contractual obligations to present such Business Combination opportunity to such entity. See “Risk Factors - Each of our directors and officers are now, and all of them may in the future become, affiliated with entities engaged in business activities similar to those intended to be conducted by us and, accordingly, may have conflicts of interest in determining to which entity a particular business opportunity should be presented.”
We do not believe, however, that the fiduciary duties or contractual obligations of our directors or officers will materially affect our ability to complete our initial Business Combination.
Our directors and officers may become involved with subsequent special purpose acquisition companies similar to our Company. Potential investors should also be aware of the following potential conflicts of interest:
● None of our directors or officers is required to commit his or her full time to our affairs and, accordingly, may have conflicts of interest in allocating his or her time among various business activities.
● In the course of their other business activities, our directors and officers may become aware of investment and business opportunities that may be appropriate for presentation to us as well as the other entities with which they are affiliated. Our management may have conflicts of interest in determining to which entity a particular business opportunity should be presented. For a complete description of our management’s other affiliations, see information below.
● Our initial stockholders, directors and officers have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to any Founder Shares and Public Shares held by them in connection with the consummation of our initial Business Combination. Additionally, our initial stockholders have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to their Founder Shares if we fail to consummate our initial Business Combination within 24 months after the closing of the Initial Public Offering or during any Extension Period. However, if our initial stockholders (or any of our directors, officers or affiliates) acquire Public Shares, they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such Public Shares if we fail to consummate our initial Business Combination within the prescribed time frame. If we do not complete our initial Business Combination within such applicable time period, the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of our Public Shares, and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. Pursuant to a letter agreement that our initial stockholders, directors and officers have entered into with us, with certain limited exceptions, the Founder Shares will not be transferable, assignable or saleable by our initial stockholders until the earlier of: (1) one year after the completion of our initial Business Combination; and (2) subsequent to our initial Business Combination (x) if the last reported sale price of our Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock dividends, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20-trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after our initial Business Combination or (y) the date on which we complete a liquidation, merger, stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of our public stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property. With certain limited exceptions, the Private Placement Warrants and the shares of Class A common stock underlying such warrants, will not be transferable, assignable or saleable by our Sponsor until 30 days after the completion of our initial Business Combination. Since our Sponsor and directors and officers may directly or indirectly own our securities following the Initial Public Offering, our directors and officers may have a conflict of interest in determining whether a particular target business is an appropriate business with which to effectuate our initial Business Combination.
● Our directors and officers may negotiate employment or consulting agreements with a target business in connection with a particular Business Combination. These agreements may provide for them to receive compensation following our initial Business Combination and as a result, may cause them to have conflicts of interest in determining whether to proceed with a particular Business Combination.
● Our directors and officers may have a conflict of interest with respect to evaluating a particular Business Combination if the retention or resignation of any such directors and officers was included by a target business as a condition to any agreement with respect to our initial Business Combination.
The conflicts described above may not be resolved in our favor.
In general, officers and directors of a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware are required to present business opportunities to a corporation if:
● the corporation could financially undertake the opportunity;
● the opportunity is within the corporation’s line of business; and
● it would not be fair to the corporation and its stockholders for the opportunity not to be brought to the attention of the corporation.
Accordingly, as a result of multiple business affiliations, our directors and officers have similar legal obligations relating to presenting business opportunities meeting the above-listed criteria to multiple entities. Furthermore, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that the doctrine of corporate opportunity will not apply with respect to any of our directors or officers in circumstances where the application of the doctrine would conflict with any fiduciary duties or contractual obligations they may have, and there will not be any expectancy that any of our directors or officers will offer any such corporate opportunity of which he or she may become aware to us. Below is a table summarizing the entities to which our directors and officers currently have fiduciary duties or contractual obligations:
Accordingly, if any of the above directors or officers become aware of a Business Combination opportunity which is suitable for any of the above entities to which he or she has then-current fiduciary or contractual obligations, he or she will honor his or her fiduciary or contractual obligations to present such Business Combination opportunity to such entity, and only present it to us if such entity rejects the opportunity. Our amended and restated certificate of incorporation provides that we renounce our interest in any corporate opportunity offered to any director or officer unless such opportunity is expressly offered to such person solely in his or her capacity as a director or officer of the Company and it is an opportunity that we are able to complete on a reasonable basis. We do not believe, however, that any of the foregoing fiduciary duties or contractual obligations will materially affect our ability to identify and pursue Business Combination opportunities or complete our initial Business Combination.
We are not prohibited from pursuing an initial Business Combination with a company that is affiliated with our Sponsor, directors or officers.
In addition, our Sponsor or any of its affiliates may make additional investments in the Company in connection with the initial Business Combination, although our Sponsor and its affiliates have no obligation or current intention to do so. If our Sponsor or any of its affiliates elects to make additional investments, such proposed investments could influence our Sponsor’s motivation to complete an initial Business Combination.
In the event that we submit our initial Business Combination to our public stockholders for a vote, our initial stockholders, directors and officers have agreed, pursuant to the terms of a letter agreement entered into with us, to vote any Founder Shares (and their permitted transferees will agree) and Public Shares held by them in favor of our initial Business Combination.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
None of our directors or officers has received directly from us any cash compensation for services rendered to us. Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on Nasdaq through the earlier of consummation of our initial Business Combination and our liquidation, pursuant to our support services agreement with our Sponsor, we will pay our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office, support and administrative services. In addition, our Sponsor, directors and officers, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made by us to our Sponsor, directors, officers or our or any of their respective affiliates.
After the completion of our initial Business Combination, directors or members of our management team who remain with us may be paid consulting, management or other compensation from the combined company. All compensation will be fully disclosed to stockholders, to the extent then known, in the tender offer materials or proxy solicitation materials furnished to our stockholders in connection with a proposed Business Combination. It is unlikely the amount of such compensation will be known at the time, because the directors of the post-combination business will be responsible for determining executive officer and director compensation. Any compensation to be paid to our officers after the completion of our initial Business Combination will be determined by a compensation committee constituted solely of independent directors.
We are not party to any agreements with our directors and officers that provide for benefits upon termination of employment. The existence or terms of any such employment or consulting arrangements may influence our management’s motivation in identifying or selecting a target business, and we do not believe that the ability of our management to remain with us after the consummation of our initial Business Combination should be a determining factor in our decision to proceed with any potential Business Combination. ***
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters.
The following table sets forth information available to us at March 30, 2022 with respect to our common stock held by:
● each person known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our outstanding shares of common stock;
● each of our executive officers and directors; and
● all our executive officers and directors as a group.
Unless otherwise indicated, we believe that all persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to all shares of common stock beneficially owned by them. The following table does not reflect record or beneficial ownership of the Private Placement Warrants as these are not exercisable within 60 days of March 30, 2022.
* Less than one percent.
(1) Shares of Class B common stock will convert into Shares of Class A common stock on a one-for-one basis, subject to adjustment, as described in the section entitled “Description of Securities” in our prospectus filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) (File No. 333-252478).
(2) Unless otherwise noted, the business address of each of the following entities or individuals is c/o Rosecliff Acquisition Corp I, 767 5th Avenue, 34th Floor, New York, New York 10153.
(3) Rosecliff Acquisition Sponsor I LLC, our Sponsor, is the record holder of 6,195,000 shares of Class B common stock. Michael P. Murphy is the managing member of Rosecliff Credit Opportunity Fund I GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, which is the general partner of Rosecliff Credit Opportunity Fund I, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, which is the managing member of our Sponsor. By virtue of his control over the managing member our Sponsor, Mr. Murphy may be deemed to beneficially own shares held by our Sponsor.
(4) Information is based solely on a Schedule 13G filed with the SEC on February 14, 2022 by Glazer Capital, LLC and Paul J. Glazer, each of whom have shared voting power over 1,872,031 shares of Class A common stock and shared dispositive power over 1,872,031 shares of Class A common stock. Glazer Capital, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, serves as investment manager to certain funds and managed accounts (collectively, the “Glazer Funds”). Glazer Capital, LLC has the authority to dispose of and vote the shares of Class A common stock directly held by the Glazer Funds. Paul J. Glazer is the managing member of Glazer Capital, LLC. Glazer Capital, LLC and Paul J. Glazer’s address is 250 West 55th Street, Suite 30A, New York, New York 10019.
(5) Information is based solely on a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC on February 14, 2022 by Saba Capital Management, L.P., Saba Capital Management GP, LLC and Boaz R. Weinstein, each of whom have shared voting power over 1,276,201 shares of Class A common stock and shared dispositive power over 1,276,201 shares of Class A common stock. Saba Capital Management, L.P., Saba Capital Management GP, LLC and Boaz R. Weinstein’s address is 405 Lexington Avenue, 58th Floor, New York, New York 10174.
Our initial stockholders beneficially own approximately 20.0% of the issued and outstanding ordinary shares and have the right to elect all of our directors prior to our initial Business Combination as a result of holding all of the Founder Shares. Holders of our Public Shares will not have the right to appoint any directors to our board of directors prior to our initial Business Combination. In addition, because of their ownership block, our initial stockholders may be able to effectively influence the outcome of all other matters requiring approval by our stockholders, including amendments to our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association and approval of significant corporate transactions.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence.
Founder Shares
During the period ended December 31, 2020, the Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover certain of the Company’s offering costs in exchange for 5,750,000 shares of the Company’s Class B common stock (the “Founder Shares”). On February 11, 2021, the Company effected a 1:1.1 stock split of its Class B common stock, resulting in an aggregate of 6,325,000 shares outstanding. All share and per-share amounts have been retroactively restated to reflect the stock split. The Founder Shares included an aggregate of up to 825,000 shares subject to forfeiture to the extent that the underwriters’ over-allotment was not exercised in full or in part, so that the number of Founder Shares would equal, on an as-converted basis, approximately 20% of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock upon the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. As a result of the underwriter’s election to fully exercise its over-allotment option, no Founder Shares are currently subject to forfeiture.
The Sponsor has agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of a Business Combination and (B) subsequent to a Business Combination, (x) if the last reported sale price of the Class A common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after a Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, capital stock exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the Public Stockholders having the right to exchange their shares of common stock for cash, securities or other property.
Amount Due to Sponsor
At December 31, 2021, the Company had advances owed to the Sponsor in the amount of $16,152. At December 31, 2020, there were no advances owed to the Sponsor.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor has purchased an aggregate of 4,706,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant ($7,060,000 in the aggregate) from the Company in a private placement. Each whole Private Placement Warrant is exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants were added to the net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless.
Registration Rights
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on February 11, 2021, the holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants or warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) will be entitled to registration rights requiring the Company to register such securities for resale (in the case of the Founder Shares, only after conversion to shares of Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a Business Combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidated damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Related Party Notes
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we completes a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on February 11, 2021 through the earlier of our consummation of a Business Combination and its liquidation, we agreed to pay our Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, support and administrative services. For the year-ended December 31, 2021, we accrued $110,000 in fees for these services, of which such amount is included in accrued expenses in the accompanying condensed balance sheet. During the period-ended December 31, 2020 we did not accrue office space, support and administrative expenses.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services.
Fees for professional services provided by our independent registered public accounting firm for the last two fiscal years include:
(1) Audit Fees. Audit fees consist of fees billed for professional services rendered for the audit of our year-end financial statements and services that are normally provided by our independent registered public accounting firm in connection with statutory and regulatory filings.
(2) Audit-Related Fees. Audit-related fees consist of fees billed for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to performance of the audit or review of our year-end financial statements and are not reported under “Audit Fees.” These services include attest services that are not required by statute or regulation and consultation concerning financial accounting and reporting standards.
(3) Tax Fees. Tax fees consist of fees billed for professional services relating to tax compliance, tax planning and tax advice.
(4) All Other Fees. All other fees consist of fees billed for all other services including permitted due diligence services related potential Business Combination.
Policy on Board Pre-Approval of Audit and Permissible Non-Audit Services of the Independent Auditors
The audit committee is responsible for appointing, setting compensation and overseeing the work of the independent auditors. In recognition of this responsibility, the audit committee shall review and, in its sole discretion, pre-approve all audit and permitted non-audit services to be provided by the independent auditors as provided under the audit committee charter.
PART IV.
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules.
(a) The following documents are filed as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K: Financial Statements: See “Item 8. Index to Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” herein.
(b) Exhibits: The exhibits listed in the accompanying index to exhibits are filed or incorporated by reference as part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
* Filed herewith.
** Furnished herewith.
(1) Incorporated by reference to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed on February 17, 2021.
Item 16. Item 15. Form 10-K Summary.
None.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
ROSECLIFF ACQUISITION CORP i
Date: March 31, 2022 /s/ Michael P. Murphy
By: Michael P. Murphy
Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: March 31, 2022 /s/ Kieran Goodwin
By: Kieran Goodwin
Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer and
Principal Accounting Officer)
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the Registrant and in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
/s/ Michael P. Murphy
Name: Michael P. Murphy
Title: Chief Executive Officer and Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
Date: March 31, 2022
/s/ Kieran Goodwin
Name: Kieran Goodwin
Title: Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Officer)
Date: March 31, 2022
/s/ Jordan Zimmerman
Name: Jordan Zimmerman
Title: President and Director
Date: March 31, 2022
/s/ Brian Radecki
Name: Brian Radecki
Title: Chairman of the Board of Directors and Director
Date: March 31, 2022
/s/ Heather Bellini
Name: Heather Bellini
Title: Director
Date: March 31, 2022
/s/ Frank S. Edmonds
Name: Frank S. Edmonds
Title: Director
Date: March 31, 2022
false FY
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2022-03-30
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2022-03-30
2021-06-30
2021-12-31
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2020-12-31
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-11-16
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-11-16
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-11-16
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-11-16
2020-11-16
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-02-17 2021-02-17
us-gaap:OverAllotmentOptionMember
2021-02-17 2021-02-17
us-gaap:OverAllotmentOptionMember
2021-02-17
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:SeriesOfIndividuallyImmaterialBusinessAcquisitionsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:SeriesOfIndividuallyImmaterialBusinessAcquisitionsMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-02-17 2021-02-17
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-02-17
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-02-17 2021-02-17
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember
2021-02-17 2021-02-17
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember
2021-02-17
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-12-31
rclf:PublicWarrantsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:OverAllotmentOptionMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
rclf:FounderSharesMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
rclf:FounderSharesMember us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2020-11-17 2020-12-31
rclf:FounderSharesMember
2021-02-01 2021-02-11
2021-02-01 2021-02-11
rclf:PublicWarrantsMember
2021-12-31
rclf:PrivatePlacementWarrantsMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:FairValueInputsLevel1Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:FairValueInputsLevel2Member
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
2021-02-01 2021-02-17
2021-02-17
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember
2020-12-31
rclf:PublicMember
2020-12-31
rclf:WarrantLiabilitiesMember
2020-12-31
rclf:PublicMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
rclf:WarrantLiabilitiesMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
rclf:PublicMember
2021-12-31
rclf:WarrantLiabilitiesMember
2021-12-31
xbrli:shares
iso4217:USD
iso4217:USD
xbrli:shares
xbrli:pure