ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) describes the matters that we consider to be important to understanding the results of our operations for each of the two years in the period ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and our capital resources and liquidity as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. Our fiscal year begins on January 1 and ends on December 31. We analyze the results of our operations for the last two years, including the trends in the overall business followed by a discussion of our cash flows and liquidity, and contractual commitments. We then provide a review of the critical accounting judgments and estimates that we have made that we believe are most important to an understanding of our MD&A and our consolidated financial statements. We conclude our MD&A with information on recent accounting pronouncements which we adopted during the year, as well as those not yet adopted that are expected to have an impact on our financial accounting practices.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, all included elsewhere herein. The forward-looking statements in this section and other parts of this document involve risks and uncertainties including statements regarding our plans, objectives, goals, strategies, and financial performance. Our actual results could differ materially from the results anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of factors set forth under the caption “Safe Harbor Statement under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995” below and as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those set forth in “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors”. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a “safe harbor” for forward-looking statements made by or on behalf of the Company.
Overview
We operate an on-demand recruiting platform aimed to disrupt the $136 billion recruiting and staffing industry. Recruiter.com combines an online hiring software solution with on-demand recruiting services. Businesses of all sizes recruit talent faster using the Recruiter.com platform, which is powered by AI Software and a network of professional recruiters.
We help businesses accelerate and streamline their recruiting and hiring processes by providing on-demand recruiting services and technology. We leverage our network of recruiters to place recruiters on a project basis, aided by cutting edge artificial intelligence-based candidate sourcing, matching and video screening technologies. We operate a cloud-based scalable software for professional hiring, which provides prospective employers access to a rich and diverse data set of prospective candidates.
Our mission is to become a preferred solution for hiring specialized talent.
Operating Businesses and Revenue
We generate revenue from the following activities:
·
Software Subscriptions: We offer a subscription to our web-based platforms that help employers recruit talent. Our platforms allow our customers to source, contact, screen and sort candidates using data science, advanced email campaigning tools, and predictive analytics. As part of our software subscriptions, we offer enhanced support packages and on-demand recruiting support services for an additional fee. Additional fees may be charged when we place a candidate with our customer, depending on the subscription type. In such cases, if the candidate ceases to be employed by the customer during the initial 90 days (the 90-day guarantee), we refund the customer in full for all fees paid by the customer.
·
Recruiters on Demand: Consists of a consulting and staffing service specifically for the placement of professional recruiters, which we market as Recruiters on Demand. Recruiters on Demand is a flexible, time-based solution that provides businesses of all sizes access to recruiters on an outsourced, virtual basis for help with their hiring needs. As with other consulting and staffing solutions, we procure for our employer clients qualified professional recruiters, and then place them on assignment with our employer clients. We derive revenue from Recruiters on Demand by billing the employer clients for the placed recruiters' ongoing work at an agreed-upon, time-based rate. We directly source recruiter candidates from our network of recruiters. In addition, we also offer talent planning, talent assessment, strategic guidance, and organizational development services, which we market as our “Talent Effectiveness” practice. Companies prepay for a certain number of consulting hours at an agreed-upon, time-based rate. We source and provide the independent consultants that provide the service.
·
Full-time Placement: Consists of providing referrals of qualified candidates to employers to hire staff for full-time positions. We generate full-time placement revenue by earning one-time fees for each time that employers hire one of the candidates that we refer. Employers alert us of their hiring needs through our Platform, or other communications. We source qualified candidate referrals for the employers’ available jobs through independent recruiter users that access the Platform and other tools. We support and supplement the independent recruiters’ efforts with dedicated internal employees we call our internal talent delivery team. Our talent delivery team selects and delivers candidate profiles and resumes to our employer clients for their review and ultimate selection. Upon the employer hiring one or more of our candidate referrals, we earn a “full-time placement fee”, an amount separately negotiated with each employer client. The full-time placement fee is typically either a percentage of the referred candidates’ first year base salary or an agreed-upon flat fee.
·
Marketplace: Our Marketplace category comprises services for businesses and individuals that leverage our online presence and career communities. For businesses, this includes job postings, sponsorship of digital newsletters, online content promotion, social media distribution, banner advertising, and other branded electronic communications, such as in our quarterly digital publication on recruiting trends and issues. We earn revenue by completing agreed upon marketing related deliverables and milestones using pricing and terms set by mutual agreement with the customer. In some cases, we earn a percentage of revenue a business receives from attracting new clients by advertising on the Platform. Companies can also pay us to post job openings on our proprietary job boards to promote open job positions they are trying to fill. In addition to our work with direct clients, we categorize all online advertising and affiliate marketing revenue as Marketplace revenue.
For individuals, Marketplace includes services to assist with career development and advancement, including a resume distribution service that promotes these job seekers’ profiles and resumes to help with their procuring employment, upskilling, and training. Our resume distribution service allows a job seeker to upload their resume to our database, which we then distribute to our network of recruiters on the Platform. We earn revenue from a one-time flat fee for this service. We also offer a recruiter certification program that encompasses our recruitment related training content, which we make accessible through our online learning management system. Customers of the recruiter certification program use a self-managed system to navigate through a digital course of study. Upon completion of the program, we issue a certificate of completion and make available a digital badge to certify their achievement for display on their online recruiter profile on the Platform. Additionally, we partner with Careerdash, a high-quality training company, to provide Recruiter.com Academy, an immersive training experience for career changers.
·
Consulting and Staffing: Consists of providing consulting and staffing personnel services to employers to satisfy their demand for long- and short-term consulting and temporary employee needs. We generate revenue by first referring qualified personnel for the employer’s specific talent needs, then placing such personnel with the employer, but with our providers acting as the employer of record for us, and finally, billing the employer for the time and work of our placed personnel on an ongoing basis. Our process for finding candidates for consulting and staffing engagements largely mirrors our process for full-time placement hiring. This process includes employers informing us of open consulting and temporary staffing opportunities and projects, sourcing qualified candidates through the Platform and other similar means, and, finally, the employer selecting our candidates for placement after a process of review and selection. We bill these employer clients for our placed candidates’ ongoing work at an agreed-upon, time-based rate, typically on a weekly schedule of invoicing.
We have a sales team and sales partnerships with direct employers as well as Vendor Management System companies and Managed Service companies that help create sales channels for clients that buy staffing, direct hire, and sourcing services. Once we have secured the relationship and contract with the interested Enterprise customer, the delivery and product teams will provide the service to fulfill any or all of the revenue segments.
The costs of our revenue primarily consist of employee costs, third-party staffing costs and other fees, outsourced recruiter fees and commissions based on a percentage of our gross margin.
2021 Business Update
Our focus during 2021 comprised many areas to help improve our organizational structure, financial position, and corporate governance. Additionally, we continued investing and partnering to expand our service offerings and client and candidate reach. We also supplemented our internal efforts with a focus on acquisitions to help add scale, management talent, and technology. All the while, we shared our progress with media outreach and a focused investor relations effort.
Key Highlights include:
Corporate Organization
●
Listed on the Nasdaq as of July 2, 2021;
●
Expanded the Board of Directors with the appointments of Robert Heath and Steven Pemberton; and
●
Appointed Angela Copeland as Vice President of Marketing and Xuan Smith as Chief Technology Officer.
Investment and Expansion of Offerings
●
Integrated advanced artificial intelligence (AI) powered candidate sourcing technology to create what we believe is the first platform in the world to offer recruiters access to both jobs and AI-matched candidates;
●
Announced the launch of Recruiter.com's Job Market Platform on the SAP App Center, the digital marketplace for SAP partner offerings;
●
Launched Recruiters on Demand solution, offering clients the flexible hiring of recruiters to augment hiring efforts and secured notable clients;
●
Launched a new on-demand Video Screening Platform that offers rapid recording and scalable management of candidate video resumes;
●
Integrated the Recruiter.com Job Market Platform with the ADP digital marketplace; and
●
Achieved a first milestone of growing a large client account to placing approximately 100 people on-site.
Partnerships/Acquisitions
Since December 31, 2020, we entered into the following partnerships or made the following acquisitions:
●
Announced a partnership to bring on-demand hiring services to the WeWork startup ecosystem through the Recruiter.com Flex membership and to offer WeWork All Access, a monthly membership that unlocks access to workspace worldwide, to Recruiter.com’s customers.
●
Partnered with KarmaCheck in order to bring innovative and streamlined candidate screening tools to the growing Recruiter.com Marketplace.
●
Formed a strategic partnership with Beeline, a global leader in software solutions for managing the extended workforce, to bring to market a unique, diversity-focused network of recruiters to Beeline customers;
●
Formed a partnership with DVBE Connect, an award winning, disabled veteran-owned recruiting and staffing company, to build a curated on-demand team of veteran recruiters; and
●
Delivered innovative recruiting solutions for the healthcare industry by partnering with hospitals and leading healthcare recruiting companies to work to fill many registered nursing positions.
●
Acquired five technology companies.
●
Announced the “Enterprise Plan” for Recruiters on Demand. The “Enterprise Plan” is designed to help employers hire ten or more full-time recruiters, as the demand for recruiting and talent acquisition professionals continues to soar.
●
Launched Amplify, an artificial intelligence ("AI") powered solution for proactive candidate outreach. Amplify leverages Recruiter.com AI software to search and market to passive candidates, transforming job posting into an active talent identification and engagement process.
●
Announced partnership with Deel, a platform that streamlines worldwide compliance and payments for international teams, which recently raised $425 million at a valuation of $5.5 billion, empowering companies to hire contractors and employees globally.
●
Announced an agreement with Raise Recruiting. The Company and Raise will work together on a joint partnership that will involve the transfer of certain assets, clients, and services for mutual benefit.
Media
●
Throughout 2020 and 2021, appeared on CNBC on multiple occasions to discuss results of the Recruiter Index, Recruiter.com's proprietary survey of recruiter sentiment on the job market and hiring and recruiting demand. Most recently, Evan Sohn appeared on CNBC on February 7, 2021 to discuss the conditions of the job market.
●
Joined forces with Revelio to release recruiting predictions for 2022, which include remote or hybrid work becoming the new normal, work-from-anywhere morphing into hire-from-anywhere, a tight job market, and diversity continuing to be a focus.
●
Quoted in top-tier publications such as The Wall Street Journal, Business Insider, CNN, Forbes, and the Business Journals.
●
Received recognition for career communities with Mediabistro being named one of the best career sites to post jobs online by the NYPost and Scouted named one of the ten best job search websites of 2022 by Balance Careers.
Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22.2 million compared to $8.5 million for the prior year representing an increase of $13.7 million or 161%. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in our Recruiters on Demand business of $10.4 million or 1079% due to contributions from acquisitions as well as significant growth in new customers. Additionally, we launched Software Subscriptions during 2021 which contributed $1.4 million in new revenue, which had no contribution in 2020. We also had an increase in Permanent Placement fees of $574 thousand or 111% from increased demand for services to support client hiring needs. We also had an increase in our Marketplace Solutions revenue of $391 thousand or 117% from contributions from recent acquisitions as well as growth in new customers. We also had an increase in our Consulting and Staffing business of $885 thousand or 13% from internal growth from some of our long- term customers as well as new customers.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $14.9 million, which included related party costs of $599 thousand, compared to $6.1 million in the prior year which included related party costs of $1.4 million. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in compensation expense to support revenue growth, third party staffing costs and other fees related to the recruitment and staffing businesses acquired, as well as costs for contract recruiters supporting the Recruiters on Demand business.
Our gross profit for 2021 was $7.3 million which produced a gross profit margin of 33%. In 2020 our gross profit was $2.4 million which produced a gross profit margin of 28%. The increase in the gross profit margin from 2020 to 2021 reflects the shift in the mix in sales for the period as all areas of our business grew faster and have higher gross margins than our staffing business.
Operating Expenses
We had total operating expenses of $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher product development and general and administrative expense, a goodwill impairment expense related to the Genesys asset purchase, higher amortization of intangibles expense to $2.7 million from $687 thousand, and an increase to bad debt expense to $928 thousand. The increase in bad debt expense primarily relates to a one-time reserve for a customer for $650 thousand due to the customer’s lack of payment. See Item 3. Legal Proceedings for more details.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $472 thousand compared to $83 thousand for the prior year, which reflects an increase in personnel, advertising, and marketing expense to help drive growth in our business.
Product Development
Our product development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $1.2 million from $300 thousand for the prior year. This increase is attributable to the continued investment in our product offerings. The product development expense in 2021 included approximately $162 thousand paid to Recruiter.com Mauritius, a related party. In 2020, product development expense included $235 thousand paid to Recruiter.com Mauritius.
Amortization of Intangibles and Impairment Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a non-cash amortization charge of $2.7 million as compared to $687 thousand for the corresponding period in 2020. The amortization expense increase is a direct result of the acquisitions of intangible assets that occurred in 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred an impairment charge of $2.5 million related to the goodwill from the 2019 acquisition of Genesys.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense include compensation-related costs for our employees dedicated to general and administrative activities, legal fees, audit and tax fees, consultants and professional services, and general corporate expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our general and administrative expense was $17.3 million including $5.4 million of non- cash stock-based compensation and $928 thousand in bad debt expense. In 2020, our general and administrative expense was $8.0 million, including $3.2 million of non-cash stock-based compensation. This increase is also attributable to increases in compensation, supporting the growth in our business primarily employees from our recent acquisitions in 2021.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of other income of $610 thousand compared to other expense of $10.3 million in 2020. The primary reason for the decrease in expense of $10.9 million is due to non-cash income of $7.3 million resulting from a change in the fair value of the derivative liability from our outstanding warrants as compared to $2.7 million of expense in the prior year. As our common stock price increases, we incur an expense and contrarily if our common stock decreases, we recognize other income. Additionally, in 2021 we had $0 change in derivative value due to anti-dilution adjustments as compared to an expense of $2.6 million in the prior year period. Other income was partially offset by an increase in primarily non-cash interest expense of $3.1 million reflecting the debt discount amortization and finance costs from the convertible note financings completed in May and September of 2020 and January of 2021.
Net loss
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $16.3 million compared to a net loss of $17.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Definition of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The following discussion and analysis includes both financial measures in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, as well as non-GAAP financial measures. Generally, a non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s performance, financial position, or cash flows that either excludes or includes amounts that are not normally included or excluded in the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed as supplemental to and should not be considered as alternatives to net income, operating income, and cash flow from operating activities, liquidity or any other financial measures. They may not be indicative of our historical operating results of Recruiter, nor are they intended to be predictive of potential future results. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Our management uses and relies on EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. We believe that both management and shareholders benefit from referring to the following non-GAAP financial measures in planning, forecasting and analyzing future periods. Our management uses these non-GAAP financial measures in evaluating its financial and operational decision making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparison. Our management recognizes that the non-GAAP financial measures have inherent limitations because of the described excluded items.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as earnings (or loss) from continuing operations before the items in the table below. Adjusted EBITDA is an important measure of our operating performance because it allows management, investors and analysts to evaluate and assess our core operating results from period-to-period after removing the impact of items of a non-operational nature that affect comparability.
We have included a reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the most comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that providing the non-GAAP financial measures, together with the reconciliation to GAAP, helps investors make comparisons between our results and other companies. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measure and the corresponding GAAP measure provided by each company under applicable SEC rules.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $9.0 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $2.5 million for 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was attributable to the increase in operating expenses outlined previously supporting the investments to grow our business. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net loss was $16.3 million. Net loss includes non-cash items of depreciation and amortization expense of $2.7 million, bad debt expense of $928 thousand, gain on forgiveness of debt of $25 thousand, equity-based compensation expense of $5.4 million, recognized loss on marketable securities of $1,424, loan principal paid directly through grant of $2,992, amortization of debt discount and debt costs of $2.5 million, initial derivative expense of $3.6 million, impairment expense of $2.5 million, and a positive change in fair value of derivative liability of $7.3 million. The bad debt expense primarily relates to a one-time reserve for a customer for $650 thousand due to the customer’s lack of payment. See Item 3. Legal Proceedings for more details. Changes in operating assets and liabilities include primarily the following: accounts receivable increased by $4.7 million and prepaid expenses and other current assets increased by $74 thousand. Accounts payable, accrued liabilities, deferred payroll taxes, other liabilities, and deferred revenue increased in total by $1.7 million.
For 2021, cash used in investing activities was $2.2 million as a result of cash paid for acquisitions, compared to $33 thousand of cash used in investing activities in 2020 principally due to cash paid to acquire customer contracts.
In 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $13.7 million. The principal factors were $2.2 million from the sale of convertible notes, net of original issue discounts and offering costs, $250 thousand proceeds from notes, $13.8 million gross proceeds from the sale of common stock and warrants, offset by $1.7 million of offering costs, $78 thousand in deferred offering costs, $724 thousand in payments of notes, and $11 thousand in repayments of sale of future revenues. In the 2020 period, financing activities provided $2.4 million, primarily due to $2.5 million from the sale of convertible notes, net of original issue discounts and offering costs.
Based on cash on hand as of March 24, 2022 of approximately $1,440,000, we do not have the capital resources to meet our working capital needs for the next 12 months.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared using generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We incurred net losses and negative operating cash flows since inception. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a net loss of $16.3 million. We have not yet established an ongoing source of revenue that is sufficient to cover our operating costs and allow us to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on us obtaining adequate capital to fund operating losses until we become profitable.
Our historical operating results indicate substantial doubt exists related to our ability to continue as a going concern. We can give no assurances that any additional capital that we are able to obtain, if any, will be sufficient to meet our needs, or that any such financing will be obtainable on acceptable terms. If we are unable to obtain adequate capital, we could be forced to cease operations or substantially curtail our commercial activities. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts and classification of liabilities should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
To date, equity offerings have been our primary source of liquidity and we expect to fund future operations through additional securities offerings. We have also entered into arrangements with factoring companies to receive advances against certain future accounts receivable in order to supplement our liquidity.
Financing Arrangements
Term Loans
We had outstanding balances of $50,431 and $77,040 pursuant to two term loans as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which mature in 2023. The loans have variable interest rates, with current rates at 6.0% and 7.76%, respectively. Current monthly payments under the loans are $1,691 and $1,008, respectively. We paid off the outstanding balance of both of these loans in February 2022.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
During 2021 our remaining loan pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act in the amount of $24,750 was forgiven.
Common Stock Offering
We closed an underwritten public offering pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-1, as amended, on July 2, 2021, which was declared effective by the SEC on June 29, 2021. The gross proceeds to us from the underwritten public offering, before deducting underwriting discount, the underwriters’ fees and expenses and our estimated expenses, were $13.8 million.
Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures
In May and June 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, effective May 28, 2020 (the “May Purchase Agreement”) with several accredited investors (the “May Purchasers”). Four of the investors had previously invested in our preferred stock. Pursuant to the May Purchase Agreement, we sold to the May Purchasers a total of (i) $2,953,125 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures (the “May Debentures”), and (ii) 738,282 common stock purchase warrants, which represents 100% warrant coverage. We also agreed to issue to the placement agent, Joseph Gunnar & Co., LLC, as additional compensation, 147,657 common stock purchase warrants exercisable at $5.00 per share.
Our obligations under the May Debentures were secured by a first priority lien on all of our assets and our subsidiaries’ assets, subject to certain existing senior liens. Our obligations under the May Debentures were guaranteed by our subsidiaries.
On January 5, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, effective January 5, 2021 (the “January Purchase Agreement”), with two accredited investors (the “January Purchasers”). Pursuant to the January Purchase Agreement, we agreed to sell to the January Purchasers a total of (i) $562,500 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures (the “January Debentures”), and (ii) 140,625 common stock purchase warrants which represents 100% warrant coverage.
On January 20, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement, (the “Follow-on Purchase Agreement”) with eighteen accredited investors (the “Follow-on Purchasers”). Pursuant to the Follow-on Purchase Agreement, we agreed to sell to the Follow-on Purchasers a total of (i) $2,236,500 in the aggregate principal amount of 12.5% Original Issue Discount Senior Subordinated Secured Convertible Debentures (the “Follow-on Debentures”), and (ii) 557,926 common stock purchase warrants, which represents 100% warrant coverage. Gunnar acted as placement agent for the offering of the Follow-on Debentures.
On July 2, 2021, we issued 1,489,437 shares of common stock upon the conversion of $5,588,359 of principal amount outstanding under the May Debentures, the January Debentures, and the Follow-on Debentures, which was the total principal amount outstanding, $115,593 of accrued interest through July 2, 2021, and a penalty amount of $253,767 on the May Debentures, which extinguished the May Debentures, the January Debentures, and the Follow-on Debentures.
On July 2, 2021, the number of placement agent warrants issued in 2020 and 2021 to Gunnar was reduced, from 287,606 to 36,364, and the exercise price was increased to $6.25.
Promissory Notes Payable
We received $250,000 in proceeds from an institutional investor pursuant to a promissory note issued on May 6, 2021. The note bears interest at 12% per year and matures on May 6, 2023.
We issued a promissory note in the original principal amount of $1.75 million pursuant to the Parrut acquisition agreement dated July 7, 2021. The note amortizes over 24 months, bears interest at 6% and matures on July 1, 2023.
We issued a promissory note in the original principal amount of $3.0 million pursuant to the Novo Group acquisition agreement dated August 27, 2021. The note amortizes over 30 months, bears interest at 6% and matures on February 1, 2024.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results and outcomes may differ from management’s estimates and assumptions. Included in these estimates are assumptions used to estimate collection of accounts receivable, fair value of available for sale securities, fair value of assets acquired in an asset acquisition and the estimated useful life of assets acquired, fair value of derivative liabilities, fair value of securities issued for acquisitions, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the business combination, fair value of intangible assets and goodwill, valuation of lease liabilities and related right of use assets, deferred income tax asset valuation allowances, and valuation of stock based compensation expense.
Revenue Recognition
Policy
We recognize revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”), Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Revenues are recognized when control is transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods. Revenue recognition is evaluated through the following five steps: (i) identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer; (ii) identification of the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determination of the transaction price; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognition of revenue when or as a performance obligation is satisfied.
Revenues as presented on the statement of operations represent services rendered to customers less sales adjustments and allowances.
Software subscription revenues are recognized over the term of the subscription for access to services and/or our web-based platform. Revenue is recognized monthly over the subscription term. Talent effectiveness subscription revenues are recognized over the term of the subscription when services are provided. Any payments received prior to the time passing to provide the subscription services are recorded as a deferred revenue liability. Revenue generated from the enhanced support package and on-demand support are recognized at the point-in-time when the service is provided. Revenue generated from placement fees that are related to the software subscription are recognized at the point-in-time when the 60 or 90-day guarantee expires.
Recruiters on Demand services are billed to clients as either monthly subscriptions or time-based billings. Revenues for Recruiters on Demand are recognized on a gross basis when each monthly subscription service is completed. Talent Effectiveness consulting services are billed to clients upfront for a period of months. Revenue is recognized on a gross basis monthly over the period the consulting services are provided.
Full time placement revenues are recognized on a gross basis when the guarantee period specified in each customer’s contract expires. No fees for direct hire placement services are charged to the employment candidates. Any payments received prior to the expiration of the guarantee period are recorded as a deferred revenue liability. Payments for recruitment services are typically due within 90 days of completion of services.
Marketplace Solutions revenues are recognized either on a gross basis when the advertising is placed and displayed or when lead generation activities and online publications are completed, which is the point at which the performance obligations are satisfied. Payments for marketing and publishing are typically due within 30 days of completion of services.
Marketplace advertising revenues are recognized on a gross basis when the advertising is placed and displayed or when lead generation activities and online publications are completed, which is the point at which the performance obligations are satisfied. Payments for marketing and publishing are typically due within 30 days of completion of services. Job posting revenue is recognized at the end of the period the job is posted. Marketplace career services revenues are recognized on a gross basis upon distribution of resumes or completion of training courses, which is the point at which the performance obligations are satisfied. Payments for career services are typically due upon distribution or completion of services.
Consulting and Staffing Services revenues represent services rendered to customers less sales adjustments and allowances. Reimbursements, including those related to travel and out- of-pocket expenses, are also included in the net service revenues and equivalent amounts of reimbursable expenses are included in costs of revenue. We record substantially all revenue on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent in the presentation of this line of revenues and expenses. We have concluded that gross reporting is appropriate because we have the task of identifying and hiring qualified employees, and our discretion to select the employees and establish their compensation and duties causes us to bear the risk for services that are not fully paid for by customers. Consulting and staffing revenues are recognized when the services are rendered by the temporary employees. Payroll and related taxes of certain employees that are placed on temporary assignment are outsourced to third party payors or related party payors. The payors pay all related costs of employment for these employees, including workers’ compensation insurance, state and federal unemployment taxes, social security and certain fringe benefits. We assume the risk of acceptability of the employees to customers. Payments for consulting and staffing services are typically due within 90 days of completion of services.
Deferred revenue results from transactions in which we have been paid for services by customers, but for which all revenue recognition criteria have not yet been met. Once all revenue recognition criteria have been met, the deferred revenues are recognized.
Sales tax collected is recorded on a net basis and is excluded from revenue.
Goodwill
Goodwill is comprised of the purchase price of business combinations in excess of the fair value assigned at acquisition to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized. We test goodwill for impairment for its reporting units on an annual basis, or when events occur, or circumstances indicate the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value.
We perform our annual goodwill impairment assessment on December 31st of each year or as impairment indicators dictate.
When evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill, management first assess a range of qualitative factors, including but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry conditions, the competitive environment, changes in the market for our products and services, regulatory and political developments, entity specific factors such as strategy and changes in key personnel, and the overall financial performance for each of our reporting units. If, after completing this assessment, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we then proceed to the impairment testing methodology primarily using the income approach (discounted cash flow method).
We compare the carrying value of the reporting unit, including goodwill, with its fair value, as determined by its estimated discounted cash flows. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then the amount of impairment to be recognized is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value.
When required, we arrive at our estimates of fair value using a discounted cash flow methodology which includes estimates of future cash flows to be generated by specifically identified assets, as well as selecting a discount rate to measure the present value of those anticipated cash flows. Estimating future cash flows requires significant judgment and includes making assumptions about projected growth rates, industry-specific factors, working capital requirements, weighted average cost of capital, and current and anticipated operating conditions. The use of different assumptions or estimates for future cash flows could produce different results.
Long-lived assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the book value of the asset may not be recoverable. We periodically evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate possible impairment. When impairment indicators exist, we estimate the future undiscounted net cash flows of the related asset or asset group over the remaining life of the asset in measuring whether or not the asset values are recoverable.
Derivative Instruments
Our derivative financial instruments consist of derivatives related to the warrants issued with the sale of our preferred stock in 2020 and 2019, and the warrants issued with the sale of convertible notes in 2020 and 2021. The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments requires that we record the derivatives at their fair values as of the inception date of the debt agreements and at fair value as of each subsequent balance sheet date. Any change in fair value is recorded as non-operating, non-cash income or expense at each balance sheet date. If the fair value of the derivatives was higher at the subsequent balance sheet date, we recorded a non- operating, non-cash charge. If the fair value of the derivatives was lower at the subsequent balance sheet date, we recorded non-operating, non-cash income.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for all stock-based payment awards made to employees, directors and others based on their fair values and recognizes such awards as compensation expense over the vesting period for employees or service period for non-employees using the straight-line method over the requisite service period for each award as required by FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying vested or unvested stock-based awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase, or cancel any remaining unearned stock-based compensation expense, or record additional expense for vested stock-based awards. Future stock-based compensation expense and unearned stock- based compensation may increase to the extent we grant additional stock options or other stock-based awards.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
There have not been any recent changes in accounting pronouncements and ASU issued by the FASB that are of significance or potential significance to the Company except as disclosed below.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This guidance, among other provisions, eliminates certain exceptions to existing guidance related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also requires an entity to reflect the effect of an enacted change in tax laws or rates in its effective income tax rate in the first interim period that includes the enactment date of the new legislation, aligning the timing of recognition of the effects from enacted tax law changes on the effective income tax rate with the effects on deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Under existing guidance, an entity recognizes the effects of the enacted tax law change on the effective income tax rate in the period that includes the effective date of the tax law. ASU 2019-12 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 did not have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, “Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt-Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options (a consensus of the FASB Emerging Issues Task Force)”. The amendments in this update are effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company is currently evaluating the impact the adoption of this ASU would have on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
See “Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors” for additional information regarding the risks and uncertainties that could affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. New risk factors emerge from time-to-time and it is not possible for us to predict all such risk factors, nor can we assess the impact of all such risk factors on our business or the extent to which any risk factor, or combination of risk factors, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Except as otherwise required by applicable laws, we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements or the risk factors described in this Annual Report, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason after the date of this Annual Report.