Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in this discussion and analysis includes forward looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward looking statements as a result of many factors. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward looking statements, please refer to the “Risk Factors” and the "Information Relating to Forward Looking Statements” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to the “Company,” “Redwire,” “we,” “us” or “our” refer to Redwire Corporation and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided to supplement the consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We intend for this discussion to provide you with information that will assist you in understanding our financial statements and the accompanying notes, the changes in those financial statements and the accompanying notes from period to period, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes. The discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is organized as follows:
● Business Overview: This section provides a general description of our business, our priorities and the trends affecting our industry in order to provide context for management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations.
● Recent Developments: This section provides recent developments that we believe are necessary to understand our financial condition and results of operations.
● Results of Operations: As further explained below, this section provides a discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the periods from February 10, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 and from January 1, 2020 to June 21, 2020.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources: This section provides an analysis of our ability to generate cash and to meet existing or reasonably likely future cash requirements.
● Critical Accounting Estimates: This section discusses the accounting estimates that we consider important to our financial condition and results of operations and that require significant judgment and estimates on the part of management in their application. In addition, our significant accounting policies, including critical accounting policies, are summarized in Note B of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Business Overview
We are a leader in mission critical space solutions and high reliability components for the next generation space economy, with valuable intellectual property for solar power generation and in-space 3D printing and manufacturing. With decades of flight heritage combined with the agile and innovative culture of a commercial space platform, we are uniquely positioned to assist our customers in solving the complex challenges of future space missions.
We manufacture and deliver space infrastructure to our customers. We offer a broad array of products and services, many of which have been enabling space missions since the 1960s and have been flight-proven on over 200 spaceflight missions, including missions such as the GPS constellation, New Horizons and Perseverance. We are also a provider of innovative technologies with the potential to help transform the economics of space and create new markets for its exploration and commercialization. One example of this is our patented suite of in-space manufacturing and robotic assembly technologies (referred to herein as on-orbit servicing, assembly, and manufacturing, or “OSAM”). Other examples of our proprietary technologies include deployable structures, human-rated camera systems and digital engineering.
We have grown organically while also continuing to integrate several acquisitions from a fragmented landscape of space-focused technology companies with innovative capabilities and deep flight heritage. Many of our technologies are flight-proven and have been adopted by a broad range of customers across national security, civil and commercial space. Combining heritage and innovation has enabled us to accelerate the delivery of disruptive technologies.
We believe the space economy is at an inflection point. The reduction of launch costs over the last decade has eliminated the single largest economic barrier to entry for the expanded utilization of space, and the increasing cadence of launches provides more flexible, reliable access. This lower cost access has resulted in both the expansion and modernization of traditional national security and civil uses of space and has enticed new commercial entrants to invest substantial capital to develop new space-based business models. Our goal is to provide a full suite of infrastructure solutions, including mission-critical components, services and systems that will
contribute to a dramatic expansion of the space-based economy. We believe that our products and services are essential to the growth of space as a strategic military and commercial domain, as well as a frontier for science and exploration.
Recent Developments
Executive Summary
In 2021, we drove strong order volume and won significant new business mandates, demonstrating the strength and breadth of our suite of breakout space infrastructure solutions, including critical avionics, navigation systems, advanced payloads, digital engineering and deployable systems. However, uncertainty around the timing of U.S. government funding, and program execution delays related to COVID-19, impacted our customers and programs. In planning 2021, we anticipated making several significant contributions to the development of the Artemis Human Landing System (HLS). However, the single award to SpaceX, protest by Blue Origin and Dynetics, and the subsequent voluntary stay of work by NASA have significantly delayed any work that would have been available to Redwire on that program. This delay and subsequent loss of the protest by our prime contractor teammate, Blue Origin, together with increasing costs associated with transitioning to operating as a publicly listed company, impacted our second half performance.
Business Highlights
•On November 1, 2021, we acquired Techshot Inc., a leader in on-orbit manufacturing, biotechnology in microgravity, and bioprinting needed for commercial space-based biotechnology and pharmaceutical research and development.
•Installed the first of three pairs of patented Roll Out Solar Arrays (“ROSA”) on the International Space Station (“ISS”), which we expect will increase aggregate power on the ISS by more than 30%. Deployment of ROSA and rigid panel solar array technology, with more than 200 kilowatts power, will be utilized for the Double Asteroid Redirection Test (“DART”) NASA planetary defense mission, the Lunar Gateway, and future commercial and Department of Defense satellite projects.
•Partnered with leading space companies on the new Orbital Reef project, a proposed dynamic commercial ecosystem in low Earth orbit (“LEO”). This next-generation space station could leverage Redwire’s capabilities including our ROSA technology, digital engineering, and microgravity manufacturing expertise.
•Completed a successful merger with Genesis Park Acquisition Corp. and began trading on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) on September 3, 2021.
•Demonstrated the feasibility of manufacturing space-enhanced products such as KDP crystals and ceramics via payloads designed and built by Redwire. These technical milestones further demonstrate the potential for developing terrestrial markets for goods manufactured in space.
•Completed a large-scale 3D printing test for the approximately $73.8 million Archinaut One satellite mission, also known as OSAM-2. Archinaut One was established to demonstrate first of its kind in-space 3D printing and robotic assembly of satellites, revolutionizing the approximately $23 billion satellite manufacturing market (according to Research and Markets), by enabling significant capability expansion and launch cost reduction compared to traditional satellites.
•Under contract with NASA, completed preliminary design work on Optimast SCI, a novel in-space manufactured telescope using Archinaut technology, which can spot more asteroids at greater resolutions than the Hubble Telescope.
•Delivered the first two of five contracted navigational and inspection cameras for the Orion Spacecraft production line on NASA’s Artemis program, which is expected to carry the first woman, next man, and other explorers to sustainably explore the Moon’s surface.
•Awarded Firefly Blue Ghost Lunar Lander contract to provide avionics and critical Terrain Relative Navigation systems for NASA’s Artemis program to explore the Moon’s surface.
•Designed and built deployable Link 16 antennas for Tranche 0 of the Space Development Agency’s proliferated LEO satellite constellation, which is expected to deploy over 1,000 satellites over the next decade, ensuring constant world-wide global coverage.
•Selected to provide Virgin Orbit state-of-the-art digital engineering solutions that will support multi-mission planning through systematic analysis and advanced modeling and dynamic mission simulation.
Acquisition Activity
On March 2, 2020, the Company acquired the business unit of Adcole Corporation, Adcole Maryland Aerospace, LLC, which was subsequently renamed Adcole Space, LLC (“Adcole”). Adcole Maryland Aerospace, LLC was established in 2017 after a merger between a division of Adcole Corporation (founded in 1957) and Maryland Aerospace Incorporated and has been at the forefront of space exploration since its early history, providing satellite components that are integral to the mission success of hundreds of LEO, geosynchronous and interplanetary spacecraft. The Company’s core capabilities include the design and manufacture of mission-critical, high reliability optical sensors for satellites providing guidance, navigation, situational awareness and control capabilities. Key products include sun sensors, star trackers and star cameras.
On June 1, 2020, the Company acquired Deep Space Systems, Inc. (“DSS”), which was established in 2001. DSS provides systems engineering that supports the design, development, integration, testing and operations of science and exploration spacecraft. DSS provides critical systems engineering support to next generation space exploration programs such as Dream Chaser and Orion. The Company is a prime contractor on NASA’s Commercial Lunar Payload Services (CLPS) contract.
On June 22, 2020, the Company acquired In Space Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (collectively, “MIS” or “Predecessor”). MIS was established in 2010 and is the industry leader for space manufacturing technologies, delivering next-generation capabilities in orbit to support exploration objectives and national security priorities. As the first commercial company to additively manufacture in space, MIS’s vision is to sustainably develop off-Earth manufacturing capabilities to enable the future of space exploration. With a focus on industrializing the space environment, MIS specializes in on-orbit manufacturing, space-enabled materials development, and exploration manufacturing technology. On August 31, 2020, the Company entered into the Original Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) Loan Agreement for $45.4 million, proceeds of which were primarily used to repay AE for financing the MIS acquisition.
On October 28, 2020, the Company acquired Roccor, LLC (“Roccor”), which was established in 2012. Roccor specializes in deployable structure systems, thermal management systems, and advanced manufacturing in the aerospace industry. Roccor develops a variety of products including solar arrays, antennas and thermal management solutions. Roccor was selected by NASA to develop a first-of-its-kind deployable structure for a nearly 18,000 square foot solar sail that will allow solar scientists to view the sun from different perspectives and stay in orbit longer than ever before. On October 28, 2020, the Company entered into the Adams Street Credit Agreement for a $31.0 million term loan to finance the Roccor acquisition.
On December 11, 2020, the Company acquired LoadPath, LLC (“LoadPath”), which was established in 2009. LoadPath specializes in the development and delivery of aerospace structures, mechanisms, and thermal control solutions, and performs design, analysis, testing and fabrication to advanced technologies through the complete concept-to-flight development cycle. Specific products and services include multiple payload adapters, deployable structures and booms, thermal management technology, spacecraft mechanisms, CubeSat components and launch accommodations, Veritrek, ground support equipment and testing services.
On January 15, 2021, the Company acquired Oakman Aerospace, Inc. (“Oakman”), which was established in 2012. Oakman specializes in the development of Modular Open System Architecture, rapid spacecraft design and development, and custom missions, payloads and applications. Oakman’s proprietary digital engineering modular, open systems software environment, Advanced Configurable Open-system Research Network, ACORN, enables the next generation of digitally engineered spacecraft that helps to optimize the balance between cost and tailor ability in spacecraft design and development. On January 15, 2021, the Company drew $15.0 million on its Adams Street Delayed Draw Term Loan (as defined below) under the Adams Street Credit Agreement to finance the Oakman acquisition.
On February 17, 2021, the Company acquired Deployable Space Systems, Inc. (“DPSS”), which was established in 2008. DPSS’s mission is to develop new and enabling deployable technologies for space applications, transition emerging technologies to industry for infusion into future Department of Defense (“DoD”), NASA and/or commercial programs and design, analyze, build, test and deliver on-time among the deployable solar arrays, deployable structures and space system products. DPSS has developed a one-of-a-kind, patented Roll Out Solar Array (“ROSA”) technology which is a new and innovative mission-enabling rolled flexible blanket solar array system that offers greatly improved performance over state-of-the-art rigid panel solar arrays. On February 17, 2021, the Company amended the Adams Street Credit Agreement to increase the principal amount of the Adams Street Term Loan by an additional $32.0 million to finance the DPSS acquisition.
On November 1, 2021, the Company acquired 100% of the equity interests of Techshot, Inc. (“Techshot”) in exchange for cash and shares of common stock of the Company. Techshot is a biotechnology leader in microgravity, bioprinting, and on-orbit manufacturing needed for commercial space-based research and development. Techshot has developed the first American system capable of manufacturing human tissue in microgravity; a platform containing a set of centrifuges for in-space biological and physical-science research; an experiment processor for biological research and small scale manufacturing in space; and an in-orbit X-ray machine for researching new treatments for osteoporosis and muscle wasting diseases.
Merger with Genesis Park Acquisition Corp. (“GPAC”)
On March 25, 2021, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among GPAC, Shepard Merger Sub Corporation, a Delaware corporation and direct, wholly owned subsidiary of GPAC (“Merger Sub”), Cosmos Intermediate, LLC (“Cosmos”) and AE Red Holdings, LLC formerly known as Redwire, LLC (“Holdings”).
Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, the parties completed a business combination transaction by which, (i) GPAC domesticated as a Delaware corporation in accordance with Section 388 of the Delaware General Corporation Law and the Companies Act of the Cayman Islands (the “Domestication”), (ii) Merger Sub merged with and into Cosmos, with Cosmos being the surviving entity in the merger (the “First Merger”), and (iii) immediately following the First Merger, Cosmos merged with and into GPAC, with GPAC being the surviving entity in the merger (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, the “Mergers” or the “Merger” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Transactions”). In this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we refer to the Domestication and the Transactions, collectively, as the “Merger”.
On September 2, 2021, the Company consummated the Merger. Upon the closing of the Merger, GPAC was renamed to Redwire Corporation. The Merger was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in which GPAC was treated as the acquired company. A reverse recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting, and the consolidated financial statements of the combined entity represent the continuation of the consolidated financial statements of the Company in many respects. MIS was deemed the accounting predecessor and the combined entity is the successor SEC registrant, Redwire.
The aggregate consideration paid to Holdings consisted of a combination of cash and stock. The cash consideration was comprised of $75.0 million (such amount, the “Closing Cash Consideration”). The remainder of the consideration was comprised of (i) 37,200,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of GPAC (the “Closing Share Consideration”) and (ii) 2,000,000 warrants to purchase one share of common stock per warrant (the “Closing Warrant Consideration”), with such amount of warrants corresponding to the forfeiture of certain warrants acquired by GPAC’s Sponsor, Genesis Park Holdings, a Cayman Islands limited liability company and Jefferies LLC in connection with GPAC’s initial public offering. At the effective time of the First Merger, the units of Cosmos were cancelled and automatically deemed for all purposes to represent the right to receive, in the aggregate, the Closing Cash Consideration, the Closing Share Consideration and the Closing Warrant Consideration.
COVID-19 Operational Posture and Impact
We continue to evaluate the ongoing impact of the pandemic. As aerospace manufacturing, communications and defense are federal critical infrastructure sectors, we continue to keep some of our workforce onsite to maintain critical operations. As such, our operations continue to expose our workforce to risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to this exposure, our pandemic crisis response plan remains activated to protect the health and safety of our team members, families, customers, and communities, while continuing to meet our commitments to customers. Our mitigation strategies cover employee preparation, travel, security, supply chain, the ability to work virtually offsite, facility preparation and communications. In doing so, we continue to diligently follow safety protocols, including social distancing, alternating shifts, temperature checks, deep cleaning facilities and employee isolation strategies for essential personnel working at our sites. Additionally, we are encouraging employees to receive COVID-19 vaccinations.
Given the ongoing nature of the outbreak and consequences on the economy, at this time we cannot reasonably estimate the magnitude of the ultimate impact that COVID-19 will have on our business, financial performance, and operating results. The pandemic has caused program execution delays as a result of variant resurgences. Therefore, the near and long-term impacts of the pandemic on the cost and schedule of the numerous programs in our existing backlog and the timing of new awards remains uncertain. We are also observing stress in our supplier base inside and outside the U.S., which is tied to global supply chain constraints, labor shortages and inflationary pressures globally. We will continue to monitor and assess the actual and potential COVID-19 impacts on employees, customers, suppliers and the productivity of the work being done, all of which, to some extent, has and will continue to impact revenues, estimated costs to complete projects, earnings and cash flow.
Results of Operations
The following periods are presented in the results of operations:
•the year ended December 31, 2021 (the “Successor 2021 Period”), which includes the results of Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor and LoadPath from the beginning of the period as well as 2021 acquisitions Oakman, DPSS and Techshot from their respective acquisition dates;
•the period from February 10, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020 (the “Successor 2020 Period”), which includes the results of Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor and LoadPath from their respective acquisition dates; and
•the period from January 1, 2020 to June 21, 2020 (the “Predecessor 2020 Period”), which only includes the results of MIS.
MIS was identified as the Predecessor through an analysis of various factors, including the size, financial characteristics, ongoing management, and order in which the acquired entities were acquired. As a result, financial information of the Predecessor and Successor periods have been prepared under two different bases of accounting and therefore are not comparable.
Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 compared to the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to June 21, 2020
The following table presents our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the Successor Period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 and the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to June 21, 2020, along with the percentage of revenues and the dollar and percent change compared to the Successor 2020 Period:
Revenues
Revenues increased by $96.8 million, or 237%, for the Successor 2021 Period compared to the Successor 2020 Period. The increase in revenues was primarily driven by 2021 acquisitions of $32.8 million, organic revenue growth from a full year of operations on 2020 acquisitions of $51.4 million, as well as new contracts and modifications to expand existing contracts awarded. The 2021 acquisitions included Oakman, DPSS and Techshot, while the 2020 acquisitions included Adcole, DSS, Roccor and LoadPath after their respective acquisition dates. MIS revenues are included in all periods presented.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenues was 79% for the Successor 2021 Period, as compared to 80% for the Successor 2020 Period and 76% for the Predecessor 2020 Period. The increase in cost of sales in the Successor 2021 Period compared to the Successor 2020 Period was primarily driven by 2021 acquisitions of $25.4 million, organic growth from a full year of operations on 2020 acquisitions of $36.0 million. Organic cost of sales increased primarily due to equity-based compensation expense of $2.1 million and high costs incurred for our largest contract during the Predecessor 2020 Period, the Archinaut One contract, contributed to a higher gross profit margin than usual, compared to historical margins for the product mix at this business unit.
Selling, General and Administrative
SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenues for the Successor 2021 Period were 57%, as compared to 32% for the Successor 2020 Period and the Predecessor 2020 Period. Of the 501% increase in SG&A in the Successor 2021 Period compared to the Successor 2020 Period, equity-based compensation expense in the Successor 2021 Period relating to the vesting of the Class P Units Incentive Plan and shares granted under the Company’s long-term incentive plan contributed $25.0 million of the SG&A increase. The acquisitions of Oakman, DPSS and Techshot contributed $8.9 million of the increase in SG&A compared to the Successor 2020 Period. In the Successor 2021 Period, higher spending for human capital and systems as we invested in our business development and centralized corporate functions at the beginning of the year to support near and long-term growth contributed $1.4 million of the SG&A increase compared to the Successor 2020 Period. In addition, higher expenses related to the capital market and advisory fees incurred for public company readiness contributed $7.7 million of the SG&A increase compared to the Successor 2020 Period. The remaining $22.6 million of the SG&A increase primarily relates to increased payroll costs from expanding the workforce and increased professional fees.
Contingent Earnout Expense
Contingent earnout expense as a percentage of revenues for the Successor 2021 Period was 8%, as compared to 0% for the Successor 2020 Period and Predecessor 2020 Period. Contingent earnout expense in the Successor 2021 Period related to a settlement agreement executed with the sellers of MIS regarding the contingent earnout payment set forth in the purchase agreement and the Roccor contingent earnout payment of which there was no comparable cost incurred in the Successor 2020 Period and Predecessor 2020 Period. Refer to Note C of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Transaction Expenses
Transaction expenses as a percentage of revenues for the Successor 2021 Period were 4%, as compared to 24% for the Successor 2020 Period and 0% for the Predecessor 2020 Period. The transaction expenses incurred in the Successor 2021 Period were primarily related to the acquisition of Oakman, DPSS and Techshot. The transaction expenses incurred in the Successor 2020 Period were related to the acquisitions of Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor and LoadPath, as well as costs associated with our evaluation of other acquisition opportunities. There was no comparable cost incurred during the Predecessor 2020 period. We expect to incur acquisition costs and other related expenses periodically in the future as we continue to seek acquisition opportunities to expand our technological capabilities. Transaction costs incurred by the acquired entities prior to the consummation of an acquisition are not reflected in our historical results of operations.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses as a percentage of revenues for the Successor 2021 Period were 3%, as compared to 5% for the Successor 2020 Period and 2% for the Predecessor 2020 Period. The decrease was related to varying spending in research and development projects. Our primary research and development projects relate to the next generation star tracker, camera systems, and software applications.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net as a percentage of revenues for the Successor 2021 Period was 5%, as compared to 3% for the Successor 2020 Period and less than 1% for the Predecessor 2020 Period. The interest expense, net incurred for the Successor 2021 Period was primarily related to us entering into the September 2, 2021 amendment to the Adams Street Capital Credit Agreement to increase the principal amount of the Adams Street Term Loan, as further discussed in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section. The interest expense, net incurred for the Predecessor 2020 Period related to credit agreements with outstanding balances repaid prior to the acquisition of MIS.
Other (Income) Expense, net
Other (income) expense, net as a percentage of revenues was 3% for the Successor 2021 Period, while the Successor 2020 Period and Predecessor 2020 Period were both less than 1%. The increase in other (income) expense, net is primarily related to a gain recognized as a result of a decrease in the private warrant liability of $2.6 million during the Successor 2021 Period. Refer to Note P of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. The remaining increase was related to a gain of $1.0 million recognized in conjunction with a favorable legal settlement that was reached in the fourth quarter of the Successor 2021 Period.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) as a percentage of revenues for the Successor 2021 Period was 8%, as compared to 9% for the Successor 2020 Period and 2% for the Predecessor 2020 Period.
The table below provides information regarding our income tax expense (benefit) for the following periods:
The decrease in our effective tax rate for the Successor 2021 Period compared to the Successor 2020 and the Predecessor 2020 Period is primarily due to the impact of equity-based compensation, nondeductible transaction costs and earnout expense. Refer to Note L of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion.
Results of operations for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 compared to the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to June 21, 2020 compared to the Predecessor results for the year ended December 31, 2019
For a comparison of our historical results of operations for the Successor period from February 10, 2020 to December 31, 2020 compared to the Predecessor period from January 1, 2020 to June 21, 2020 compared to the Predecessor results for the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to the section entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in the prospectus filed on October 4, 2021.
Supplemental Non-GAAP Information
We use certain financial measures to evaluate our operating performance, generate future operating plans, and make strategic decisions, including those relating to operating expenses and the allocation of internal resources which are not calculated in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and are considered to be Non-GAAP financial performance measures. These Non-GAAP financial performance measures are used to supplement the financial information presented on a U.S. GAAP basis and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the relevant U.S. GAAP measures and should be read in conjunction with information presented on a U.S. GAAP basis. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of Non-GAAP measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA and Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA are two such Non-GAAP financial measures that we use. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) adjusted for interest expense (income), net, income tax (benefit) expense, depreciation and amortization, acquisition costs, acquisition integration costs, purchase accounting fair value adjustment related to deferred revenue, capital market and advisory fees, write-off of long-lived assets, and equity-based compensation. Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA is computed to give effect to the business combinations as if they occurred on January 1 of the year in which they were acquired.
The table below presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA and Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP for the following periods:
i.Redwire incurred acquisition costs including due diligence and integration costs.
ii.Redwire incurred acquisition costs related to the Roccor and MIS contingent earnout payments.
iii.Redwire incurred purchase accounting fair value adjustments to unwind deferred revenue for Adcole, MIS, Roccor, and DPSS.
iv.Redwire incurred capital market and advisory fees related to advisors assisting with preparation for the Merger.
v.Redwire incurred write-off costs for long-lived assets at Adcole related to the write-off of leasehold improvements when Adcole moved office locations.
vi.Redwire incurred expenses related to the securities litigation as further described in Note N of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements.
vii.Redwire incurred expenses related to equity-based compensation under Redwire’s equity-based compensation plan.
viii.Redwire adjusted the fair value of the private warrants between the initial valuation as of September 2, 2021, the date the warrants were assumed, and December 31, 2021.
ix.Pro forma impact represents the incremental results of a full period of operations assuming the entities acquired during the periods presented were acquired from January 1 of the year in which they occurred. For the year ended December 31, 2021 the pro forma impact included Oakman from January 1, 2021 to January 15, 2021, DPSS from January 1, 2021 to February 17, 2021, and Techshot from January 1, 2021 to November 1, 2021 and for the year ended December 31, 2020 the pro forma impact includes Adcole from January 1, 2020 to March 2, 2020, DSS from January 1, 2020 to June 1, 2020, MIS from January 1, 2020 to June 22, 2020, Roccor from January 1, 2020 to October 28, 2020 and LoadPath from January 1, 2020 to December 11, 2020.
Key Performance Indicators
Book-to-bill Ratio
Book-to-bill is the ratio of total contract awarded to revenues recorded in the same period. The contracts awarded balance includes firm contract orders including time and material contracts which were awarded during the period and does not include unexercised contract options or potential orders under indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contracts. Although the contracts awarded balance reflects firm contract orders, terminations, amendments, or contract cancellations may occur which could result in a reduction to the contracts awarded balance.
We view book-to-bill as an indicator of future revenue growth potential. To drive future revenue growth, our goal is for the level of contract awarded in a given period to exceed the revenue recorded, thus yielding a book-to-bill ratio greater than 1.0.
Our book-to-bill ratio was as follows for the periods presented:
Our book-to-bill ratio was 1.13 for the Successor 2021 Period, as compared to 0.56 for the Successor 2020 Period and 0.49 for the Predecessor 2020 Period. In the Successor 2021 Period, $41.5 million of the contracts awarded balance relates to acquired contract value from the Oakman, DPSS, and Techshot acquisitions. In the Successor 2020 Period, $22.7 million of the contracts awarded balance relates to acquired contract value from the Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor, and LoadPath acquisitions.
The increase in contract awarded value in the Successor 2021 Period, compared to the Successor 2020 Period (which includes only Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor, and LoadPath), and the Predecessor 2020 Period, is due to inclusion of contracts awarded to Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor, LoadPath, Oakman, DPSS, and Techshot.
Backlog
We view growth in backlog as a key measure of our business growth. Contracted backlog represents the estimated dollar value of firm funded executed contracts for which work has not been performed (also known as the remaining performance obligations on a contract). Our contracted backlog includes $10.7 million and $4.3 million in remaining contract value from time and materials contracts as of December 31, 2021 and as of December 31, 2020, respectively.
Organic contracted backlog change excludes backlog activity from acquisitions for the first four full quarters since the entities’ acquisition date. Contracted backlog activity for the first four full quarters since the entities’ acquisition date is included in acquisition-related contracted backlog change. After the completion of four fiscal quarters, acquired entities are treated as organic for current and comparable historical periods.
Organic contract value includes the remaining contract value as of January 1 not yet recognized as revenue and additional orders awarded during the period for those entities treated as organic. Acquisition-related contract value includes remaining contract value as of the acquisition date not yet recognized as revenue and additional orders awarded during the period for entities not treated as organic. Similarly, organic revenue includes revenue earned during the period presented for those entities treated as organic, while
acquisition-related revenue includes the same for all other entities, excluding any pre-acquisition revenue earned during the period. The Predecessor 2020 Period is treated as organic below to ensure comparability of acquisition-related contracted backlog for future reporting periods.
The acquisition-related contracted backlog activity in the Successor 2021 Period includes contracted backlog activity of Oakman, DPSS, and Techshot. The organic contracted backlog activity in the Successor 2021 Period includes contracted backlog activity of Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor, and LoadPath. Contracted backlog increased during the Successor 2021 period primarily due to the acquisitions of Oakman, DPSS, and Techshot, offset by a decrease in organic contracted backlog related to higher organic revenue than organic additions during the period.
The organic contracted backlog activity for the year ended December 31, 2020 includes the contracted backlog activity of MIS during the Predecessor 2020 Period and the contracted backlog activity of Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor, and LoadPath during the Successor 2020 period.
Although contracted backlog reflects business associated with contracts that are considered to be firm, terminations, amendments or contract cancellations may occur, which could result in a reduction in our total backlog. In addition, some of our multi-year contracts are subject to annual funding. Management fully expects all amounts reflected in contracted backlog to ultimately be fully funded. Contracted backlog related to contracts from MIS operations in Luxembourg of $5.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and $8.6 million as of December 31, 2020 is subject to foreign exchange rate conversions from euros to U.S. dollars that could cause the remaining backlog balance to fluctuate with the foreign exchange rate at the time of measurement.
Our total backlog as of December 31, 2021, which includes both contracted and uncontracted backlog, was $271.6 million. Uncontracted backlog represents the anticipated contract value, or portion thereof, of goods and services to be delivered under existing contracts which have not been appropriated or otherwise authorized. Our uncontracted backlog as of December 31, 2021 was $131.9 million. Uncontracted backlog includes $67.8 million of contract extensions under negotiation that are priced, fully scoped, verbally awarded, and expected to be executed shortly.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows provided by our operations, access to existing credit facilities and proceeds from the Merger. Prior to becoming a public company, in the Successor 2020 period, AE Industrial Partners provided an additional source of liquidity to facilitate the purchase of Adcole, DSS and MIS.
Since its inception, the Company has incurred net losses and negative operating cash flow, and has used its cash to fund capital expenditures, costs associated with the Company’s acquisitions, and costs associated with the Merger, among other uses. While some of these cash outflows have been non-recurring in nature, the Company has continued to experience net cash outflows from operating activities. While the Company believes its continued growth and cash flow management will result in improvements in cash from operating activities going forward, there can be no assurance these improvements will be achieved.
Our primary short-term cash requirements are to fund working capital, operating lease obligations, and short-term debt, including current maturities of long-term debt. Working capital requirements can vary significantly from period to period, particularly as a result of the timing of receipts and disbursements related to long-term contracts. Significant fluctuations in working capital could adversely impact the Company’s cash position and short-term liquidity needs.
Our medium-term to long-term cash requirements are to service and repay debt, expand our breadth and footprint through acquisitions as well as invest in facilities, equipment, technologies, and research and development for our growth initiatives. To support these initiatives, we expect to continue to make significant investments in our business, including hiring additional staff, implementing processes and procedures to address public company requirements and other customary practices as well as evaluating strategic acquisitions. As a result, we will likely incur additional operating expenses and capital expenditures.
Our ability to fund our cash needs is dependent upon the successful execution of our business strategy and future operating results. Our future operating results are subject to, among others, general economic conditions, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, competitive dynamics in our target markets as well as legislative and regulatory factors that may be outside of our control. As part of our business and debt management strategy, we continuously evaluate opportunities to further strengthen our financial and liquidity position including the issuance of additional equity or debt securities, refinance or otherwise restructure our existing credit facilities, or enter into new financing arrangements. In addition, the Company has identified a plan to execute certain cost reduction actions including, among others, integration-related workforce rationalizations, real estate synergies, business unit optimization initiatives, and cost savings associated with certain Corporate level employment costs. There can be no assurances that any of these actions will be sufficient to allow us to service our debt obligations, meet our debt covenants, or that such actions will not result in an adverse impact on our business.
As of December 31, 2021, our available liquidity totaled $25.5 million, which was comprised of $20.5 million in cash and cash equivalents, and $5.0 million in available borrowings from our existing credit facilities. As further disclosed below, on March 25, 2022, our existing credit facilities were amended to, among other things, increase commitments under the revolving credit facility to $25.0 million. We believe that our existing sources of liquidity will be sufficient to meet our working capital needs and comply with our debt covenants for at least the next twelve months from the date on which our consolidated financial statements were issued. However, the Company’s current liquidity may not be sufficient to meet the required long-term liquidity needs associated with continued use of cash from operating activities at historical levels, in addition to its other liquidity needs associated with its capital expenditures, debt payments, and other investing and financing requirements.
The table below summarizes our outstanding debt as of the following periods:
Adams Street Credit Agreement
On October 28, 2020, we entered into the Adams Street Credit Agreement, which included the following:
i.$31.0 million term loan (the “Adams Street Term Loan”). Proceeds from the Adams Street Term Loan were used to finance the acquisition of Roccor, pay acquisition-related costs, fund working capital needs (including the payment of any working capital adjustment pursuant to the Roccor acquisition agreement) and other general corporate purposes;
ii.$5.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Adams Street Revolving Credit Facility”); and
iii.$15.0 million delayed draw term loan (the “Adams Street Delayed Draw Term Loan”).
On January 15, 2021, we drew $15.0 million on the delayed draw term loan to finance the Oakman acquisition. On February 17, 2021, we amended the Adams Street Credit Agreement to increase the principal amount of the Adams Street Term Loan by an additional $32.0 million to finance the DPSS acquisition. On July 30, 2021, we drew $3.0 million on the revolving credit facility and repaid the $3.0 million draw down on September 23, 2021.
On September 2, 2021, the Adams Street Credit Agreement was amended to provide that the consolidated total net leverage ratio not exceed 6.50:1.00 on the last day of any quarter (“the Financial Covenant”), to remove the cap on the amount of unrestricted cash which may be netted for purposes of the Financial Covenant, to redefine “Consolidated EBITDA”, and to reset the call protection terms.
The Adams Street Credit Agreement has a maturity date of October 28, 2026. The Adams Street Credit Agreement is secured by a first lien security interest in all right, title or interest in or to certain assets and properties owned by us and the guarantors included in the Adams Street Credit Agreement. The Adams Street Credit Agreement requires us to meet customary affirmative and negative covenants, default provisions, representations and warranties and other terms and conditions. We are required to make mandatory prepayments of the outstanding principal and accrued interest under the Adams Street Credit Agreement (i) upon the occurrence of certain events and (ii) to the extent a specified net leverage ratio is exceeded as evaluated on any test period ending date. The test period ending dates are March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 each year, starting on March 31, 2021, through the maturity of the agreement.
In December 2021, the Company entered into a Consent to Credit Agreement whereby Adams Street Capital agreed to an extension of the delivery of periodic financials required under the Adams Street Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with our debt covenants under the Adams Street Credit Agreement.
On March 25, 2022, Redwire Holdings, LLC, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (the “Lead Borrower”), and certain other subsidiaries of the Company party thereto, entered into a Third Amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Adams Street Capital Credit Agreement to, among other things, increase commitments under the revolving credit facility from $5.0 million to $25.0 million.
The Amendment also modified certain negative covenants and increased the per annum interest rate (i) with respect to revolving loans in an aggregate principal amount of $5.0 million or less, to 6.00% for Eurocurrency rate loans and 5.00% for Base Rate Loans, and (ii) with respect to revolving loans in an aggregate principal amount in excess of $5.0 million, to 7.50% for Eurocurrency rate loans and 6.50% for Base Rate Loans.
The Adams Street Capital Credit Agreement, as amended, contains certain customary representations and warranties, affirmative and other covenants and events of default, including among other things, payment defaults, breach of representations and warranties, and covenant defaults.
In connection with the entry into the Amendment, AEI and certain of its affiliates (the “AEI Guarantors”), provided a limited guarantee for the payment of outstanding revolving loans in excess of $10.0 million, with a $15.0 million cap in the aggregate. In the event that the AEI Guarantors are required to make payments to the lenders under the Adams Street Capital Credit Agreement pursuant to the terms of the limited guarantee, each AEI Guarantor would be subrogated to the rights of the lenders. In connection with the limited guarantee, the Lead Borrower agreed to pay to the AEI Guarantors, a fee equal to 2% of any amount actually paid by such guarantors under the limited guarantee. The fee is waivable by the AEI Guarantors in their discretion.
SVB Loan Agreement
On August 31, 2020, we entered into a $45.4 million loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank (the “Original SVB Loan Agreement”) maturing on August 31, 2021, which was subsequently modified on October 28, 2020 to (i) increase the available commitment by $5.7 million and (ii) pay $0.6 million toward the outstanding principal under the Original SVB Loan Agreement. This resulted in a modified loan (the “SVB Loan Agreement”) for $50.5 million. On October 30, 2020, we made a $4.0 million principal payment. On April 2, 2021, we extended the maturity date to September 30, 2022.
On September 2, 2021, we repaid the full outstanding principal and interest of $41.6 million on the SVB Loan.
DSS Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On May 1, 2020, prior to the DSS Acquisition, DSS received a Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan for $1.1 million (the “DSS PPP Loan”), with a maturity date of May 1, 2022. Under the terms of the DSS PPP Loan, DSS could apply for forgiveness under the PPP regulations if DSS used the proceeds of the loan for its payroll costs and other expenses in accordance with the requirements of the PPP. As the funds were disbursed to DSS prior to the acquisition, the Company intended to repay any unforgiven balance with funds held in a DSS savings account as of the date of the DSS acquisition. On June 18, 2021, $0.6 million of the DSS PPP Loan was forgiven and as a result reclassified as a note payable to the seller of DSS. During the Successor 2021 Period, we repaid the $0.6 million note payable to the seller of DSS and the remaining outstanding principal and interest of $0.5 million on the DSS PPP loan.
D&O Financing Loan
On September 3, 2021, we entered into a $3.0 million loan with BankDirect Capital Finance (the “D&O Financing Loan”) to finance our directors and officers insurance premium. The D&O Financing Loan has an interest rate of 1.74% per annum, an effective interest rate of 1.75%, and a maturity date of May 3, 2022.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021:
The Company is obligated under certain operating leases for its facilities and office equipment. Certain facility leases contain predetermined fixed escalation of minimum rents at rates ranging from 1.96% to 4.00% per annum and renewal options that could extend certain leases up to an additional nine years; the office equipment lease contains a renewal option that could extend the lease to consecutive 60-day terms and a purchase option. As of December 31, 2021, the future annual minimum lease payments for operating leases for the year 2022 was estimated at $4.3 million with estimated aggregate minimum lease payments of $26.3 million through expiration of current leases. Refer to Note K of the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information.
Cash Flows
The table below summarizes certain information from the consolidated statements of cash flows for the following periods:
Operating activities
For the Successor 2021 Period, net cash used in operating activities was $37.4 million. Net loss before deducting depreciation, amortization and other non-cash items generated a cash outflow of $27.8 million and was further impacted by an unfavorable change in net working capital of $9.5 million during this period. The unfavorable change in net working capital was largely driven by increase in accounts receivable of $6.8 million, contract assets of $5.0 million, prepaid insurance of $2.8 million, and decrease in deferred revenue of $4.5 million and notes payable of $0.6 million, offset by the increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $10.4 million. The change in prepaid insurance relates to the Company’s directors and officers insurance policy purchased and prepaid during the Successor 2021 Period, and the changes in accounts receivable, contract assets and deferred revenue relates to the timing of billable milestones occurring during the Successor 2021 Period. The change in accounts payable and accrued expenses is primarily a result of increase accrued payroll related costs and accounts payable due to acquisitions during the Successor 2021 period.
For the Successor 2020 Period, net cash used by operating activities was $15.7 million. Net loss before deducting depreciation, amortization and other non-cash items generated a cash outflow of $14 million and was further impacted by an unfavorable change in net working capital of $1.7 million during this period. The unfavorable change in net working capital was largely driven by the decrease in other liabilities of $5.7 million, increase in prepaid and other current assets of $0.6 million and accounts receivable of $1.6 million, offset by an increase in deferred revenue of $3.6 million and increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2.6 million. The changes in accounts receivable and deferred revenue relates to the timing of billable milestones occurring during the
Successor 2020 Period.
For the Predecessor 2020 Period, net cash provided by operating activities was $3.2 million. Net loss before deducting depreciation, amortization and other non-cash items generated a cash outflow of $0.1 million while favorable changes in net working capital of $3.3 million contributed to operating cash flows during this period. The favorable change in net working capital was largely driven by the increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $4.6 million.
Investing activities
For the Successor 2021 Period, net cash used in investing activities was $38.5 million, consisting of $40.6 million used for the acquisitions of Oakman, DPSS and Techshot, as well as $2.1 million used for the purchase of property, plant and equipment. This was partially offset by $4.9 million of cash received related to the settlement of a related party receivable.
For the Successor 2020 Period, net cash used in investing activities was $85.3 million, consisting of $79.5 million used for the acquisition of Adcole, DSS, MIS, Roccor and LoadPath and $4.9 million used for advances to related parties as well as $0.9 million used for the purchase of property, plant and equipment.
For the Predecessor 2020 Period, net cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million, consisting of the purchase of property, plant and equipment.
Financing activities
For the Successor 2021 Period, net cash provided by financing activities was $74.2 million, consisting of proceeds from debt of $53.0 million and proceeds from the Merger of $110.6 million offset by repayment of debt of $52.8 million and Merger costs of $35.9 million.
For the Successor 2020 Period, net cash provided by financing activities was $122.7 million, consisting of proceeds from debt of $81.3 million and Holdings’ contribution of $46.1 million offset by the repayment of debt of $4.7 million.
For the Predecessor 2020 Period, net cash provided by financing activities was $1.4 million, consisting of proceeds from long-term debt of $1.5 million offset by repayment of long-term debt of $0.1 million.
Foreign Currency Exposures
There were no material changes to our foreign currency exposures that occurred in the periods covered by this report.
Critical Accounting Estimates
For the critical accounting estimates used in preparing our consolidated financial statements, we make assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on net revenues, cost and expenses, and other expense (income), net, in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss), as well as, on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
In accordance with the Company’s policies, we regularly evaluate estimates, assumptions, and judgments; our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are based on historical experience and on factors we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results involve judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities not readily apparent from other sources. If our assumptions or conditions change, the actual results the Company reports may differ from these estimates. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect the more significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments the Company uses to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
Business Combinations
Under the acquisition method of accounting, the Company recognizes tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at acquisition date. The accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to goodwill, intangible assets, and contingent consideration.
Goodwill
The Company recognizes the goodwill for business combinations in which the acquisition method of accounting is applied, whereby the excess of the purchase consideration over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired and liabilities assumed is allocated to goodwill. The goodwill reflects the potential synergies and expansion of the Company’s offerings across product lines and markets complementary to its existing products and markets.
The Company assesses goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below an operating segment. Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as of October 1, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate the carrying value may be impaired. In circumstances where a qualitative analysis indicates that the fair value of a reporting unit does not exceed its carrying value, a quantitative analysis is performed using an income approach. The Company performed the qualitative assessment for each of the three reporting units on October 1, 2021 and did not find any indicators that the fair value is more likely than not below the carrying value.
As such, the quantitative assessment was not required, and no goodwill impairment was recognized for the Successor 2021 Period.
In circumstances where a quantitative assessment is performed, the discounted cash flow approach requires management to make certain assumptions based upon information available at the time the valuations are performed. Actual results could differ from these assumptions.
Additional risks for goodwill across all reporting units include, but are not limited to:
•our failure to reach our internal forecasts could impact our ability to achieve our forecasted levels of cash flows and reduce the estimated discounted value of our reporting units;
•adverse technological events that could impact our performance;
•volatility in equity and debt markets resulting in higher discount rates; and
•significant adverse changes in the regulatory environment or markets in which we operate.
It is not possible at this time to determine if an impairment charge would result from these factors. We will continue to monitor our goodwill for potential impairment indicators in future periods.
Intangible Assets
Identifiable finite-lived intangible assets, including technology, trademarks, and customer relationships, have been acquired through the Company’s various business combinations. The fair value of the acquired trademarks, technology, and customer relationships has been estimated using various underlying judgments, assumptions, and estimates. Potential changes in the underlying judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in our valuations of acquired intangible assets could result in different estimates of the future fair values. A potential increase in discount rates, a reduction in projected cash flows or a combination of the two could lead to a reduction in estimated fair values, which may result in impairment charges that could materially affect our financial statements in any given year. The approaches used for determining the fair value of finite-lived technology, trademarks and customer relationships acquired depends on the circumstances; the Company has used the income approach (within the income approach, various methods are available such as multi-period excess earnings, with and without, incremental and relief from royalty methods). Within each income approach method, a tax amortization benefit is included, which represents the tax benefit resulting from the amortization of that intangible asset depending on the tax jurisdiction where the intangible asset is held.
Finite-lived intangible assets are reported at cost, net of accumulated amortization, and are either amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives or over the period the economic benefits of the intangible asset are consumed. Significant judgment is also required in assigning the respective useful lives of intangible assets. Our assessment of intangible assets that have a finite life is based on a number of factors including the competitive environment, market share, brand history, underlying product life cycles, attrition rate, operating plans, cash flows (i.e., economic life based on the discounted and undiscounted cash flows), future usage of intangible assets and the macroeconomic environment. The costs of finite-lived intangible assets are amortized to expense over the estimated useful life.
Contingent Consideration
We record contingent consideration resulting from a business combination at its fair value on the acquisition date. The fair value of any contingent consideration is calculated considering the probability of occurrence of an earnout payment. The fair value of contingent consideration is estimated using the Black-Scholes options pricing model, which uses assumptions such as a risk-free interest rates, discount rates and volatility rates.
Revenue Recognition
The recognition and measurement of revenue requires the use of judgments and estimates. Specifically, judgment is used in interpreting complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions and determining when all criteria for revenue recognition have been met. The Company’s revenues are derived from the sales of products and services.
The Company engages in long-term contracts for production and service activities and recognizes revenue for performance obligations over time. The Company’s contracts generally do not contain penalties, credits, price concessions or other types of potential variable consideration. Prices are fixed at contract inception and are not contingent on performance or any other criteria. Revenue is recognized over time (versus point in time recognition), due to the fact that the Company’s performance creates an asset with no alternative use to the Company and the Company has an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. The Company considers the nature of these contracts and the types of products and services provided when determining the proper accounting for a particular contract. These contracts include both fixed-price and cost reimbursable contracts. The Company’s cost reimbursable contracts typically include cost-plus fixed fee and time and material (“T&M”) contracts. The portion of the payments retained by the customer or advance payment is not considered a significant financing component because it is used to facilitate inventory demands at the onset of a contract and to safeguard the Company from the failure of the other party to abide by some or all of their obligations under the contract.
The Company recognizes revenue over time using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress. Under the cost-to-cost method, revenue is recognized based on the proportion of total costs incurred to estimated total costs-at-completion (“EAC”). An EAC includes all direct costs and indirect costs directly attributable to a program or allocable based on our program cost pooling arrangements. Estimates regarding the Company’s cost associated with the design, manufacture and delivery of products and services are used in determining the EAC. Changes in EAC are applied retrospectively and when adjustments in estimated contract costs are identified, such revisions may result in current period adjustments to earnings applicable to performance in prior periods. For acquisitions that occurred in the Successor 2020 Period, contracts recognized under the cost-to-cost method were reset as of the date of acquisition to calculate prospective periods using the contract value and estimated costs to complete as of the acquisition date rather than the contract value and estimated costs to complete since inception of the contract. Effective January 1, 2021, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2021-08, “Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers.” Accordingly, for acquisitions in the Successor 2021 Period, contracts were recognized and measured in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” which does not prescribe a reset as of the date of acquisition. For T&M contracts, the Company recognizes revenue reflecting the number of direct labor hours expended in the performance of a contract multiplied by the contract billing rate, as well as reimbursement of other direct billable costs.
Our cost estimation process is based on the professional knowledge of our engineering, program management and financial professionals and draws on their significant experience and judgment. We prepare EACs for our contracts and calculate estimated revenues and costs over the life of our contracts. Accounting for long-term contracts requires significant judgment relative to estimating total contract revenues and costs, in particular, assumptions relative to the amount of time to complete the contract, including the assessment of the nature and complexity of the work to be performed. The Company’s estimates are based upon the professional knowledge and experience of its engineers, program managers and other personnel, who review each long-term contract monthly to assess the contract’s schedule, performance, technical matters and estimated cost at completion. For acquisitions that occurred in the Successor 2020 Period, changes in estimates are applied retrospectively for contracts executed after the date of acquisition and are applied via the ASC 805 reset method described above for contracts existing at the date of acquisition. Subsequent to the adoption of ASU 2021-08, all changes in estimates are retrospectively applied. When adjustments in estimated contract costs are identified, such revisions may result in current period adjustments to earnings applicable to performance in prior periods.
Factors considered in these estimates include our historical performance, the availability, productivity and cost of labor, the nature and complexity of work to be performed, availability and cost of materials, components and subcontracts, the risk and impact of delayed performance and the level of indirect cost allocations.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company evaluates the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If a long-lived asset is tested for recoverability and the undiscounted estimated future cash flows to which the asset relates is less than the carrying amount of the asset, the asset cost is adjusted to fair value and an impairment loss is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. No such impairment charges were recognized during the periods presented.
Using a discounted cash flow method involves significant judgment and requires the Company to make significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of cash flows, market conditions and appropriate discount rates. Judgments are based on historical experience, current market trends, consultations with external valuation specialists and other information. If facts and circumstances change, the use of different estimates and assumptions could result in a materially different outcome. The Company generally develops these forecasts based on recent sales data for existing products, acquisitions, and estimated future growth of the market in which it operates.
Income Taxes
Significant judgments are required in order to determine the realizability of tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we evaluate all significant available positive and negative evidence, including historical operating results, estimates of future sources of taxable income, carry-forward periods available, the existence of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies and other relevant factors. The Company recognizes a tax benefit only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement.
Warrants
As part of the Merger, public warrants were established as equity and private warrants were established as a liability. Classification of the public warrants as equity instruments and the private warrants as liability instruments is based on management’s analysis of the guidance in ASC 815 Derivatives and Hedging and in a statement issued by the Staff of the SEC regarding the accounting and reporting considerations for warrants issued by special purpose acquisition companies entitled “Staff Statement on Accounting and Reporting Considerations for Warrants Issued by Special Purpose Acquisition Companies.” Management determined that while the public warrants meet the definition of a derivative, they meet the equity scope exception in ASC 815-10-15-74(a) to be classified in stockholders’ equity and are not subject to remeasurement provided that the Company continues to meet the criteria for equity classification. Management considered whether the private warrants display the three characteristics of a derivative under ASC 815, and concluded that the private warrants meet the definition of a derivative. However, the private warrants fail to meet the equity scope exception in ASC 815-10-15-74(a) and thus are classified as a liability measured at fair value, subject to remeasurement at each reporting period. The Company measures the private warrant liability at fair value each reporting period with the change in fair value recorded as other (income) expense, net in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). The Company measured the public warrants at the fair value of the equity instruments as of the date of the Merger.