Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our financial statements and related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We are the world’s largest online marketplace for the resale of authenticated luxury goods. We are revolutionizing luxury resale by providing an end-to-end service that unlocks supply from consignors and creates a trusted, curated online marketplace for buyers globally. Since our inception in 2011, we have cultivated a loyal and engaged consignor and buyer base through our investments in our technology platform, logistics infrastructure and people. We offer a wide selection of authenticated, primarily pre-owned luxury goods on our online marketplace bearing the brands of thousands of luxury and premium designers. We offer products across multiple categories including women’s and men’s fashion, fine jewelry and watches, and home and art. We have built a vibrant online marketplace that we believe expands the overall luxury market, promotes the recirculation of luxury goods and contributes to a more sustainable world.
We have transformed the luxury consignment experience by removing the friction and pain points inherent in the traditional consignment model. For consignors, we offer concierge at-home consultation and pickup, subject to safety requirements related to the COVID pandemic, and meetings with consignors via online face-to-face platforms, or Virtual Consultations. Consignors may also drop off items at our luxury consignment offices. Our Flagship and Neighborhood Stores provide an alternative location to drop off consigned items and an opportunity to interact with our experts. Consignors may also utilize our complimentary shipping directly to our authentication centers. We leverage our proprietary transactional database and market insights from approximately 23.0 million item sales since inception to deliver optimal pricing and rapid sell-through. For buyers, we offer highly coveted and exclusive authenticated pre-owned luxury goods at attractive values, as well as a high-quality experience befitting the products we offer. Our online marketplace is powered by our proprietary technology platform, including consumer facing applications and purpose-built software that supports our complex, single-SKU inventory management system.
The substantial majority of our revenue is generated by consignment sales. We also generate revenue from other services and direct sales.
•Consignment and service revenue. When we sell goods through our online marketplace or retail stores on behalf of our consignors, we retain a percentage of the proceeds, which we refer to as our take rate. Take rates vary depending on the total value of goods sold through our online marketplace on behalf of a particular consignor as well as the category and price point of the items. In 2021 and 2020, our take rate on consigned goods was 34.7% and 35.7% respectively. The decrease in our take rate was due to the higher sales mix of lower take rate categories such as handbags and jewelry. Additionally, we earn revenue from shipping fees and from our subscription program, First Look, in which we offer buyers early access to the items we sell in exchange for a monthly fee.
•Direct revenue. In certain cases, such as when we accept out of policy returns from buyers, or when we make direct purchases from businesses and consignors, we take ownership of goods and retain 100% of the proceeds when the goods subsequently sell through our online marketplace or retail stores.
We generate revenue from orders processed through our website, mobile app and 19 retail locations. Our omni-channel experience enables buyers to purchase anytime and anywhere. We have a global base of more than 25
million members as of December 31, 2021. We count as a member any user who has registered an email address on our website or downloaded our mobile app, thereby agreeing to our terms of service.
Through December 31, 2021, we have cumulatively paid approximately $2.5 billion in commissions to our consignors. Our GMV increased to $1.5 billion in 2021 from $987.0 million in 2020. Our AOV increased to $497 in 2021 from $442 in 2020. In 2021 and 2020, our total revenue was $467.7 million and $299.9 million, respectively, representing an increase of 56% in 2021. In 2021 and 2020, our gross profit was $273.5 million and $187.6 million, respectively, representing an increase of 46% in 2021.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic adversely impacted our business and results of operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced a return to our previous high growth.
Early in 2020, operations in our authentication centers were limited, in-person concierge consignment appointments were temporarily suspended and our retail stores and luxury consignment offices were temporarily closed due to restrictions related to COVID-19. As these restrictions began to ease in the second half of 2020, our operations capacity was no longer limited and all of our luxury consignment offices and retail stores re-opened. GMV decreased in 2020 from 2019 as supply and demand were negatively impacted by COVID-19 related disruptions.
In 2021, many COVID-19 related restrictions continued to ease, allowing the Company to resume in-person concierge consignment appointments. GMV and net revenues have fully recovered, yielding year over year increases. During 2021, we faced staffing challenges exacerbated by the effects of COVID-19 and we may continue to experience such challenges in 2022. While supply has continued to come into our authentication centers, hiring challenges in late December 2021 and into early January 2022 negatively impacted the time for processing and launching products on our website. Additionally, the effects of any new variants of COVID-19 that may arise make it difficult to predict the impact of COVID-19 on our business going forward, including any impacts on our vendors.
Throughout the pandemic, our top priority has been to protect the health and safety of our employees and our customers. We have enforced social distancing in our authentication centers, enabled virtual consignment appointments, implemented curbside pick-up of products from our consignors, and enabled our corporate employees to work remotely. We have followed internally derived specific health-related criteria with an emphasis on comprehensive safety precautions, including frequent cleaning in our stores and social distancing.
Other Factors Affecting Our Performance
Other key business and marketplace factors, independent of the health and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, impact our business. To analyze our business performance, determine financial forecasts and help develop long-term strategic plans, we focus on the factors described below. While each of these factors presents significant opportunity for our business, collectively, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth, improve our operating results and achieve and maintain our profitability.
Consignors and Buyers
Consignor growth and retention. We grow our sales by increasing the supply of luxury goods offered through our consignment online marketplace. We measure the ratio of demand versus supply in a given period, which we refer to as our online marketplace sell-through ratio. Sell-through ratio is defined as GMV in the period divided by the aggregate initial value of items added to our online marketplace in the period. In 2021 and 2020, our marketplace sell-through ratios were 94% and 99%, respectively. Our 2021 sell-through ratio normalized as demand remained strong but we were able to bring in more supply, compared to prior year. The 2020 sell-through ratio was driven by continued high demand but reflected challenges in securing supply due to the adverse impacts of COVID-19.
Our GMV growth has been driven in significant part by repeat sales by existing consignors concurrent with growth of our consignor base. In 2021 and 2020, repeat consignors accounted for approximately 84% and 83% of GMV, respectively.
Buyer growth and retention. We grow our business by attracting and retaining buyers. We attract and retain buyers by offering highly coveted, authenticated, pre-owned luxury goods at attractive values and delivering a high-quality, luxury experience. We measure our success in attracting and retaining buyers by tracking buyer satisfaction and purchasing activity over time. We have experienced high buyer satisfaction, as evidenced by our buyer net promoter score of 62 in 2021, and compared to our online shopping industry average of 40 according to NICE Satmetrix U.S. Consumer 2021 data. If we fail to continue to attract and retain our buyer base to our online marketplace, our operating results would be adversely affected.
The first graph below shows trends in purchasing activity for buyer cohorts for each year beginning in 2015. Each cohort represents all buyers that first purchased across our online marketplace in the designated year and the aggregate GMV purchased by such cohort for the initial year and each year thereafter. As illustrated in the first graph below, we have seen consistent retention of buyer activity across cohorts through 2021. In 2020, buyer retention was impacted by the adverse impacts of COVID-19 on supply, and as a result, GMV. The second graph below shows the percentage of GMV in each year from our repeat buyers. GMV from repeat buyers reflects purchases made after their initial purchase month.
We believe there is substantial opportunity to grow our business by having buyers also become consignors and vice versa. As of December 31, 2021, 14% of our buyers had become consignors and 57% of our consignors had become buyers. The graph below shows the percentage of GMV in each year from buyers who have participated as both buyers and consignors on our online marketplace. GMV attributable to consigning activity of such buyers is not included.
Buyer acquisition cost. Our financial performance depends on effectively managing the expenses we incur to attract and retain buyers. We closely monitor our efficiency in acquiring new buyers. Our buyer acquisition cost (“BAC”) for a given period is comprised of our total advertising spend for acquiring both buyers and consignors, which is principally the cost of television, digital and direct mail advertising, divided by the number of buyers acquired in that period. We adjust or re-allocate our advertising in real-time to optimize our spend across channels, buyer demographics and geographies to improve our return on advertising spend. With the exception of 2020 due to
the adverse impacts of COVID-19 on our business, our BAC has declined over time driven by improving acquisition efficiencies.
Scaling operations and technology. To support the future growth of our business, we are expanding our capacity through investments in physical infrastructure, talent and technology. We principally conduct our intake, authentication, merchandising and fulfillment operations in our four leased authentication centers located in Arizona and New Jersey comprising an aggregate of approximately 1.4 million square feet of space. In October 2020, we secured a lease in Arizona for an additional authentication center and moved operations from our former Brisbane authentication center in June 2021. We operate flagship retail stores in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Chicago. In addition to our neighborhood stores in New York, Palo Alto, and Newport Beach, we opened seven new neighborhood stores in Greenwich, Dallas, Austin, Atlanta, Marin County, Manhasset, and Palm Beach during the year ended December 31, 2021. In February 2022, we opened a neighborhood store in Brentwood, CA. In addition to scaling our physical infrastructure, growing our single-SKU business operations require that we attract, train and retain highly-skilled personnel for purposes of authentication, copywriting, merchandising, pricing and fulfilling orders. We have invested substantially in technology to automate our operations and support growth, including proprietary machine learning technology to support efficiency and quality. We continue to strategically invest in technology, as innovation positions us to scale and support growth into the future.
Seasonality. Historically, we have observed trends in seasonality of supply and demand in our business. Specifically, our supply increases in the third and fourth quarters, and our demand increases in the fourth quarter. As a result of this seasonality, we typically see stronger AOV and more rapid sell-through in the fourth quarter. We also incur higher operating expenses in the last four months of the year as we increase advertising spend to attract consignors and buyers and increase headcount in sales and operations to handle the higher volumes.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
The key operating and financial metrics that we use to assess the performance of our business are set forth below for 2021, 2020, and 2019.
GMV
GMV represents the total amount paid for goods across our online marketplace in a given period. We do not reduce GMV to reflect product returns or order cancellations, which totaled 26.3%, 25.3%, and 27.5% of GMV in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. GMV includes amounts paid for both consigned goods and our inventory net of platform-wide discounts and excludes the effect of buyer incentives, shipping fees and sales tax. Platform-wide discounts are made available to all buyers on the online marketplace, and impact commissions paid to consignors. Buyer incentives apply to specific buyers and consist of coupons or promotions that offer credits in connection with purchases on our platform. In addition to revenue, we believe this is an important measure of the scale and growth of our online marketplace and a key indicator of the health of our consignor ecosystem. We monitor trends in GMV to inform budgeting and operational decisions to support and promote growth in our business and to monitor our success in adapting our business to meet the needs of our consignors and buyers. While GMV is the primary driver of our revenue, it is not a proxy for revenue or revenue growth. See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Revenue Recognition-Consignment and Service Revenue.
NMV
Net merchandise value ("NMV") represents the value of sales from both consigned goods and our inventory net of platform-wide discounts less product returns and order cancellations and excludes the effect of buyer incentives, shipping fees and sales tax. We believe NMV is a supplemental measure of the scale and growth of our online marketplace. Like GMV, NMV is not a proxy for revenue or revenue growth.
Consignment and Service Revenue
Consignment and service revenue is generated from the sale of pre-owned luxury goods through our online marketplace and retail stores on behalf of consignors. We retain a portion of the proceeds received, which we refer to as our take rate. We recognize consignment revenue, net of allowances for product returns, order cancellations, buyer incentives and adjustments. Additionally, we generate revenue from shipping fees we charge to buyers. We also generate service revenue from subscription fees paid by buyers for early access to products.
Direct Revenue
Direct revenue is generated from the sales of company-owned inventory. We recognize direct revenue upon shipment of the goods sold, based on the gross purchase price net of allowances for product returns, buyer incentives and adjustments.
Number of Orders
Number of orders means the total number of orders placed across our online marketplace and retail stores in a given period. We do not reduce number of orders to reflect product returns or order cancellations.
Take Rate
Take rate is a key driver of our revenue and provides comparability to other marketplaces. The numerator used to calculate our take rate is equal to net consignment sales and the denominator is equal to the numerator plus consignor commissions. Net consignment sales represents the value of sales from consigned goods net of platform-wide discounts less consignor commission, product returns and order cancellations. We exclude direct revenue from our calculation of take rate because direct revenue represents the sale of inventory owned by us, which costs are included in cost of direct revenue. Our take rate reflects the high level of service that we provide to our consignors across multiple touch points and the consistently high velocity of sales for their goods. Our take rate structure is a tiered commission structure for consignors, where the more they sell the higher percent commission they earn. Consignors start at a 55% commission (which equals a 45% take rate for us) and can earn up to a 70% commission. This tiered structure applies unless it is overridden by a commission exception.
Commission exceptions from the tiered commission structure optimize supply and drive take rate changes. Examples of current commission exceptions include a flat 30% commission on all items under $96, and an 85% commission on watches over $2,495. Management assesses changes in take rates by monitoring the volume of GMV and take rate across each discrete commission grouping, encompassing commission tiers and exceptions.
Active Buyers
Active buyers include buyers who purchased goods through our online marketplace during the 12 months ended on the last day of the period presented, irrespective of returns or cancellations. We believe this metric reflects scale, brand awareness, buyer acquisition and engagement.
Average Order Value (“AOV”)
Average order value (“AOV”) means the average value of all orders placed across our online marketplace and retail stores, excluding shipping fees and sales taxes. Our focus on luxury goods across multiple categories drives a consistently strong AOV. Our AOV reflects both the average price of items sold as well as the number of items per order. Our AOV is a key driver of our operating leverage.
Percent of GMV from Repeat Buyers
Repeat buyers represents buyers who made a purchase in the months subsequent to the month they made their initial purchase across our online marketplace and retail stores. GMV from repeat buyers reflects purchases made after their initial purchase month.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a key performance measure that our management uses to assess our operating performance. Because Adjusted EBITDA facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we use this measure as an overall assessment of our performance, to evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies and for business planning purposes. Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled metrics of other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA means net loss before interest income, interest expense, other (income) expense net, provision for income taxes, and depreciation and amortization, further adjusted to exclude stock-based compensation, payroll taxes on employee stock transactions, and certain one-time expenses. Adjusted EBITDA provides a basis for comparison of our business operations between current, past and future periods by excluding items that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA has certain limitations as the measure excludes the impact of certain expenses that are included in our statements of operations that are necessary to run our business and should not be considered as an alternative to net loss or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for 2021, 2020, and 2019:
(1) We exclude employer payroll tax expense related to employee stock-based transactions because we believe that excluding this item provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating results. In particular, this expense is dependent on the price of our common stock at the time of vesting or exercise, which may vary from period to period, and other factors that are beyond our control and do not correlate to the operation of the business. When evaluating the performance of our business and making operating plans, we do not consider these items. Similar charges were not adjusted in prior periods as they were not material.
(2) During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received insurance reimbursement of $4.3 million related to legal fees for a certain matter, of which $3.1 million have been applied to the current year's legal expenses.
(3) Includes the financial terms of the stipulation of settlement of the putative shareholder class action and the final settlement of the derivative case. On November 5, 2021, a stipulation of settlement was filed with the federal court to settle the putative shareholder class action filed against us, our officers and directors, and the underwriters for the Company’s initial public offering. The stipulation of settlement is subject to preliminary and final approval by the court. The financial terms of the settlement stipulation provide that the Company will pay $11.0 million within thirty (30) days of the later of preliminary approval of the settlement or plaintiff’s counsel providing payment instructions. Also on November 5, 2021, a stipulation of settlement was filed in the derivative case filed against us as a nominal defendant and our officers and directors as defendants. The stipulation of settlement for the derivative case was finally approved by the court on February 11, 2022. The stipulation of settlement for the derivative case was preliminarily approved on December 8, 2021, and the $0.5 million was paid within 30 days of preliminary approval, or on January 7, 2022.
(4) The restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2021 comprise of the costs to transition operations from the Brisbane warehouse to our new Phoenix warehouse. The restructuring charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 consist of COVID-19 related costs including employee severance.
Components of our Operating Results
Revenue
Our revenue is comprised of consignment and service revenue and direct revenue.
•Consignment and service revenue. We generate the substantial majority of our revenue from the sale of pre-owned luxury goods through our online marketplace and retail stores on behalf of consignors. For consignment sales, we retain a percentage of the proceeds received, which we refer to as our take rate. We recognize consignment revenue, net of allowances for product returns, order cancellations, buyer incentives and adjustments. Additionally, we generate revenue from shipping fees we charge to buyers. We also generate service revenue from subscription fees paid by buyers for early access to products, but to date our subscription revenue has not been material.
•Direct revenue. We generate direct revenue from the sale of items that we own, which we refer to as our inventory. We generally acquire inventory when we accept out of policy returns from buyers, and when we make direct purchases from businesses and consignors. We recognize direct revenue upon shipment based on the gross purchase price paid by buyers for goods, net of allowances for product returns, buyer incentives and adjustments.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of consignment and services revenue consists of shipping costs, credit card fees, packaging, customer service personnel-related costs, website hosting services, and consignor inventory adjustments related to lost or damaged products. Cost of direct revenue consists of the cost of goods sold, credit card fees, packaging, customer service personnel-related costs, website hosting services, and inventory adjustments.
Marketing
Marketing expense comprises the cost of acquiring and retaining consignors and buyers, including the cost of television, digital and direct mail advertising. Marketing expense also includes personnel-related costs for employees engaged in these activities. We expect these expenses to continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Operations and Technology
Operations and technology expense principally includes personnel-related costs for employees involved with the authentication, merchandising and fulfillment of goods sold through our online marketplace and retail stores, as well as our general information technology expense. Operations and technology expense also includes allocated facility and overhead costs, costs related to our retail stores, facility supplies and depreciation of hardware and equipment, as well as research and development expense for technology associated with managing and improving our operations. We capitalize a portion of our proprietary software and technology development costs. As such, operations and technology expense also includes amortization of capitalized technology development costs. We expect operations and technology expense to increase in future periods to support our growth, including continuing to invest in automation and other technology improvements to support and drive efficiency in our operations. These expenses may vary from year to year as a percentage of revenue, depending primarily upon when we choose to make more significant investments. We expect these expenses to continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense is principally comprised of personnel-related costs for our sales professionals and employees involved in finance and administration. Selling, general and administrative expense also includes allocated facilities and overhead costs and professional services, including accounting and legal advisors. We expect these expenses to continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue.
Legal Settlement
Legal settlement expense primarily includes actual or estimated losses related to legal settlements when they become probable and estimable.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists primarily of state minimum taxes in the United States. We have a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets primarily consisting of net operating loss carryforwards, accruals and reserves. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the financial statements and notes included elsewhere in the Annual Report. Prior year comparisons are included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. The following tables set forth our results of operations and such data as a percentage of revenue for the periods presented:
Comparison of 2021 and 2020
Consignment and Service Revenue
Consignment and service revenue increased by $99.5 million, or 40%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in revenue was driven primarily by a 50% increase in GMV, partially offset by an increase in returns and cancellations year over year. GMV growth during the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by a 33% increase in orders and a 12% increase in AOV, due to an increased market demand for online luxury goods. We believe this growth is driven by heightened interest in luxury resale due to increasing consumer desire for more affordable, accessible luxury goods in a sustainable circular economy.
Returns and cancellations as a percentage of GMV for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 26.3%, compared to 25.3% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a normalization of customer return patterns during the year ended December 31, 2021. Our take rate decreased to 34.7% from 35.7% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to last year due to the higher sales mix of high-value items which typically have a lower take rate, such as watches and fine jewelry.
Direct Revenue
Direct revenue increased by $68.2 million, or 130%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the higher sales mix of company-owned inventory due to direct purchases from businesses and consignors, along with higher sales of aged inventory primarily resulting from out of policy returns. We recognize direct revenue on a gross basis upon shipment of the purchased good to the buyer. Direct revenue has been increasing as a percentage of total revenue in recent quarters as a result of a higher sales mix of company-owned inventory due to direct purchases from businesses and consignors. Direct revenue as a percentage of total revenue may vary from period to period primarily based on the growth of consignment and service revenue, as well as the amount of company-owned inventory we purchase. We anticipate direct revenue to decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the longer term.
Cost of Consignment and Service Revenue
Cost of consignment and service revenue increased by $25.8 million, or 39%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in shipping costs driven by fulfillment of a larger number of orders and credit card fees driven by growth in our business. Consignment and service revenue gross margin remained flat in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Direct Revenue
Cost of direct revenue increased by $56.0 million, or 123%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Direct revenue gross margin increased by 2 percentage points in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily driven by favorable product margins.
The margin profile of our direct revenue is lower than consignment and service revenue. Our total gross margin decreased by 5% in 2021 compared to 2020 due to the increase in direct revenue as a percentage of total revenue. As we continue to make direct purchases from vendors, gross margin may vary from period to period.
Marketing
Marketing expense increased by $7.9 million, or 14%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in advertising costs and marketing program expenses as we seek to optimize the digital experience on our online marketplace and grow the number of buyers and consignors.
As a percentage of revenue, marketing expense decreased to 13% in 2021 from 18% in 2020. These expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue, depending primarily upon our marketing investments. We expect these expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term.
Operations and Technology
Operations and technology expense increased by $72.0 million, or 44%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher employee compensation related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, due to increased headcount to support our growth, and higher occupancy costs due to our additional retail stores and the transition of operations to our authentication center in Arizona. The increase was also driven by an increase in travel expense, software fees, as well as restructuring costs associated with the transition of operations from our Brisbane authentication center to our Arizona authentication center during the year ended December 31, 2021. Stock-based compensation increased due to increased headcount, as well as an increase in long-term equity incentive awards.
As a percentage of revenue, operations and technology expense decreased to 50% in 2021 from 55% in 2020. These expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue, depending primarily upon when we choose to make more significant investments. We expect these expenses to continue to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $35.8 million, or 25%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was due to higher employee compensation expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, an increase in software fees, partially offset by an insurance reimbursement for legal expenses. Stock-based compensation increased due to increased headcount, as well as an increase in long-term equity incentive awards.
As a percentage of revenue, selling, general and administrative expense decreased to 38% in 2021 from 47% in 2020. We expect these expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term.
Legal settlement expense increased by $12.3 million, or over 100%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily due to the $11.0 million legal settlement for the shareholder class action filed against us and $0.5 million of attorney's fees to be paid as part of the settlement for the related derivative case filed against us.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $418.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $768.1 million. Since inception, we have generated negative cash flows from operations and have primarily financed our operations through equity and convertible debt financings. In July 2019, we received net proceeds of $315.5 million upon completion of our IPO on July 2, 2019. In June 2020, we received net proceeds of $143.3 million from the issuance of the 2025 Notes and the related capped call transactions. In March 2021, we received net proceeds of $244.5 million from the 2028 Notes and the related capped call transactions.
We expect that operating losses and negative cash flows from operations could continue in the foreseeable future. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our requirements and plans for cash for at least the next 12 months.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, our ability to grow our revenues and the timing of investments to support growth in our business, such as the build-out of our authentication centers and, to a lesser extent, the opening of new retail stores. We may seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated. Prior year comparisons are included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $142.2 million, which consisted of a net loss of $236.1 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $108.3 million and cash outflows due to a net change of $14.3 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of cash outflows due to increases of $28.7 million in inventory driven by an increase in direct purchases of inventory from vendors, a decrease of $15.3 million in operating lease liability, and a decrease of $10.0 million in accounts payable, partially offset by cash inflows due to increases of $30.9 million in other accrued and current liabilities and $14.0 million in accrued consignor payable.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
During 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $43.4 million, which consisted of $37.5 million for purchases of property and equipment, net, including leasehold improvements, and $10.0 million for capitalized proprietary software costs, partially offset by $4.0 million of proceeds from maturities on short-term investments.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $252.9 million, which primarily consisted of proceeds of $278.2 million from the issuance of the 2028 Notes, net of issuance costs, $6.0 million from the exercise of stock options, and $2.3 million from the issuance of common stock related to the Company's employee stock purchase plan (the "ESPP"), partially offset by $33.7 million for the purchase of capped calls related to the 2028 Notes issuance.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our material cash requirements from our known contractual obligations and other commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Consists of non-cancelable purchase commitments to third-party vendors with terms of greater than one year and purchase commitments on inventory, as well as a non-cancelable purchase obligation for marketing activities.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires our management to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these judgments and estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, we believe that the accounting estimates discussed below relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Leases
For our operating leases, we record a lease liability based on the present value of the lease payments at lease inception, using the applicable incremental borrowing rate. We estimate the incremental borrowing rate based on our own estimated synthetic credit rating, corresponding yield curve, and the terms of each lease at the lease commencement date. Given the lack of a directly observable Company specific credit rating, there is significant judgment in the methodology used to develop the incremental borrowing rates, including the development of the synthetic credit rating. Management also typically utilizes third party valuation specialists to provide market yield curves associated with our estimated synthetic credit rating. The incremental borrowing rates we used ranged from
2.3% to 9.3% depending on the lease terms. The sensitivity of the estimate is mainly due to the judgement used in the development of the synthetic credit rating and yield curves at lease inception.
Convertible Senior Notes
In recording our convertible debt instruments, we separately account for the liability and equity components by allocating proceeds between the liability component and the embedded conversion options, or equity components. We allocate the debt components of the instruments on the basis of the estimated fair value of a similar liability that does not have an associated convertible feature and the remaining proceeds are allocated to the equity component. The allocation was performed in a manner that reflects our non-convertible debt borrowing rate for similar debt. The fair value borrowing rate is considered a critical estimate because the judgment in assessing an interest rate that would be available to the company of a similar debt instrument that does not have a conversion feature. For the 2025 Notes with a principal amount of $172.5 million, an interest rate of 5.67% was used to compute the initial fair value of the liability component of $152.7 million. For the 2028 Notes with a principal amount of $287.5 million, an interest rate of 7.18% was used to compute the initial fair value of the liability component of $191.3 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.