Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis may contain forward-looking statements based on assumptions about our future business. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Amounts presented in the discussion below are in thousands, except share and per share amounts.
Results of Operations
Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company expanded its retail footprint outside of grocery and natural channels that historically represent the majority of our products sold. The Company continued to expand growth in its 12-ounce can product line led by Ginger Ale and Ginger Beer growth, fully utilizing its expanded network of co-packers to support this growth. In addition to our traditional sales channels, the Company is utilizing its ecommerce platform that includes their branded web sites and Amazon to offer its line of shots, ginger candy and drinks packaged in cans.
A public equity offering which closed during the year ended December 31, 2021, provided the Company with funds for working capital and general corporate purposes. These funds enabled us to initiate the implementation of our 2021 strategy that included driving growth while strategically reducing operating costs.
The Company remains focused on driving sales growth and improving margin. The sales growth focus is on channel expansion, new product introduction and improved sales execution. The margin enhancement initiative is driven by co-packer upgrades, better leveraged purchasing and improved efficiency. Underpinning these initiatives is a focus on strategically reducing operating costs.
COVID-19 Considerations
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our operating results and the Company anticipates a continued impact for the balance of the year. In addition, the pandemic may cause reduced demand for our products if, for example, the pandemic results in a recessionary economic environment which negatively effects the consumers who purchase our products. Based on the recent increase in demand for our products, we believe that over the long term, there will continue to be strong demand for our products.
Through December 31, 2021, the Company has experienced higher transportation expenses as the capacity in the freight market has not kept up with demand. The Company believes that costs will continue to increase throughout the year. In addition, the Company experienced increases in the pricing of several of its raw materials and delays in procuring several of these items. However, mitigation plans are being implemented to manage this risk. Additionally, the Company was negatively impacted by supply chain challenges impacting our ability to benefit from strong demand for and increased sales of our product. The disruption caused by labor shortages, significant raw material cost inflation, logistics issues and increased freight costs, and ongoing port congestion, resulted in suppressed margins and net income. The Company anticipates a continued impact throughout 2022.
Our ability to operate without significant incremental negative operational impact from the COVID-19 pandemic will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees and our supply chain. The Company has endeavored to follow the recommended actions of government and health authorities to protect our employees. Since the inception of the COVID-19 pandemic and through December 31, 2021, we maintained the consistency of our operations during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. We will continue to innovate in managing our business, coordinating with our employees and suppliers to do our part in the infection prevention and remain flexible in responding to our customers and suppliers. However, the uncertainty resulting from the pandemic could result in an unforeseen disruption to our workforce and supply chain (for example an inability of a key supplier or transportation supplier to source and transport materials) that could negatively impact our operations.
Net sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, were up 19% from the prior year period. Through December 31, 2021, we continue to generate cash flows to meet our short-term liquidity needs, and we expect to maintain access to the capital markets. We have also not observed any material impairments of our assets or a significant change in the fair value of our assets due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
For additional information on risk factors related to the pandemic or other risks that could impact our results, please refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2021
The following table sets forth key statistics for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, in thousands:
(A) We define gross billing as the total sales for the Company unadjusted for costs related to generating those sales. Management utilizes gross billing as an indicator of and to monitor operating performance of products and salespersons before the effect of any promotional or other allowances, which are determined in accordance with GAAP, and can mask certain performance issues. We believe that the presentation of gross billing provides a useful measure of our operating performance. Additionally, gross billing may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies, as gross billing has been defined by our internal reporting practices.
(B) We define promotional and other allowances as costs deducted from gross billing which are associated with generating those sales. Management utilizes promotional and other allowances as an indicator of and to monitor operating performance of products, salespersons, and customer agreements. We believe that the presentation of promotional and other allowances provides a useful measure of our operating performance. The presentation of promotional and other allowances facilitates an evaluation of their impact on the determination of net sales and the spending levels incurred or correlated with such sales. The expenditures described in this line item are determined in accordance with GAAP and meet GAAP requirements, the disclosure thereof does not conform to GAAP presentation requirements. Additionally, our definition of promotional and other allowances may not be comparable to similar items presented by other companies. Promotional and other allowances primarily include consideration given to the Company’s distributors or retail customers including, but not limited to the following: (i) reimbursements given to the Company’s distributors for agreed portions of their promotional spend with retailers, including slotting, shelf space allowances and other fees for both new and existing products; (ii) the Company’s agreed share of fees given to distributors and/or directly to retailers for in-store marketing and promotional activities; (iii) the Company’s agreed share of slotting, shelf space allowances and other fees given directly to retailers; (iv) incentives given to the Company’s distributors and/or retailers for achieving or exceeding certain predetermined sales goals; and (v) discounted or free products. Promotional and other allowances constitute a material portion of our marketing activities. The Company’s promotional allowance programs with its numerous distributors and/or retailers are executed through separate agreements in the ordinary course of business. These agreements generally provide for one or more of the arrangements described above and are of varying durations, ranging from one week to one year.
Sales, Cost of Sales, and Gross Margins
The following chart sets forth key statistics for the transition of the Company’s top line activity through the years ended December 31, 2021.
Sales, Cost of Sales, and Gross Margins
As part of the Company’s ongoing initiative to simplify and streamline operations the Company has identified core products on which to place its strategic focus. These core products consist of Reed’s and Virgil’s branded beverages. Non-core products consist primarily of Wellness Shots, candy and slower selling discontinued Reed’s and Virgil’s SKUs.
Core beverage volume for the year ended December 31, 2021, represents 99% of all beverage volume.
Core brand gross billing increased by 18% to $53,263 compared to the same period last year, driven by Reed’s volume growth of 28% and Virgil’s volume growth of 15%. The result is an increase in total gross billing of 17%, to $54,658 in the year ended December 31, 2021, from $46,801 during the year ended December 31, 2020. Price on our core brands decreased 3% to $17.80 per case due to a shift in mix to lower priced, higher margin products.
Discounts as a percentage of gross billing decreased to 9% from 11% in the same period last year. As a result, net sales revenue grew 19% in the year ended December 31, 2021, to $49,599, compared to $41,615 in the same period last year.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold increased $7,152 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period last year. As a percentage of net sales, cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 73% as compared to 69% for the same period last year.
The total cost of goods per case increased to $11.91 per case in the year ended December 31, 2021, from $11.60 per case for the same period last year. The cost of goods sold per case on core brands was $11.63 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $11.45 for the same period last year.
Gross Margin
Gross margin was 27% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 31% for the same period last year.
Operating Expenses
Delivery and Handling Expenses
Delivery and handling expenses consist of delivery costs to customers and warehousing costs incurred for handling our finished goods after production. Delivery and handling expenses increased by $5,083 in the years ended December 31, 2021, to $11,939 from $6,856 in the same period last year, driven by increased volumes, ecommerce fulfilment costs, and increasing freight rates due to market conditions. Delivery costs in the year ended December 31, 2021, were 24% of net sales and $3.95 per case, compared to 16% of net sales and $2.76 per case during the same period last year.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Marketing expenses consist of direct marketing, marketing labor, and marketing support costs. Selling expenses consist of all other selling-related expenses including personnel and contractor support. Total selling and marketing expenses increased $2,162 to $9,665 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $7,503 during the same period last year. As a percentage of net sales, selling and marketing costs increased to 19% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 18% during the same period last year. The increase was driven by staffing costs, stock compensation, and distributor buyout.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the cost of executive, administrative, operations and finance personnel, as well as professional fees. General and administrative expenses increased in the year ended December 31, 2021, to $7,965 from $7,023 an increase of $942 over the same period last year. The increase was driven by higher legal settlements, liquor licensing fees, loss on sale of assets, recycling fees, postage, public company costs, travel expenses, depreciation, and bad debt, partially offset by lower stock compensation.
Loss from Operations
The loss from operations was $15,971 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to a loss of $8,616 in the same period last year driven by increased gross profit offset by increases in operating expenses discussed above.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Interest and other income for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted of $1,201 of interest expense offset by $770 gain on forgiveness of debt. During the same period last year, interest and other expense consisted of $1,307 of interest expense, loss on extinguishment of debt of $262, offset by the change in fair value of our warrant liability of $8.
Modified EBITDA
In addition to our GAAP results, we present Modified EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our performance. However, Modified EBITDA is not a recognized measurement under GAAP and should not be considered as an alternative to net income, income from operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP, or as an alternative to cash flow from operating activities as a measure of liquidity. We define Modified EBITDA as net income (loss), plus interest expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, changes in fair value of warrant expense, and one-time restructuring-related costs including employee severance and asset impairment.
Management considers our core operating performance to be that which our managers can affect in any particular period through their management of the resources that affect our underlying revenue and profit generating operations during that period. Non-GAAP adjustments to our results prepared in accordance with GAAP are itemized below. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating Modified EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Modified EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items.
Set forth below is a reconciliation of net loss to Modified EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
We present Modified EBITDA because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. In addition, we use Modified EBITDA in developing our internal budgets, forecasts and strategic plan; in analyzing the effectiveness of our business strategies in evaluating potential acquisitions; making compensation decisions; and in communications with our board of directors concerning our financial performance. Modified EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, which includes, among others, the following:
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements, for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Modified EBITDA does not reflect future interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our debts; and
●
Although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Modified EBITDA does not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared under the assumption that the Company will continue as a going concern for one year from the date these financial statements are issued. Such assumption contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a net loss of $16,402 and used cash in operations of $17,589. These conditions raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least one year from the date of issuance of these financial statements. In addition the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s December 31, 2021, audited financial statements, raised substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
During 2021, the Company conducted public offerings and sold 6.7 million of its common shares and received net proceeds of $7,327.
On March 10, 2022, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (“Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors (the “Purchasers”) pursuant to which the Purchasers agreed to purchase, and the Company agreed to issue and sell to the Purchasers in a private placement, an aggregate of 18,594,571 shares (“Shares”) of the Company’s common stock, $0.0001 par value (“Common Stock”), and warrants (“Warrants”) to purchase an aggregate of 9,297,289 shares of Common Stock (the “Private Placement”). The purchase price per share of common stock and associated warrant was $0.28 for the investors (other than officers and directors of the Company) and $0.3502 for the officers and directors of the Company in compliance with the rules of the Nasdaq Stock Market. Each whole warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price of $0.2877 per share. The warrants are exercisable at a per share exercise price of $0.2877 for a period of five years commencing six months from the closing date. Officers and directors of the Company purchased approximately $1.1 million of the securities in the offering. The gross proceeds to the Company, after deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses, are approximately $5.1 million.
Historically, we have financed our operations through public and private sales of common stock, issuance of preferred and common stock, convertible debt instruments, term loans and credit lines from financial institutions, and cash generated from operations. Management is currently evaluating various funding alternatives and may seek to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, mezzanine or debt securities, through arrangements with strategic partners or through obtaining credit from financial institutions. In addition, we have taken decisive action to improve our margins, including fully outsourcing our manufacturing process, streamlining our product portfolio, negotiating improved vendor contracts and restructuring our selling prices.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Use of Estimates and Assumptions. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Those estimates and assumptions include estimates for reserves of uncollectible accounts receivables, assumptions used in valuing inventories at net realizable value, impairment testing of recorded long-term tangible and intangible assets, the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, accruals for potential liabilities, assumptions made in valuing stock instruments issued for services, and assumptions used in valuing warrant liabilities, and assumptions used in the determination of the Company’s liquidity.
Accounts Receivable. Accounts receivable are recorded at the invoiced amounts. The Company evaluates the collectability of its trade accounts receivable based on a number of factors. In circumstances where the Company becomes aware of a specific customer’s inability to meet its financial obligations to the Company, a specific reserve for bad debts is estimated and recorded, which reduces the recognized receivable to the estimated amount the Company believes will ultimately be collected. In addition to specific customer identification of potential bad debts, bad debt charges are recorded based on the Company’s historical losses and an overall assessment of past due trade accounts receivable outstanding.
Inventory. Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. We regularly review our inventory quantities on hand and record a provision for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on our estimated forecast of product demand and our ability to sell the product(s) concerned. Demand for our products can fluctuate significantly. Factors that could affect demand for our products include unanticipated changes in consumer preferences, general market conditions or other factors, which may result in cancellations of advance orders or a reduction in the rate of reorders placed by customers. Additionally, our management’s estimates of future product demand may be inaccurate, which could result in an understated or overstated provision required for excess and obsolete inventory.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue and costs of sales are recognized when control of the products transfers to our customer, which generally occurs upon shipment from our facilities. The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied at that time. The Company does not have any significant contracts with customers requiring performance beyond delivery, and contracts with customers contain no incentives or discounts that could cause revenue to be allocated or adjusted over time. Shipping and handling activities are performed before the customer obtains control of the goods and therefore represent a fulfillment activity rather than a promised service to the customer.
Stock Compensation Expense. The Company periodically issues stock options and restricted stock awards to employees and non-employees in non-capital raising transactions for services and for financing costs. The Company accounts for such grants issued and vesting based on ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation whereby the value of the award is measured on the date of grant and recognized as compensation expense on the straight-line basis over the vesting period. The Company recognizes the fair value of stock-based compensation within its Statements of Operations with classification depending on the nature of the services rendered.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.