ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report and the historical financial statements of Rekor Systems, Inc., and the related notes thereto.
Overview
We are a global leader in intelligent infrastructure focused on addressing critical challenges across transportation management, public safety, and key commercial markets. With a real-time intelligence platform driven by deep access to data, AI-powered software, and smart optical devices at-the-edge, we combine our industry expertise and advanced proprietary technologies to deliver unrivaled insights that increase roadway safety, efficiency, and sustainability while enabling safer, smarter, and more connected cities and communities. Our products are used in over 80 countries as we deliver mission-critical intelligent infrastructure solutions and services for government agencies and commercial clients in the world.
General
The information provided in this discussion and analysis of Rekor’s financial condition and results of operations covers the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. In 2021, we completed the acquisition of 100% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Waycare Technologies, Ltd. During 2020 we sold our fully-owned subsidiaries AOC Key Solutions Inc. (“AOC Key Solutions”) and Global Technical Services Inc. (“TeamGlobal”). As a result of the dispositions, we determined in 2020 that all the remaining operations that comprised our Professional Services Segment met the criteria to be considered discontinued and they are no longer presented as continuing operations.
Our financial results are impacted principally by the demand by clients for our products and services, the degree to which full-time staff can be kept occupied in revenue-generating activities and the success of our sales team in generating client engagements.
Unexpected changes in the demand for our products and services can result in significant variations in revenues, and present a challenge to optimal hiring, staffing and use of consultants. The volume of work performed can vary from period to period.
Acquisitions and Dispositions
On April 2, 2020, we sold AOC Key Solutions for an aggregate purchase price of $4,000,000, consisting of $3,400,000 in cash and a subordinated promissory note in the amount of $600,000.
On June 29, 2020, we sold TeamGlobal for an aggregate purchase price of $4,000,000, consisting of $2,300,000 in cash and a secured promissory note in the amount of $1,700,000.
On August 18, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Waycare Technologies Ltd. (“Waycare”) for an aggregate purchase price of $60,171,000, consisting of $39,884,000 in cash and $20,287,000 of stock consideration.
Opportunities, Trends and Uncertainties
We look to identify the various trends, market cycles, uncertainties and other factors that may provide us with opportunities and present challenges that impact our operations and financial condition from time to time. Although there are many that we may not or cannot foresee, we believe that our results of operations and financial condition for the foreseeable future will be primarily affected by the following:
●
Growing Smart City Market - According to a United Nations report, about two-thirds of the world population will live in urban areas by 2050. Our cities are getting larger, with longer commutes, bigger roads and the resulting impact on the environment and the quality of life. This trend requires forward-thinking officials to manage assets and resources more efficiently. We believe that advancements in “big data” connected devices and artificial intelligence can provide Intelligent Transportation System (“ITS”) solutions that can be used to reduce congestion, keep travelers safe, improve transportation, protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance the quality of life. We believe our data-driven, artificial intelligence-aided solutions provide useful tools that can effectively tackle the challenges cities and communities are facing today and will face over the coming decades.
●
AI for Infrastructure - We believe that the application of AI to the analysis of conditions on roadways and other infrastructure can significantly affect the safety and efficiency of vehicular travel in the future. As vehicles move towards full automation, there is a need for real-time data and actionable insights around traffic flow, identification of anomalous and unsafe movements - e.g. wrong way vehicles, stopped vehicles, or/and pedestrians on the roadway. Marketers and drive-thru retailers with loyalty programs can also benefit from rapid, lower cost identification of existing and potential customers in streamlining and accelerating local vehicular flow as well as data about the vehicles on the roadway.
●
Connected Vehicle Data - Today’s new vehicles are equipped with dozens of sensors, collecting information about internal systems, external hazards, and driving behaviors. This data is an untapped resource for cities and transportation agencies alike. Notably, the data from these vehicles represent a virtual network that is independent of the infrastructure which is maintained and operated by the public agencies. Connected vehicle sensors provide important information related to hazardous conditions, speed variations, intersection performance, and more. This data can help agencies and cities gain more visibility on their roads, supplementing data from existing infrastructure and providing untapped transportation information from rural areas that are not served by ITS infrastructure.
●
New and Expanded Uses for Vehicle Recognition Systems - We believe that reductions in the cost of vehicle recognition products and services will significantly broaden the market for these systems. We currently serve many users who could not afford the cost, or adapt to the restrictions of, conventional vehicle recognition systems. These include smaller municipalities, homeowners’ associations, and organizations finding new applications such as innovative customer loyalty programs. We have seen and responded to an increase in the number of smaller jurisdictions and municipalities that are testing vehicle recognition systems or that issued requests for proposals to install a network of vehicle recognition sensors. We also expect the availability of faster, higher-accuracy, lower-cost systems to dramatically increase the ability of crowded urban areas to manage traffic congestion and implement smart city programs.
●
Adaptability of the Market - We have made a considerable investment in our advanced vehicle recognition systems because we believe their increased accuracy, affordability and ability to capture additional vehicle data will allow them to compete effectively with existing providers. Based on published benchmarks, our software currently outperforms competitors. However, large users of existing technology, such as toll road operators, have long-term contracts with service providers that have made considerable investments in their existing technologies and may not consider the improvements in accuracy or reductions in cost sufficient to justify abandoning their current systems in the near future. In addition, existing providers may be able to reduce the cost of their current offerings or elect to reduce prices and accept reduced profitability while working to develop their own or secure advanced vehicle recognition systems from others who are also working to develop them. As a result, our success in establishing a major position in these markets will depend on being able to effectively communicate our presence, develop strong customer relationships, and maintain leadership in providing the capabilities that customers want. As with any large market, this will require considerable effort and resources.
●
Expansion of Automated Enforcement of Motor Vehicle Laws - We expect contactless compliance programs to be expanded as the types of vehicle related violations authorized for automated enforcement increase and experience provides localities with a better understanding of the circumstances where it is and is not beneficial. We believe that future legislation will increasingly allow for automated enforcement of regulations such as motor vehicle insurance requirements. Communities are currently searching for better means of achieving compliance with minor vehicle offenses, such as lapsed registrations, and safety issues such as motorists who fail to stop for school buses. For example, due to high rates of fatalities and injuries to law enforcement and other emergency response crews on roadsides, several states are considering authorizing automated enforcement of violations where motorists fail to slow down and/or move over for emergency responders and law enforcement vehicles at the side of the road. To the extent that legislative implementation is required, a deliberative and necessarily time-consuming process is involved. However, as states expand auto enforcement, the market for our products and services should broaden in the public safety market.
●
Graphic Processing Unit (“GPU”) Improvements - We expect our business to benefit from more powerful and affordable GPU hardware that has recently been developed. These GPUs are more efficient for image processing because their highly parallel structure makes them more efficient than general-purpose central processing units (“CPUs”) for algorithms that process large blocks of data, such as those produced by video streams. GPUs also provide superior memory bandwidth and efficiencies as compared to their CPU counterparts. The most recent versions of our software have been designed to use the increased GPU speeds to accelerate image recognition. The GPU market is predicted to grow as a result of a surge in the adoption of the Internet of Things (“IoT”) by the industrial and automotive sectors. As GPU manufacturers increase production volume, we hope to benefit from the reduced cost to manufacture the hardware included in our products or available to others using our services.
●
Edge Processing - Demand for actionable roadway information continues to grow in parallel with camera resolutions. Over the last several decades, cameras have evolved and unlocked new capabilities with each advancement. Further, cellular networks have been optimized for downloading data rather than uploading data. As a result, while download speeds have improved significantly due to large investments in cellular infrastructure, this has resulted in relatively small improvements to cellular upload speeds. With roadside deployments experiencing explosive growth in count and density, scalability, latency and bandwidth have become aspects of competition in the market. Our systems have been designed to address these issues through the use of more effective edge processing, enabled both by incorporating the increasingly effective new GPUs into our systems and continual improvements in the efficiency of our AI algorithms. Our edge processing systems ingest local HD video streams at the source and convert the raw video data to text data, dramatically reducing the volume of data that needs to be transferred through the network. Edge processing allows us to scale a network dramatically without the bandwidth, cost, latency and dependability limitations that are experienced by other networks where raw video needs to be streamed to the cloud for processing.
●
Accelerated Business Development and Marketing - Our ability to compete in a large, competitive and rapidly evolving industry will require us to achieve and maintain a visible leadership position. As a result, we have accelerated our business development marketing and eCommerce activities to increase awareness and market adoption of our new technology and products within the market. We anticipate that an increased presence in the market, the continued development of strategic partnerships and other economies of scale will significantly reduce the level of costs necessary to support sales of our products and services. However, the speed at which these markets grow to the degree to which our products and services are adopted is uncertain.
●
COVID 19 - The spread of a novel strain of COVID-19 around the world since the first quarter of 2020 has caused significant volatility in U.S. and international markets. Despite the roll-out of vaccinations, there continues to be significant uncertainty around the breadth and duration of business disruptions related to COVID-19, as well as its impact on the U.S. and international economies. As such, we are unable to determine the full impact on our operations. However, we have also seen a positive impact of COVID-19 on the technology sector, in which we are competing. The pandemic has accelerated the adoption of new technologies by businesses. According to a McKinsey Global Survey of executives, their companies have accelerated the digitization of their customer and supply-chain interactions and their internal operations by three to four years. Funding for digital initiatives has increased, creating opportunities for innovative solution providers such as Rekor.
●
Pressure on Government Budgets - COVID-19 has caused significant strain on government budgets. With less money to spend and more need for resources, government agencies need affordable, effective, and scalable solutions for revenue recovery and discovery. With subscription pricing and an intelligent infrastructure platform that accomplishes multiple agency missions, we are uniquely positioned to provide agencies with force-multiplying tools when money and human resources are limited. Agencies can be better positioned to improve public safety, manage resources more effectively, and make an impact on their citizen's quality of life with limited capital expenditure. In addition, states adopting contactless compliance programs may be able to garner significant net cash contributions to their annual budgets while reducing the number of non-compliant vehicles on their roadways.
●
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (“IIJA”) - The IIJA, signed into law on November 15, 2021, provides for significant national investments in the transportation systems in the United States, including over $150 billion in new spending on roadway infrastructure, including intelligent transportation systems. We believe that our comprehensive offering of solutions positions the Company well to emerge as a technology leader in the expanded market for intelligent infrastructure that will benefit from this legislation. We have identified opportunities to access federal funding streams, and we are working to implement a program that capitalizes on this unprecedented U.S. federal investment in public safety, homeland security, and transportation infrastructure and ensures that our customers are positioned to capture as much of this extraordinary government spending as possible. Beyond the many recurring federal grant programs that could support customer purchases, and the $350 billion in American Rescue Plan Act allocations that public agencies are receiving now, we are particularly excited about the prospect of engaging in the following new funding streams that are contained in the IIJA.
● $200 million annually for a “Safe Streets and Roads for All” program that would make competitive grants for state projects that significantly reduce or eliminate transportation-related fatalities.
● $150 million for the department to establish a grant program to modernize state data collection systems
● $500 million for the Strengthening Mobility and Revolutionizing Transportation (“SMART”) Grant Program that would support demonstration projects on smart technologies that improve transportation efficiency and safety
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are not aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on our financial condition.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
We derive revenues substantially from the sale of software, hardware and related services.
Software sales include subscriptions for the use of our software as a service (“SaaS”) and software licenses. SaaS revenues are treated as recurring revenue and provided both through negotiated agreements with larger governmental and commercial customers and through subscriptions from smaller customers. License sales are typically term agreements, including agreements for perpetual licenses, that may include maintenance obligations for software updates that keep up with changes in vehicle models and license plate designs.
Hardware is sold through direct sales or subscriptions and is typically sold with a software subscription or license arrangement. Revenue from direct sales is generally recognized when the hardware is delivered, or installation is completed in accordance with the terms of the contract. Subscription revenues may include hardware and software subscriptions and are recognized as recurring revenue throughout the term of the lease agreement.
Our related services include customer support and implementation services, as well as management services such as violation notices, billing and collections, website portals and call centers related to programs that employ our software solutions. In addition, we engage in pilot programs with governmental and commercial entities that include extension or renewal features that may result in recurring revenues and/or additional point in time revenues at the completion of the pilot program.
Costs of revenues, excluding depreciation and amortization
Direct costs of revenues consist primarily of the portion of technical and non-technical salaries and wages and payroll-related costs incurred in connection with revenue-generating activities. Direct costs of revenues also include production expenses, data subscriptions, sub-consultant services and other expenses that are incurred in connection with our revenue-generating activities. Direct costs of revenues exclude the portion of technical and non-technical salaries and wages related to marketing efforts, vacations, holidays, and other time not spent directly generating fees under existing contracts. Such costs are included in operating expenses. We expense direct costs of revenues when incurred.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of general and administrative expenses, sales and marketing, research and development and depreciation and amortization. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, payroll taxes and stock-based compensation expenses. Operating expenses also include depreciation, amortization and impairment of assets.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs for our executive, finance, legal, human resources and administrative departments. Additional expenses include office leases, professional fees and insurance.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to remain high for the foreseeable future due to the costs associated with our growth and the costs of accounting, compliance, insurance and investor relations as a public company. Our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses. However, we expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel costs, marketing programs, travel and entertainment associated with sales and marketing personnel, expenses for conferences and trade shows. We intend to make significant investments in our sales and marketing expenses to grow revenue, further penetrate the market and expand our customer base.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of personnel costs, software used to develop our products and consulting and professional fees for third-party development resources. Our research and development expenses support our efforts to continue to add capabilities to and improve the value of our existing products and services, as well as develop new products and services.
We expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development efforts to enhance the functionality of our AI solutions. However, we expect our research and development expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our research and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period due to the timing and extent of these expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses are primarily attributable to our capital investments and consist of fixed asset depreciation, amortization of right-of-use assets, amortization of intangibles considered to have definite lives, and amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense in connection with our debt arrangements, costs associated with the extinguishment of our debt arrangements, gains on the sale of subsidiaries, gains or losses on the sale of fixed assets, and interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and note receivables.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision consists primarily of income taxes in certain domestic jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We have recorded deferred tax assets for which a full valuation allowance has been provided, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits. We expect to maintain this full valuation allowance for the foreseeable future as it is more likely than not that some or all of those deferred tax assets may not be realized based on our history of losses.
Results of Operations
Our historical operating results in dollars are presented below. The analysis of operation is solely related to continuing operations and does not consider the results of discontinued operations. The following selected consolidated financial data should be read in conjunction with the foregoing information contained in this Item 7 and with the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto in Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” Only historical operating results are presented below. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
The increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was a result of additional products and programs we offered, and increases in our direct sales of existing products and programs.
In 2021, we initiated services for Oklahoma’s UVED Program which has generated revenue of $1,282,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, $925,000 of revenue was attributed to Waycare.
We also saw an increase, during the year ended December 31, 2021, in hardware sales and sales of perpetual software licenses to larger customers. Revenue relating to the delivery of the hardware and perpetual licenses was recognized as point in time revenue, while revenue relating to the software subscriptions and future maintenance services will be recognized as recurring revenue over the remaining life of the sales or licensing agreements.
Cost of Revenue, Excluding Depreciation and Amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization increased compared to the corresponding prior periods primarily due to an increase in personnel and other direct costs that were incurred to support our increase in revenue.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative Expenses
The increase general and administrative expenses of $12,677,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $6,065,000 increase in personnel costs related to an increase in headcount, including a $2,309,000 increase in stock-based compensation. Additionally, we saw increase in professional fees of $4,290,000, including $2,025,000 related to one-time fees associated with merger and acquisition transactions.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
The increase of $2,334,000 in selling and marketing expenses during the year is attributable mainly to increased marketing efforts to promote our products and services including digital marketing and other sales efforts. In connection with these efforts, there was an increase in staffing to support the Company’s growth plan which led to a $1,170,000 increase in personnel costs, including a $168,000 increase in stock-based compensation. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2021, we saw an increase in advertising expenses of $474,000.
Research and Development Expense
The increase in research and development expenses of $5,107,000 during the year was primarily attributable to the development of new products and additional software capabilities, mainly as a result of an increase in headcount and hours associated with research and development activities. In the current year, there was an increase in staffing to support the Company’s new products which led to a $4,777,000 increase in personnel costs, including a $595,000 increase in stock-based compensation.
Depreciation and Amortization
The increase in depreciation and amortization during the year is attributable primarily to increased technology-based intangible assets that were acquired as part of our acquisition of Waycare.
Other Income (Expense)
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is due to the staged retirement of the 2019 Promissory notes in 2020.
The gain on the extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2021, was related to the forgiveness of the PPP loans. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt related to fees associated with the early extinguishment of the principal balance of our 2019 Promissory Notes.
In connection with the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal, we recognized a gain on the sale of the business of $3,631,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expense
The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $3,819,000, which is due primarily to the step-up in the basis of intangible assets related to the Waycare acquisition, as compared to tax expense of $23,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. We established a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter of 2017 and have continued to maintain a full valuation allowance through the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-GAAP Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We calculate EBITDA as net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, adjusted for (i) impairment of intangible assets, (ii) loss on extinguishment of debt, (iii) stock-based compensation, (iv) losses or gains on sales of subsidiaries, (v) losses associated with equity method investments, (vi) merger and acquisition transaction costs and (vii) other unusual or non-recurring items. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are not measurements of financial performance or liquidity under accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”) and should not be considered as an alternative to net earnings or cash flow from operating activities as indicators of our operating performance or as a measure of liquidity or any other measures of performance derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are presented because we believe they are frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of a company’s ability to service and/or incur debt. However, other companies in our industry may calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do.
The following table sets forth the components of the EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods included (dollars in thousands):
Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin
Adjusted Gross Profit is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as revenue less cost of revenue, excluding depreciation and amortization. We define Adjusted Gross Margin as our Adjusted Gross Profit divided by our revenue. We expect Adjusted Gross Margin to continue to improve over time to the extent that we can gain efficiencies through the adoption of our technology and successfully cross-selling and upselling our current and future offerings. However, our ability to improve Adjusted Gross Margin overtime is not guaranteed and could be impacted by the factors affecting our performance. We believe Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin are useful to investors, as they eliminate the impact of certain non-cash expenses and allow a direct comparison of these measures between periods without the impact of non-cash expenses and certain other nonrecurring operating expenses.
The following table sets forth the components of the Adjusted Gross Profit and Adjusted Gross Margin for the periods included:
Adjusted Gross Margin, for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to 56.4% from 61.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fluctuation in Adjusted Gross Margin was driven primarily by our mix of software and hardware sales. Software sales carry a higher margin than hardware sales as there are fewer costs associated with software sales. However, hardware sales are typically associated with performance obligations that will provide higher margin recurring revenue in the future. Additionally, as part of our planned go-to-market strategy, we offer our customers short-term pilot programs which range from three to six months. Our pilot programs generally have lower margins due to additional upfront costs we incur to establish the program, which will not be incurred again if the pilot program is converted into a long-term program.
Key Performance Indicators
We regularly review several indicators, including the following key indicators, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. Since much of our revenue from hardware sales is associated with future recurring revenues from subscriptions and maintenance fees, we expect the percentage of our revenue that is associated with point-in-time hardware sales to gradually decline in relation to recurring revenues.
Recurring Revenue
The growth of our recurring revenue provides some insights into our future operating results and cash flow from operations. This enables us to better manage and invest in our business.
We continue to focus on long-term contracts with recurring revenue as part of our business model. This model emphasizes the importance of securing geographic coverage in connection with one customer solution so that additional products and services can be provided more efficiently through the same network infrastructure. We expect recurring revenue growth in future periods to continue to increase as we move to market our suite of products through the Rekor One™ platform.
Total Contract Value
The total contract value of contracts won in the current period also provides us some visibility into our future operating results and cash flows from operations. Total contract value is a non-GAAP measure in which there are certain assumptions that we make when determining the total contract value of an agreement, such as the success rate of renewal periods, cancellations and usage estimates. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we won contracts valued at $8,936,000, compared to $6,613,000 of contracts won for the year ended December 31, 2020. This growth represents a $2,323,000 or 35% growth, period over period.
Performance Obligations
While a portion of the total contract value won in a particular period represents point-in-time revenue or recurring revenue earned during the period, the remainder represents future performance obligations that can provide insights into the growth of our revenues. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $22,587,000 of performance obligations with respect to contracts that were closed prior to December 31, 2021 but have a contractual period beyond December 31, 2021. This represents growth of $5,882,000 or 35% compared to $16,705,000 of performance obligations as of December 31, 2020. These contracts generally cover a term of one to five years, which the Company will recognize revenue ratably over the contract term. We currently expect to recognize approximately 41% of this amount over the succeeding twelve months, and the remainder is expected to be recognized over the following four years. On occasion, our customers will prepay the full contract or a substantial portion of the contract. Amounts related to the prepayment of the contract related to the performance obligation for a service period that is not yet met are recorded as part of our contract liabilities balance.
Lease Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we leased building space at the following locations in the U.S.:
●
Columbia, Maryland - The corporate headquarters
●
Linthicum, Maryland
●
Orlando, Florida
●
Tel Aviv, Israel
● Los Angeles, California
We believe our facilities are in good condition and adequate for their current use. We expect to improve, replace and increase facilities as considered appropriate to meet the needs of our planned operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The net cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods below were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net cash used in operating activities - continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, had a net decrease of $6,853,000, which was attributable to the increase in the loss from continuing operations of $12,815,000. This amount was partially offset by an increase in share-based compensation expense, a non-cash adjustment, which increased by $3,113,000 to $3,909,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $796,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2021, there was a non-cash adjustment of $3,819,000 related to an income tax benefit that was primarily due to the step up in basis of the identified definite-lived intangible asset related to technology acquired as part of the acquisition of Waycare. This increase is due to the number of shares that were issued as well as the increase in our stock price. Additionally, for the year ended December 31, 2020, there was a $3,631,000 gain on the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal. The gain on the sale is shown as a decrease in cash flow from operations and an increase in cash flow from investing activities to reflect the nature of the transactions.
The net increase in net cash used in investing activities - continuing operations of $51,955,000 was primarily due to the net cash outlay in relation to the acquisition of Waycare of $39,770,000 and the $1,250,000 SAFE investment in Roker. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company's capital expenditures increased by $5,235,000 compared to the prior period. The increase in capital expenditures, period over period, was related to supporting the Company's go-to-market strategy. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the cash provided by investing activities from continuing operations was primarily due to the cash proceeds of the sale of AOC Key Solutions and TeamGlobal.
Net cash provided by financing activities - continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased $45,545,000 from the prior year ended December 31, 2020. In the current year, through our 2021 Public Offering, we received net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us, of $70,125,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we funded our operations primarily through cash from operating activities from our subsidiaries, issuance of debt, the sale of our subsidiaries and the sale of equity. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents from continuing operations of $25,796,000 and working capital of $16,989,000, as compared to unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $20,595,000 and working capital of $18,324,000 as of December 31, 2020. Management believes that based on relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable, its current forecasts and projections, for one year from the date of the filing of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, indicate the Company’s ability to continue operations as a going concern for that one-year period.
Balance Sheet Arrangements, Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital resources or capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of our operations is based upon our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We believe the application of accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are periodically reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change. Rekor bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that the management of Rekor believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form management’s basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that may not be readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, or if management made different judgments or utilized different estimates.
For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - Business and Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
The Company derives its revenues primarily from Software as a Service (“SaaS”), subscriptions, customer support services, contactless compliance solutions, implementation services, perpetual license sales and the sale of hardware in connection with its software solutions. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products and services to the Company’s customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for those products and services.
To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that the Company determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps:
●
Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
●
Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
●
Determination of the transaction price
●
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
●
Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied
Revenues
Recurring revenue
Recurring revenue includes the Company’s SaaS revenue, subscription revenue, eCommerce revenue and customer support revenue. The Company generates recurring revenue from long-term contracts with customers that provide periodic payments and short-term contracts that are automatically invoiced on a monthly basis. The Company’s recurring revenue is generated by a combination of direct sales, partner-assisted sales, and eCommerce sales.
Recurring revenues are generated through the Company’s SaaS model, where the Company provides customers with the right to access the Company’s software solutions for a fee. These services are made available to the customer continuously throughout the contractual period. However, the extent to which the customer uses the services may vary at the customer’s discretion. The Company's contracts with customers are generally for a term of one to five years. The payment for SaaS solutions may be received either at the inception of the arrangement or over the term of the arrangement. These SaaS solutions are considered to have a single performance obligation where the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefit, and as such, we recognize revenue for these arrangements ratably over the term of the contractual agreement.
The Company also currently receives recurring revenues under contracts entered into using a subscription model for bundled hardware and software over a period. Payments for these services and subscriptions are received periodically over the term of the agreement and revenue is recognized ratably over the term of the agreement. In addition, some of our subscription revenue includes providing, through a web server, access to the Company’s software solutions, a self-managed database, and a cross-platform application programming interface. The subscription arrangements with these customers typically do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of the Company’s software at any time. Instead, customers are granted continuous access to the Company’s solutions over the contractual period. The Company’s subscription services arrangements are non-cancelable and do not contain refund-type provisions. Accordingly, any fixed consideration related to the arrangement is generally recognized as recurring revenue on a straight-line basis over the contract term beginning on the date access to the Company’s software is provided.
eCommerce revenue is defined by the Company as revenue obtained through direct sales on the Company’s eCommerce platform. The Company’s eCommerce revenue generally includes subscriptions to the Company’s vehicle recognition software which can be purchased online and activated through a digital key. The Company's contracts with customers are generally for a term of one month with automatic renewal each month. The Company invoices and receives fees from its customers monthly.
Customer support revenue is associated with perpetual licenses and long-term subscription arrangements and consists primarily of technical support and product updates. The Company’s customer support team is ready to provide these maintenance services, as needed, to the customer during the contract term. The customer benefits evenly throughout the contract period from the guarantee that the customer support resources and personnel will be available to them. As customer support is not critical to the customers' ability to derive benefit from their right to use the Company’s software, customer support is considered a distinct performance obligation when sold together with a long-term license for software. Customer support for perpetual and term licenses is renewable, generally on an annual basis, at the option of the customer. Customer support for subscription licenses is renewable concurrently with such licenses for the same duration of time. Revenue for customer support is recognized ratably over the contract period based on the start and end dates of the customer support obligation, in line with how the Company believes services are provided.
Product and service revenue
Product and service revenue is defined as the Company’s contactless compliance revenue, implementation revenue, perpetual license sales and hardware sales.
Contactless compliance solutions revenues reflect arrangements to provide traffic safety systems to several jurisdictions in North America. These systems include hardware that identifies red light and school safety zone traffic violations and software that captures and records forensic images and analyzes the images to provide data and supports citation management services. In the first quarter of 2021, the Company launched a new service offering for the State of Oklahoma to support its Uninsured Vehicle Enforcement Diversion (“UVED”) Program. Rekor provides hardware, software and services to identify uninsured motor vehicles, notify owners of non-compliance and assist them in obtaining the required insurance as an alternative to traditional enforcement methods. Revenue is recognized monthly based on the number of citations collected by the relevant jurisdiction.
Implementation revenue is recognized when the Company provides pilot programs to customers. Pilot programs may involve a one-time fee for a defined period in which the customer can use the Company’s software in connection with a previously installed camera network or connected vehicle data. At the end of the pilot program, the customer can convert from a pilot program to a subscription model which has a typical term between one and five years. The Company’s pilot program revenue is recognized at various stages of completion.
In addition to the recurring software sales, the Company will recognize revenue related to the sale of perpetual software licenses. The Company sells perpetual licenses which provide customers the right to use software for an indefinite period in exchange for a one-time license fee, which is generally paid at contract inception. The Company’s perpetual licenses provide a right to use intellectual property (“IP”) that is functional in nature and have significant stand-alone functionality. Accordingly, for perpetual licenses of functional IP, revenue is recognized at the point-in-time when the customer has access to the software, which normally occurs once software activation keys have been made available to the customer.
The Company generates revenue through the sale of hardware through its partner program distribution channels. The Company satisfies its performance obligation upon the transfer of control of hardware to its customers. The Company invoices end-user customers upon transfer of control of the hardware to its customers. The Company offers hardware installment to customers which ranges from one to six months. The revenue related to the installation component is recognized at various stages of completion.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are customer obligations due under normal trade terms. We perform continuing credit evaluations of our clients’ financial condition, and we generally do not require collateral.
Management reviews accounts receivable to determine if any receivables will potentially be uncollectible. Factors considered in the determination include, among other factors, the number of days an invoice is past due, client historical trends, available credit rating information, other financial data and the overall economic environment. Collection agencies may also be used if management so determines.
We record an allowance for doubtful accounts based on specifically identified amounts that are believed to be uncollectible. We also record as an additional allowance a certain percentage of aged accounts receivable, based on historical experience and our assessment of the general financial conditions affecting its customer base. If actual collection experience changes, revisions to the allowance may be required. After all reasonable attempts to collect an account receivable have failed, the amount of the receivable is written off against the allowance.
Goodwill
The excess purchase consideration over the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Goodwill is not amortized but rather subject to a periodic impairment testing on an annual basis. The Company will assess goodwill for impairment annually on October 1st of each year, or more often if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impaired, by comparing its carrying value to the reporting unit’s fair value. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had not recognized any impairment to goodwill.
Business Combination
Management conducts a valuation analysis on the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date thereof. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the fair value of these tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. In addition, uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially established in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the Company’s consolidated statements of operations.
Amounts paid for acquisitions are allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. The Company allocates a portion of the purchase price to the fair value of identifiable intangible assets. The fair value of identifiable intangible assets is based on a detailed valuation that uses information and assumptions provided by management. The Company allocates any excess purchase price over the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired to goodwill.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes as set forth in the authoritative guidance for accounting for income taxes. This method requires an asset and liability approach for the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Management has evaluated the recoverability of the net deferred income tax assets and the level of the valuation allowance required with respect to such net deferred income tax assets. After considering all available facts, we fully reserved for our net deferred tax assets because management believes that it is more likely than not that their benefits will not be realized in future periods. We will continue to evaluate net deferred tax assets to determine whether any changes in circumstances could affect the realization of their future benefit. If it is determined in future periods that portions of the net deferred income tax assets satisfy the realization standard, the valuation allowance will be reduced accordingly.
The tax effects of uncertain tax positions are recognized in the consolidated financial statements only if the position is more likely than not to be sustained on audit, based on the technical merits of the position. For tax positions meeting the more likely than not threshold, the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized. It is our accounting policy to account for Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740-10-25-related penalties and interest as a component of the income tax provision in the consolidated statements of operations.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, our evaluation revealed no uncertain tax positions that would have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements. The 2018 through 2020 tax years remain subject to examination by the IRS, as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Management’s Plan
For all annual and interim periods, management will assess going concern uncertainty in the Company’s consolidated financial statements to determine whether there is sufficient cash on hand and working capital, including available borrowings on loans, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period”, as defined in U.S. GAAP. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to management, management will consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections and estimates and will make certain key assumptions. These assumptions include, among other factors, its ability to raise additional capital, if necessary, the expected timing and nature of the Company’s programs and projected cash expenditures and its ability to delay or curtail these programs or expenditures to the extent management has the proper authority to do so and considers it probable that those implementations can be achieved within the look-forward period.
The Company has generated losses since its inception and has relied on cash on hand, external bank lines of credit, the sale of a note, proceeds from the sale of common stock, proceeds from the private sale of the Company’s non-core subsidiaries, proceeds from note receivables, debt financings and a public offering of its common stock to support cash flow from operations. The Company attributes losses to non-capital expenditures related to the scaling of existing products, development of new products and service offerings and marketing efforts associated with these products and services. As of and for the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had a net loss from continuing operations of $26,777,000 and working capital of $16,989,000.
The Company's net cash position was increased by $5,592,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the net proceeds of $70,125,000 from the completion of the 2021 Public Offering. This amount was offset by the net cash outlay of $39,770,000 in connection with the acquisition of Waycare.
Management believes that based on relevant conditions and events that are known and reasonably knowable, its current forecasts and projections, for one year from the date of the filing of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, indicate the Company’s ability to continue operations as a going concern for that one-year period. The Company is actively monitoring its operations, the cash on hand and working capital. Should access to funds be unavailable, the Company will need to seek out additional sources of funding. On February 24, 2022, the Company entered into an At-the-Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “2022 Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. (the “Agent”) to create an at the market equity program under which the Company from time to time may offer and sell shares of its common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $50,000,000 through or to the Agent. Furthermore, the Company has contingency plans to reduce or defer expenses and cash outlays should operations weaken in the look-forward period or additional financing, if needed, is not available.
The Company's ability to generate positive operating results and complete the execution of its business strategy will depend on (i) its ability to continue the growth of its technology business, (ii) the continued performance of its contractors, subcontractors and vendors, (iii) its ability to maintain and build good relationships with its lenders and financial intermediaries, (iv) its ability to maintain timely collections from existing customers, and (v) the stabilization of the world economy and global financial markets. To the extent that events outside of the Company's control have a significant negative impact on economic and/or market conditions, they could affect payments from customers, services and supplies from vendors, its ability to continue to secure and implement new business, raise capital, and otherwise, depending on the severity of such impact, materially adversely affect its operating results.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Item 8 of Part II, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 1 - Business and Significant Accounting Policies”