Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Reliance Global Group, Inc. (formerly known as Ethos Media Network, Inc.) was incorporated in Florida on August 2, 2013. In September 2018, Reliance Global Holdings, LLC, a related party, purchased a controlling interest in the Company. Ethos Media Network, Inc. was renamed Reliance Global Group, Inc. on October 18, 2018.
We operate as a diversified company engaging in business in the insurance market, as well as other related sectors. Our focus is to grow the Company by pursuing an aggressive acquisition strategy, initially and primarily focused upon wholesale and retail insurance agencies. The Company is controlled by the same management team as Reliance Global Holdings, LLC (“Reliance Holdings”), a New York based firm that is the owner and operator of numerous companies with core interests in real estate and insurance. Our relationship with Reliance Holdings provides us with significant benefits: (1) experience, knowhow, and industry relations; (2) a source of acquisition targets currently under Reliance Holdings’ control; and (3) financial and logistics assistance. We are led and advised by a management team that offers over 100 years of combined business expertise in real estate, insurance, and the financial service industry.
In the insurance sector, our management has extensive experience acquiring and managing insurance portfolios in several states, as well as developing specialized programs targeting niche markets. Our primary strategy is to identify specific risk to reward arbitrage opportunities and develop these on a national platform, thereby increasing revenues and returns, and then identify and acquire undervalued wholesale and retail insurance agencies with operations in growing or underserved segments, expand and optimize their operations, and achieve asset value appreciation while generating interim cash flows.
As part of our growth and acquisition strategy, we are currently in negotiations with several non-affiliated parties and expect to complete a number of material insurance asset transactions throughout the course of 2022 and beyond. As of December 31, 2021, we’ve acquired eight insurance agencies, including both affiliated and unaffiliated companies.
Long term, we seek to conduct all transactions and acquisitions through our direct operations.
Over the next 12 months, we plan to focus on the expansion and growth of our business through continued asset acquisitions in insurance markets and organic growth of our current insurance operations through geographic expansion and market share growth.
Further, the Company launched its 5MI platform during 2021 which expanded our national footprint. 5MI is an all new and high-tech proprietary tool developed by the Company as a business to consumer portal which enables consumers to compare and purchase car and home insurance in a time efficient and effective manner. 5MI taps into the growing number of online shoppers and utilizes advanced artificial intelligence and data mining techniques, to provide competitive insurance quotes in around 5 minutes with minimal data input needed from the consumer. The platform launched during the summer of 2021 and currently operates in 44 states offering coverage with up to 16 highly rated insurance carriers.
Business Trends and Uncertainties
The insurance intermediary business is highly competitive, and we actively compete with numerous firms for customers, properties and insurance companies, many of which have relationships with insurance companies, or have a significant presence in niche insurance markets that may give them an advantage over us. Other competitive concerns may include the quality of our products and services, our pricing and the ability of some of our customers to self-insure and the entrance of technology companies into the insurance intermediary business. A number of insurance companies are engaged in the direct sale of insurance, primarily to individuals, and do not pay commissions to agents and brokers.
Financial Instruments
The Company’s financial instruments consist of a derivative warrant sales commitment treated as a forward sales contract as of December 31, 2021. Accounting treatment is to record the derivative financial instruments at their fair values as of the inception/issuance date of and at fair value as of each subsequent balance sheet date. Any change in fair value is recorded as non-operating, non-cash gain or loss at each balance sheet date.
Insurance Operations
Our insurance operations focus on the acquisition and management of insurance agencies throughout the U.S. Our primary focus is to pinpoint undervalued wholesale and retail insurance agencies with operations in growing or underserved segments (including healthcare and Medicare, as well as personal and commercial insurance lines). We then focus on expanding their operations on a national platform and improving operational efficiencies in order to achieve asset value appreciation while generating interim cash flows. In the insurance sector, our management team has over 100 years of experiences acquiring and managing insurance portfolios in several states, as well as developing specialized programs targeting niche markets. We plan to accomplish these objectives by acquiring wholesale and retail insurance agencies it deems to represent a good buying opportunity (as opposed to insurance carriers) as insurance agencies bear no insurance risk. Once acquired, we will develop them on a national platform to increase revenues and profits through a synergetic structure. The Company is initially focused on segments that are underserved or growing, including healthcare and Medicare, as well as personal and commercial insurance lines.
Insurance Acquisitions and Strategic Activities
As of the date of this filing, we have acquired nine insurance brokerages (see table below), including both acquisitions of affiliated companies (i.e., owned by Reliance Holdings before the acquisition) and unaffiliated companies. As our acquisition strategy continues, our reach within the insurance arena can provide us with the ability to offer lower rates, which could boost our competitive position within the industry.
Acquired
Date
Location
Line of Business
Status
U.S. Benefits Alliance, LLC (USBA)
October 24, 2018
Michigan
Health Insurance
Affiliated
Employee Benefit Solutions, LLC (EBS)
October 24, 2018
Michigan
Health Insurance
Affiliated
Commercial Solutions of Insurance Agency, LLC
December 1, 2018
New Jersey
P&C - Trucking Industry
Unaffiliated
Southwestern Montana Insurance Center, Inc.
April 1, 2019
Montana
Group Health Insurance
Unaffiliated
Fortman Insurance Agency, LLC
May 1, 2019
Ohio
P&C
Unaffiliated
Altruis Benefits Consultants, Inc.
September 1, 2019
Michigan
Health Insurance
Unaffiliated
UIS Agency LLC
August 17, 2020
New York
Health Insurance
Unaffiliated
J.P. Kush and Associates, Inc.
May 1, 2021
Michigan
Health Insurance
Unaffiliated
Medigap Healthcare Insurance Company LLC
January 10, 2022
Florida
Health Insurance
Unaffiliated
The following table lists our activity in 2021 by number of agents, approximate policies issued and revenue written.
The following table lists our activity in 2020 by number of agents, policies issued and revenue written.
UIS Transaction
On August 17, 2020, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with UIS Agency LLC whereby the Company shall purchase the business and certain assets noted within the Purchase Agreement (the “UIS Acquisition”) for a total purchase price of $883,334. The purchase price was paid with a cash payment of $601,696, $200,000 in shares of the Company’s common stock and an earn-out payment. Three cash installment payments totaling $500,000 were due on September 30, 2020, October 31, 2020 and December 31, 2020. Earn-out payment is dependent on the Net Product Line Revenues being equal to or greater than $450,000 for the measurement period. The balance of the earn-out liability as of December 31, 2021 was $0.
The UIS Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination in accordance with the acquisition method under the guidance in ASC 805-10 and 805-20. Accordingly, the total purchase consideration was allocated to intangible assets acquired based on their respective estimated fair values. The acquisition method of accounting requires, among other things, that assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, if any, in a business purchase combination be recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date. The process for estimating the fair values of identifiable intangible assets and certain tangible assets requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including estimating future cash flows, developing appropriate discount rates, estimating the costs, and timing.
The allocation of the purchase price in connection with the UIS Acquisition was calculated as follows:
Goodwill of $716,462 arising from the UIS Acquisition consisted of the value of the employee workforce and the residual value after all identifiable intangible assets were valued. Goodwill recognized pursuant to the UIS Acquisition is currently expected to be deductible for income tax purposes. Total acquisition costs for the UIS Acquisition incurred were $33,344 recorded as a component of General and administrative expenses. The revenues for the acquired business as a standalone entity per ASC 805 from January 1, 2020 to August 17, 2020 were approximately $337,000. The net loss for the acquired business was not determinable as the business was fully integrated with an existing subsidiary of the Company.
J.P. Kush and Associates, Inc. Transaction
On May 1, 2021, the Company entered into a Purchase Agreement with J.P. Kush and Associates, Inc. whereby the Company shall purchase the business and certain assets noted within the Purchase Agreement (the “Kush Acquisition”) for a total purchase price of $3,644,166. The purchase price was paid with a cash payment of $1,900,000, $50,000 in restricted shares of the Company’s common stock, in a transaction exempt from registration under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and an earn-out payment. The fair value balance of the earn-out liability as of December 31, 2021 is $1,689,733, and presented net of accretion on the balance sheet.
The Kush Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination in accordance with the acquisition method under the guidance in ASC 805-10 and 805-20. Accordingly, the total purchase consideration was allocated to intangible assets acquired based on their respective estimated fair values. The acquisition method of accounting requires, among other things, that assets acquired, and liabilities assumed, if any, in a business purchase combination be recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date. The process for estimating the fair values of identifiable intangible assets and certain tangible assets requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including estimating future cash flows, developing appropriate discount rates, estimating the costs, and timing.
The allocation of the purchase price in connection with the Kush Acquisition was calculated as follows:
Goodwill of $1,288,552 arising from the Kush Acquisition consisted of the value of the employee workforce and the residual value after all identifiable intangible assets were valued. Goodwill recognized pursuant to the Kush Acquisition is currently expected to be deductible for income tax purposes. Total acquisition costs for the Kush Acquisition incurred were $58,092 recorded as a component of General and administrative expenses. The approximate revenue and net profit for the acquired business as a standalone entity per ASC 805 from January 1, 2021 to April 30, 2021 was $380,349 and $166,667, respectively, and from January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020, $1,141,047 and $500,000, respectively.
Medigap Healthcare Insurance Company LLC Transaction
On January 10, 2022, the Company finalized an agreement (the “APA”) with Medigap Healthcare Insurance Company, LLC (“Medigap”) pursuant to which the Company purchased all of the assets of Medigap for a purchase price in the amount of $20,096,250 consisting of payment to Medigap of (i) $18,138,750 in cash and (ii) issuing to seller 606,037 shares of the Company’s restricted common stock in a transaction exempt from registration under Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The purchase price is subject to post-closing adjustment to reconcile certain pre-closing credits and liabilities of the parties. The shares issued to Medigap as part of the purchase price are subject to lock up arrangements pursuant to which 50% of those shares may be sold after the one-year anniversary of the date of Closing the APA and the balance of the shares after the second year anniversary of the date of closing under the APA.
Recent Developments
Underwritten Public Offering
The Company filed a Form 424(b)(4) on February 11, 2021 to offer 1,800,000 shares of common stock and accompanying Series A warrants at a public offering price of $6.00 per share and accompanying Series A warrant for aggregate gross proceeds of $10,800,000 prior to deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering expenses.
On February 11, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 1,800,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $5.99. All sales of the Company’s common stock had a warrant attached, which was valued at $0.01, for a total purchase price of $6.00. All shares of common stock sold were offered by the Company.
The Company granted a 45-day option to the underwriters, exercisable one or more times in whole or in part, to purchase up to an additional 270,000 shares of common stock at a price of $5.99 per share and up to an additional 270,000 Series A Warrants at a price of $0.01 per Series A Warrant less, in each case the underwriting discounts and commissions, to cover over-allotments, if any. The total number of common stock shares and warrants issued as a result was 270,000 for both common stock and warrants. The warrants will be exercisable immediately and for five years from the effective date.
The gross proceeds to the Company were approximately $12.4 million. After deducting the underwriting discount and other offering expenses, net proceeds were approximately $10.5 million.
Prior Period Adjustments
The Company identified certain immaterial adjustments impacting the prior reporting period. Specifically, the Company identified adjustments to correct certain asset, liability and equity accounts in relation to historical purchase price allocation accounting, adjustments to true up accounts receivable and retained earnings for certain historical accrued revenues and true up the common stock issuable account. The Company has also separately reclassified its purchased software from property, plant and equipment to intangible assets.
The Company assessed the materiality of the adjustments to prior period financial statements in accordance with Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. (SAB) 99, Materiality, and SAB 108, Considering the Effects of Prior Year Misstatements when Quantifying Misstatements in Current Year Financial Statements, and ASC 250, Accounting Changes and Error Corrections.
Stock Split
On January 21, 2021 the Company has had effected a reverse split of the issued and outstanding shares of common stock in a ratio of 1: 85.71 which is simultaneously occurred with the Company’s up listing to the Nasdaq Capital Market. The Company has adjusted all of share and per share numbers to take into account this reverse stock split.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to the year ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our revenue and operating expenses for each of the years presented.
Revenues
The Company’s revenue is primarily comprised of commission paid by health insurance carriers related to insurance plans that have been purchased by a member who used the Company’s service. The Company defines a member as an individual currently covered by an insurance plan, including individual and family, Medicare-related, small business, and ancillary plans, for which the Company is entitled to receive compensation from an insurance carrier.
The Company had revenues of $9,710,334 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $7,297,146 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $2,413,188 or 33% was primarily due to expanded operations, including the additional insurance agencies acquired during 2020 and 2021, with the former reporting a full year of revenue.
Commission expense
The Company had total commission expense of $2,427,294 for the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to $1,569,752 for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase of $857,542 or 55% is attributable to an increase in operations, including the additional insurance agencies acquired during 2020 and 2021 with the former reporting a full year of commission expense.
Salaries and wages
The Company reported $4,672,988 of salaries and wages expense for the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to $3,654,284 for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase of $1,018,704 or 28% is a result of the Company’s growth compared to the prior period, the Company has hired more employees due to an increase in operational and reporting activities.
General and administrative expenses
The Company had total general and administrative expenses of $3,589,221 for the year ending December 31, 2021, as compared to $4,205,797 for the year ending December 31, 2020. The decrease in expense of $616,576 or 15% is a result of improvements in operational efficiencies.
Marketing and advertising
The Company reported $325,838 of marketing and advertising expense for the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to $168,778 for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase of $157,060 or 93% is a result of the Company’s efforts to increase branding and outreach to achieve a greater presence in the insurance industry compared to the prior year.
Depreciation and amortization
The Company reported $1,607,313 of depreciation and amortization expense for the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to $1,325,337 for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase of $281,976 or 21% is a result of the Company’s acquired assets through business combinations.
Other income and expense
The Company reported $18,186,145 of other expense for the year ending December 31, 2021 compared to $54,587 for the year ending December 31, 2020. The increase of $18,131,558 or 33,216% is attributable primarily to the recognition and change in fair value of warrant commitment of $17,652,808 in 2021. Additionally, during December 31, 2020, the Company recognized $508,700 in the gain on extinguishment of debt.
Liquidity and capital resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a cash balance of $4,620,722 and working capital deficit of $36,999,751 compared with a cash balance of $529,581 and a working capital deficit of $5,448,036 at December 31, 2020. The decrease in working capital is primarily attributable to the recognition of a warrant commitment liability of $37,652,808, offset by net proceeds raised of $10,496,220 from the issuance of common stock and Series A warrants in February 2021 and increased profitability derived from the agencies and the acquisition of Kush.
The spread of the coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak in the United States has resulted in economic uncertainties which may negatively impact the Company’s business operations. While the disruption is expected to be temporary, there is uncertainty surrounding the duration and extent of the impact. Currently the Company has not seen any material financial impact as a result of the coronavirus outbreak. However, management is actively monitoring the global situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, industry and workforce.
Adverse events such as health-related concerns about working in our offices, the inability to travel and other matters affecting the general work environment could harm our business and our business strategy. While we do not anticipate any material impact to our business operations as a result of the coronavirus, in the event of a major disruption caused by the outbreak of pandemic diseases such as coronavirus, we may lose the services of our employees or experience system interruptions, which could lead to diminishment of our business operations. Any of the foregoing could harm our business and delay the implementation of our business strategy and we cannot anticipate all the ways in which the current global health crisis and financial market conditions could adversely impact our business.
To this effect on April 4, 2020, the Company entered into a loan agreement with First Financial Bank for a loan of $673,700 pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the CARES Act. In 2020, the Company repaid a total of $165,000 of principal on the loan and on November 17, 2020 the Company received notification from the SBA that the remaining PPP loan balance of $508,700 was forgiven. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any loans payable in relation to the PPP loan.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as such term is defined in Regulation S-K.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,253,275, which includes a net loss of $21,098,465 offset by non-cash expenses of $19,679,929 principally related to share based compensation expense of $749,127, depreciation and amortization of $1,607,313, recognition and change in fair value of warrant commitment of $17,652,808, and amortization of debt issuance costs of $22,822, offset by an earn-out fair value adjustment of $359,470, as well as changes of net working capital items in the amount of $834,738 principally due to a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $531,123 and increases in accounts receivable of $162,234 and prepaid expense and other current assets of $144,036.
Investing Activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash flows used in investing activities were $2,299,360 compared to cash flow used in investing activities of $1,946,194 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 2021 cash used relates to cash paid for the acquisition of Kush of $1,608,586, the purchase of property and equipment of $71,108, and cash paid of $619,666 for intangible assets.
Financing Activities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $8,643,776 as compared to $2,452,655 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash provided by financing activities is primarily related to proceeds from offering of 2,070,000 shares of common stock and accompanying warrants in February 2021. The issuance of common stock provided $10,496,221 and is partially offset by the principal repayments of debt of $887,455, the payments of the earn-out liability by 452,236, and the repayments of loans payable to related parties of $515,685.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses, and related disclosures. Estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, forecasted events, and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Estimates and judgments may vary under different assumptions or conditions. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. Our management believes the accounting policies below are critical in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments.
Business acquisitions: Accounting for acquisitions requires us to estimate the fair value of consideration paid and the individual assets and liabilities acquired, which involves a number of judgments, assumptions, and estimates that could materially affect the amount and timing of costs recognized in subsequent periods. Accounting for acquisitions can also involve significant judgment to determine when control of the acquired entity is transferred. We typically obtain independent third-party valuation studies to assist in determining fair values, including assistance in determining future cash flows, discount rates, and comparable market values. Items involving significant assumptions, estimates, and judgments include the following:
● Debt, including discount rate and timing of payments;
● Deferred tax assets, including projections of future taxable income and tax rates;
● Fair value of consideration paid or transferred;
● Intangible assets, including valuation methodology, estimations of future revenue and costs, and discount rates;
Contingencies: We are subject to the possibility of losses from various contingencies. Significant judgment is necessary to estimate the probability and amount of a loss, if any, from such contingencies. An accrual is made when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired, and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. In accounting for the resolution of contingencies, significant judgment may be necessary to estimate amounts pertaining to periods prior to the resolution that are charged to operations in the period of resolution and amounts related to future periods.
Goodwill and intangible assets: We test goodwill for impairment in our fourth quarter each year, or more frequently if indicators of an impairment exist, to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit with goodwill is less than its carrying value. For reporting units for which this assessment concludes that it is more likely than not that the fair value is more than its carrying value, goodwill is considered not impaired and we are not required to perform the goodwill impairment test. Qualitative factors considered in this assessment include industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and factors affecting the fair value of the reporting unit. For reporting units for which this assessment concludes that it is more likely than not that the fair value is below the carrying value, goodwill is tested for impairment by determining the fair value of each reporting unit and comparing it to the carrying value of the net assets assigned to the reporting unit. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is considered not impaired. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we would record an impairment loss up to the difference between the carrying value and implied fair value.
Determining when to test for impairment, the reporting units, the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, and the fair value of the reporting unit requires significant judgment and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, and expenses and are developed as part of our long-range planning process. The same estimates are used in business planning, forecasting, and capital budgeting. We test the reasonableness of the output of our long-range planning process by calculating an implied value per share and comparing that to current stock prices, analysts’ consensus pricing, and management’s expectations. These estimates and assumptions are used to calculate projected future cash flows for the reporting unit, which are discounted using a risk-adjusted rate to estimate a fair value. The discount rate requires determination of appropriate market comparables. We base fair value estimates on assumptions we believe to be reasonable but that are unpredictable and inherently uncertain. Actual future results may differ from those estimates.
We test other identified intangible assets with definite useful lives when events and circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable by comparing the carrying amount to the sum of undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. We test intangible assets with indefinite lives annually for impairment using a fair value method such as discounted cash flows. Estimating fair values involves significant assumptions, including future sales prices, sales volumes, costs, and discount rates.
Income taxes: We are required to estimate our provision for income taxes and amounts ultimately payable or recoverable in numerous tax jurisdictions around the world. These estimates involve significant judgment and interpretations of regulations and are inherently complex. Resolution of income tax treatments in individual jurisdictions may not be known for many years after completion of the applicable year. We are also required to evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets on an ongoing basis in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires the assessment of our performance and other relevant factors. Realization of deferred tax assets is dependent on our ability to generate future taxable income. In recent periods, our results of operations have benefited from increases in the amount of deferred taxes we expect to realize, primarily from the levels of capital spending and increases in the amount of taxable income we expect to realize. Our income tax provision or benefit is dependent, in part, on our ability to forecast future taxable income in these and other jurisdictions. Such forecasts are inherently difficult and involve significant judgments including, among others, projecting future average selling prices and sales volumes, manufacturing and overhead costs, levels of capital spending, and other factors that significantly impact our analyses of the amount of net deferred tax assets that are more likely than not to be realized.
Revenue recognition:
All commission revenue is recorded net of any deductions for estimated commission adjustments due to lapses, policy cancellations, and revisions in coverage.
The Company earns additional revenue including contingent commissions, profit-sharing, override and bonuses based on meeting certain revenue or profit targets established periodically by the carriers (collectively the Contingent Commissions). The Contingent Commissions are earned when the Company achieves the targets established by the insurance carries. The insurance carriers notify the company when it has achieved the target. The Company only recognizes revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the revenue will not occur.
Stock-based compensation: Stock-based compensation is estimated at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense using the straight-line amortization method over the requisite service period. For performance-based stock awards, the expense recognized is dependent on our assessment of the likelihood of the performance measure being achieved. We utilize forecasts of future performance to assess these probabilities and this assessment requires significant judgment.
Determining the appropriate fair-value model and calculating the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires significant judgment, including estimating stock price volatility and expected option life. We develop these estimates based on historical data and market information which can change significantly over time. A small change in the estimates used can result in a relatively large change in the estimated valuation. We use the Black-Scholes option valuation model to value employee stock options and awards granted under our employee stock purchase plan. We estimate stock price volatility based on our historical volatility implied volatility derived from traded options on our stock.