ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to assist the reader in better understanding our business, results of operations, financial condition, changes in financial condition, critical accounting policies and estimates and significant developments. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes appearing elsewhere in this filing. This section is organized as follows:
•
Business Overview
•
Results of Operations - an analysis and comparison of our consolidated results of operations for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2022, May 29, 2021 and May 30, 2020, as reflected in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss).
•
Liquidity, Financial Position and Capital Resources - a discussion of our primary sources and uses of cash for the fiscal years ended May 28, 2022, May 29, 2021 and May 30, 2020, and a discussion of changes in our financial position.
Business Overview
Richardson Electronics, Ltd. is a leading global manufacturer of engineered solutions, power grid and microwave tubes, and related consumables; power conversion and RF and microwave components; high-value replacement parts, tubes, and service training for diagnostic imaging equipment; and customized display solutions. More than 60% of our products are manufactured in LaFox, Illinois, Marlborough, Massachusetts, or Donaueschingen, Germany, or by one of our manufacturing partners throughout the world. All our partners manufacture to our strict specifications and per our supplier code of conduct. We serve customers in the alternative energy, healthcare, aviation, broadcast, communications, industrial, marine, medical, military, scientific, and semiconductor markets. The Company’s strategy is to provide specialized technical expertise and “engineered solutions” based on our core engineering and manufacturing capabilities. The Company provides solutions and adds value through design-in support, systems integration, prototype design and manufacturing, testing, logistics, and aftermarket technical service and repair through its global infrastructure.
Some of the Company's products are manufactured in China and are imported into the United States. The Office of the United States Trade Representative ("USTR") instituted additional 10% to 25% tariffs on the importation of a number of products into the United States from China effective July 6, 2018, with additional products added August 23, 2018 and September 24, 2018. These additional tariffs are a response to what the USTR considers to be certain unfair trade practices by China. A number of the Company's products manufactured in China are now subject to these additional duties of 25% when imported into the United States.
Management continues to work with its suppliers as well as its customers to mitigate the impact of the tariffs on our customers’ markets. However, if the Company is unable to successfully pass through the additional cost of these tariffs, or if the higher prices reduce demand for the Company's products, it will have a negative effect on the Company's sales and gross margins.
We have three operating and reportable segments. Starting with our first quarter earnings release in October for fiscal 2023, we will introduce our new Green Energy Solutions (“GES”) segment. This segment is carved out of our existing PMT segment as we continue to focus on power management applications that support the green energy market globally. Accordingly, in the first quarter of fiscal 2023, we will begin reporting on four segments.
The three operating and reportable segments for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are defined as follows:
Power and Microwave Technologies (“PMT”) combines our core engineered solutions capabilities, power grid and microwave tube business with new disruptive RF, Wireless and Power technologies. As a designer, manufacturer, technology partner and authorized distributor, PMT’s strategy is to provide specialized technical expertise and engineered solutions based on our core engineering and manufacturing capabilities on a global basis. We provide solutions and add value through design-in support, systems integration, prototype design and manufacturing, testing, logistics and aftermarket technical service and repair-all through our existing global infrastructure. PMT’s focus is on products for power, RF and microwave applications for customers in 5G, alternative energy, aviation, broadcast, communications, industrial, marine, medical, military, scientific and semiconductor markets. PMT focuses on various applications including broadcast transmission, CO2 laser cutting, diagnostic imaging, dielectric and induction heating, high energy transfer, high voltage switching, plasma, power conversion, radar and radiation oncology. PMT also offers its customers technical services for both microwave and industrial equipment.
Canvys provides customized display solutions serving the corporate enterprise, financial, healthcare, industrial and medical original equipment manufacturers markets. Our engineers design, manufacture, source and support a full spectrum of solutions to match the needs of our customers. We offer long term availability and proven custom display solutions that include touch screens, protective panels, custom enclosures, All-In-One computers, specialized cabinet finishes and application specific software packages and certification services. Our volume commitments are lower than the large display manufacturers, making us the ideal choice for companies with very specific design requirements. We partner with both private label manufacturing companies and leading branded hardware vendors to offer the highest quality display and touch solutions and customized computing platforms.
Healthcare manufactures, repairs, refurbishes and distributes high value replacement parts and equipment for the healthcare market including hospitals, medical centers, asset management companies, independent service organizations and multi-vendor service providers. Products include diagnostic imaging replacement parts for CT and MRI systems; replacement CT and MRI tubes; CT service training; MRI coils, cold heads and RF amplifiers; hydrogen thyratrons, klystrons, magnetrons; flat panel detector upgrades; pre-owned CT systems; and additional replacement solutions currently under development for the diagnostic imaging service market. Through a combination of newly developed products and partnerships, service offerings and training programs, we believe we can help our customers improve efficiency while lowering the cost of healthcare delivery.
We currently have operations in the following major geographic regions: North America, Asia/Pacific, Europe and Latin America.
Results of Operations
Overview - Fiscal Year Ended May 28, 2022
•
Fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 both contained 52 weeks.
•
Net sales during fiscal 2022 were $224.6 million, up 26.9%, compared to net sales of $176.9 million during fiscal 2021.
•
Gross margin was 31.9% of net sales during fiscal 2022, compared to 33.2% of net sales during fiscal 2021.
•
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $55.7 million, or 24.8% of net sales, during fiscal 2022, compared to $55.9 million, or 31.6% of net sales, during fiscal 2021.
•
Operating income during fiscal 2022 was $16.0 million, compared to an operating income of $2.9 million during fiscal 2021.
•
Other expense during fiscal 2022 was $0.2 million, compared to other expense of $0.6 million during fiscal 2021.
•
Net income during fiscal 2022 was $17.9 million, compared to a net income of $1.7 million during fiscal 2021.
Net Sales and Gross Profit Analysis
Net sales by segment and percent change for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
During fiscal 2022, consolidated net sales increased by 26.9% compared to fiscal 2021. Sales for PMT increased by 29.7%, Canvys sales increased by 20.0% and Healthcare sales increased by 10.1%. The increase in PMT was mainly due to strong growth from our Power and Microwave Group (PMG) new technology partners in various applications including power management, green energy, and 5G infrastructure, and increased revenue from our Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication Equipment customers buying engineered solutions. We also had growth in various Electron Device (EDG) product lines. The increase in Canvys was primarily due to strong sales in the European and North American markets. The increase in Healthcare was primarily due to strong part sales and increase in demand for the ALTA750TM tubes.
During fiscal 2021, consolidated net sales increased by 13.5% compared to fiscal 2020. Sales for PMT increased by 15.9%, Canvys sales increased by 1.4% and Healthcare sales increased by 21.7%.
Gross profit by segment and percent of segment net sales for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Gross profit reflects the distribution and manufacturing product margin less manufacturing variances, inventory obsolescence charges, customer returns, scrap and cycle count adjustments, engineering costs and other provisions.
Consolidated gross profit was $71.7 million during fiscal 2022, compared to $58.8 million during fiscal 2021. Consolidated gross margin as a percentage of net sales decreased to 31.9% during fiscal 2022, from 33.2% during fiscal 2021, primarily due to PMT’s product mix, higher freight costs and foreign exchange effects in Canvys and increased component scrap expenses in Healthcare. Gross margin during fiscal 2022 included expense related to inventory provisions for PMT of $0.4 million and $0.1 million for Healthcare.
Consolidated gross profit was $58.8 million during fiscal 2021, compared to $49.7 million during fiscal 2020. Consolidated gross margin as a percentage of net sales increased to 33.2% during fiscal 2021, from 31.9% during fiscal 2020, primarily due to improved product mix in all business units. Gross margin during fiscal 2021 included expense related to inventory provisions for PMT of $0.6 million, $0.1 million for Canvys and $0.4 million for Healthcare.
Power and Microwave Technologies
Net sales for PMT increased 29.7% to $178.1 million during fiscal 2022 from $137.3 million during fiscal 2021. The increase was mainly due to strong growth from our Power and Microwave Group (PMG) technology partners in various applications including power management, green energy, and 5G infrastructure, and increased revenue from our Semiconductor Wafer Fabrication Equipment customers buying engineered solutions. We also had strong growth in various Electron Device (EDG) product lines. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales decreased to 32.6% during fiscal 2022 as compared to 33.5% during fiscal 2021, primarily due to product mix.
Net sales for PMT increased 15.9% to $137.3 million during fiscal 2021, from $118.5 million during fiscal 2020. This increase was due to strong growth in 5G and power management applications in our Power and Microwave Group (PMG). In addition, sales in the Semiconductor wafer fab market grew significantly due to strong demand along with year over year growth in our MRO Electron Devices products. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales increased to 33.5% during fiscal 2021 as compared to 32.3% during fiscal 2020, primarily due to improved product mix and manufacturing efficiencies.
Canvys - Visual Technology Solutions
Net sales for Canvys increased 20.0% to $35.2 million during fiscal 2022, from $29.3 million during fiscal 2021. Sales increased primarily due to strong sales in the European and North American markets. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales decreased to 32.0% during fiscal 2022 as compared to 35.0% during fiscal 2021 mainly due to increasing freight costs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and foreign currency effects.
Net sales for Canvys increased 1.4% to $29.3 million during fiscal 2021, from $28.9 million during fiscal 2020. Sales increased due to the addition of new customers and programs as well as increased customer demand in North America. The growth in North America was partially offset by lower customer demand in Europe due to the impact from the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales increased to 35.0% during fiscal 2021 as compared to 32.2% during fiscal 2020, primarily due to product mix and foreign currency effects.
Healthcare
Net sales for Healthcare increased 10.1% to $11.4 million during fiscal 2022, from $10.3 million during fiscal 2021. The increase in sales was primarily due to strong parts sales and an increase in demand for the ALTA 750DTM tubes. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales was 21.2% during fiscal 2022, compared to 25.1% during fiscal 2021. The decrease is primarily due to increased component scrap expenses.
Net sales for Healthcare increased 21.7% to $10.3 million during fiscal 2021, from $8.5 million during fiscal 2020. The increase in sales was primarily due to a significant increase in demand for the ALTA 750DTM tubes. Gross margin as a percentage of net sales was 25.1% during fiscal 2021, compared to 24.4% during fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily due to improved equipment margins as a result of installing ALTA 750DTM tubes in the equipment, offset by under absorbed manufacturing expenses.
Sales by Geographic Area
On a geographic basis, our sales are categorized by destination: North America; Asia/Pacific; Europe; Latin America; and Other.
Net sales by geographic area and percent change for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Gross profit by geographic area and percent of geographic net sales for fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
(1) Other primarily includes net sales not allocated to a specific geographical region, unabsorbed value-add costs and other
unallocated expenses.
We sell our products to customers in diversified industries and perform periodic credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition. Terms are generally on open account, payable net 30 days in North America, and vary throughout Asia/Pacific, Europe and Latin America. Estimates of credit losses are recorded in the financial statements based on monthly reviews of outstanding accounts.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) decreased during fiscal 2022 to $55.7 million from $55.9 million during fiscal 2021. However, when considering the non-recurrence of the $1.6 million legal settlement in fiscal 2021, the SG&A expense for fiscal 2022 was $1.4 million or 2.6% higher than fiscal 2021. This increase in SG&A expense from fiscal 2021 was mainly due to higher employee compensation expenses including incentive expense, partially offset by lower legal fees. SG&A as a percentage of sales decreased to 24.8% during fiscal 2022 as compared to 31.6% during fiscal 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased during fiscal 2021 to $55.9 million from $51.3 million during fiscal 2020. This increase included the $1.6 million legal settlement which is discussed in the following section. In addition to the $1.6 million legal settlement, SG&A expenses increased due to higher employee compensation expenses and higher legal fees, partially offset by lower travel and consulting expenses. SG&A as a percentage of sales decreased to 31.6% during fiscal 2021 as compared to 32.9% during fiscal 2020.
Legal Settlement - Fiscal 2021
On April 2, 2021, as part of a settlement where the Company did not admit liability, Richardson agreed to pay Varex Imaging Corporation (“Varex”) $1.6 million to settle alleged counts of patent infringement and claims of trade secret misappropriation. This settlement was recorded in selling, general and administrative expenses within the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
Other Income/Expense
Other income/expense was an expense of $0.2 million during fiscal 2022, compared to an expense of $0.6 million during fiscal 2021. Fiscal 2022 had $0.1 million of investment income compared to $0.1 million of investment income for fiscal 2021. Our foreign exchange gains and losses are primarily due to the translation of U.S. dollars held in non-U.S. entities. The foreign exchange loss reported for fiscal 2022 totaled $0.3 million, compared to a $0.8 million loss for fiscal 2021. We currently do not utilize derivative instruments to manage our exposure to foreign currency.
Income Tax Provision
Our income tax (benefit) provision during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 was ($2.2 million), $0.7 million and $0.6 million, respectively. The effective income tax rates during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 were (13.7%), 28.3% and (51.4%), respectively. The difference between the effective income tax rates as compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21.0% during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 was primarily driven by the impact of valuation allowance changes related to the realizability of our U.S. state and federal net deferred tax assets and changes in our geographical distribution of income (loss).
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. government enacted new tax legislation, Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Act”). The Company was subject to requirements of the Act beginning in fiscal 2019. Provisions include an income inclusion for global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”), a tax determined by base erosion and anti-avoidance tax (“BEAT”) related to certain payments between a U.S. corporation and foreign related entities, a limitation of certain executive compensation and a deduction for foreign derived intangible income. The Company has determined its accounting policy to treat the taxes due on GILTI as a period cost. The Company is not subject to the BEAT provision due to the revenue thresholds.
As of May 28, 2022, we have utilized all net deferred tax assets related to federal net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards, compared to $3.0 million as of May 29, 2021. Net deferred tax assets related to domestic state NOL carryforwards at May 28, 2022 amounted to approximately $2.4 million, compared to $3.9 million at May 29, 2021. Net deferred tax assets related to foreign NOL carryforwards as of May 28, 2022 totaled approximately $0.4 million with various or indefinite expiration dates. The amount of net deferred tax assets related to foreign NOL carryforwards was $0.4 million as of May 29, 2021. We also had a domestic net deferred tax asset of $1.8 million of foreign tax credit carryforwards as of both May 28, 2022 and May 29, 2021.
We have historically determined that undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries, to the extent of cash available, will be repatriated to the U.S. The deferred tax liability on the outside basis difference is now primarily withholding tax on future dividend distributions. The deferred tax liability related to undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries was less than $0.1 million in both fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to support a more likely than not assertion that its deferred tax assets will be realized. A significant component of objective evidence evaluated was the cumulative income or loss incurred in each jurisdiction over the three-year period ended May 28, 2022. We considered other positive evidence in determining the need for a valuation allowance in the U.S. including the subpart F and GILTI inclusions of our foreign earnings, the changes in our business performance in recent years, and the utilization of federal NOLs. The weight of this positive evidence is sufficient to outweigh other negative evidence in evaluating our need for a valuation allowance in the U.S. federal jurisdiction. As a result of the positive evidence outweighing the negative evidence for the year ended May 28, 2022, we have released the full valuation allowance on the U.S. federal and state deferred tax items. In addition, we partially released the valuation allowance on the state NOL deferred tax item, based on the amount of the NOLs that management believes it is more likely than not to realize. We have maintained a full valuation allowance against the foreign tax credit deferred tax asset based on negative evidence relating to the Company’s ability to utilize the foreign tax credit carryforward in the future.
As of May 28, 2022, a valuation allowance of $3.5 million was recorded, representing the portion of the deferred tax asset that management does not believe is more likely than not to be realized. The valuation allowance as of May 29, 2021 was $12.2 million. The remaining valuation allowance relates to foreign tax credits ($1.8 million), state NOLs ($0.2 million) and deferred tax assets in foreign jurisdictions where historical taxable losses have been incurred ($1.5 million). The amount of the deferred tax asset considered realizable, however, could be adjusted if estimates of future taxable income during the carryforward period are increased, or if objective negative evidence in the form of cumulative losses is no longer present and additional weight may be given to subjective evidence such as our projections for growth.
Income taxes paid, including foreign estimated tax payments, were $1.5 million, $0.1 million and $1.0 million, during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
In the normal course of business, we are subject to examination by taxing authorities throughout the world. Generally, years prior to fiscal 2016 are closed for examination under the statute of limitation for U.S. federal, U.S. state and local or non-U.S. tax jurisdictions. We are currently under examination in Germany for fiscal 2015 through fiscal 2018. This audit is expected to be closed in the first quarter of fiscal 2023. Our primary foreign tax jurisdictions are Germany and the Netherlands. We have tax years open in Germany beginning in fiscal 2019 and the Netherlands beginning in fiscal 2018.
The uncertain tax positions as of both May 28, 2022 and May 29, 2021 were $0.1 million. We record penalties and interest related to uncertain tax positions in the income tax expense line item within the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss). Accrued interest and penalties were included within the related tax liability line in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. We have not recorded a liability for interest and penalties as of May 28, 2022 or May 29, 2021.
Liquidity, Financial Position and Capital Resources
Our operations and cash needs have been primarily financed through income from operations and cash on hand.
Cash, cash equivalents and investments were $40.5 million at May 28, 2022. Cash, cash equivalents and investments by geographic area at May 28, 2022 consisted of $25.7 million in North America, $6.0 million in Europe, $1.5 million in Latin America and $7.3 million in Asia/Pacific. We repatriated a total of $1.5 million to the United States in fiscal 2022 from our foreign entities. This amount includes $0.7 million in the first quarter from our entity in China, $0.3 million in the second quarter from our entity in Taiwan and $0.5 million in the third quarter from our entity in Japan. Although the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act generally eliminated federal income tax on future cash repatriation to the United States, cash repatriation may be subject to state and local taxes, withholding or similar taxes. See Note 7, Income Taxes, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Cash and cash equivalents were $43.3 million at May 29, 2021. Cash and cash equivalents by geographic area at May 29, 2021 consisted of $26.1 million in North America, $8.8 million in Europe, $1.2 million in Latin America and $7.2 million in Asia/Pacific. We repatriated a total of $0.9 million to the United States in fiscal 2021 from several of our foreign entities. This amount includes $0.7 million from our entities in Italy and South Korea in the third quarter of fiscal 2021 and $0.2 million from our entity in France in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
The Company continues to monitor the impact of COVID-19, including the extent, duration and effectiveness of containment actions taken, the speed and extent of vaccination programs, the impact of the pandemic on its supply chain, manufacturing and distribution operations, customers and employees, as well as the U.S. economy in general. However, due to the uncertain and constantly evolving impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic across the globe, the Company cannot currently predict the long-term impact on its operations and financial results. The uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects include potential adverse effects on the overall economy, the Company’s supply chain, transportation services, employees and customers. The COVID-19 pandemic and its effects could adversely affect the Company’s revenues, earnings, liquidity and cash flows and may require significant actions in response, including expense reductions. Conditions surrounding COVID-19 change rapidly and additional impacts of which the Company is not currently aware may arise. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that the existing sources of liquidity, including current cash, will provide sufficient resources to meet known capital requirements and working capital needs through the next twelve months. Additionally, while our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, the economy and the outlook for growth in our markets, we believe our existing sources of liquidity as well as our ability to generate operating cash flows will satisfy our future obligations and cash requirements.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flow from operating activities primarily resulted from our net income adjusted for non-cash items and changes in our operating assets and liabilities.
Operating activities provided $1.9 million of cash during fiscal 2022. We had net income of $17.9 million during fiscal 2022, which included non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $0.7 million associated with the issuance of stock option awards and restricted stock awards, $0.5 million of inventory provisions, and depreciation and amortization expense of $3.4 million associated with our property and equipment as well as amortization of our intangible assets. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities resulted in a use of cash of $16.5 million during fiscal 2022, primarily due to the increase in inventories of $20.6 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $6.2 million and an increase in prepaid expenses of $0.2 million. These uses of cash were partially offset by the increase in our accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $10.1 million. The majority of the inventory increase was to support our
manufacturing, Canvys and PMG businesses. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to the sales increase in fiscal 2022. The increase in our accounts payable was due to higher inventory levels to support sales growth, and the increase in accrued liabilities was due to the higher employee compensation expenses and payroll taxes as well as increased deferred revenue.
Operating activities provided $0.8 million of cash during fiscal 2021. We had net income of $1.7 million during fiscal 2021, which included non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $0.7 million associated with the issuance of stock option awards and restricted stock awards, $1.0 million of inventory provisions and depreciation and amortization expense of $3.4 million associated with our property and equipment as well as amortization of our intangible assets. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities resulted in a use of cash of $6.0 million during fiscal 2021, primarily due to the increase in inventories of $4.9 million, an increase in accounts receivable of $4.2 million and a decrease in accounts payable of $0.6 million. These uses of cash were partially offset by the increase in our accrued liabilities of $3.6 million and the decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.1 million. The majority of the inventory increase was to support our electron tube and PMG businesses. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to the sales increase in fiscal 2021. The decrease in our accounts payable was due to timing of payments for some of our larger vendors for both inventory and services and the increase in accrued liabilities was due to the timing of employee compensation and payroll tax payments, as well as increased deferred revenue.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The cash flow from investing activities consisted primarily of purchases and maturities of investments and capital expenditures.
Cash used by investing activities of $8.1 million during fiscal 2022 was mainly attributed to the $5.0 million purchase of a Certificate of Deposit (CD) and $3.1 million in capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were primarily related to our manufacturing, Healthcare business and IT systems.
Cash provided by investing activities of $13.4 million during fiscal 2021 included the proceeds from the maturities of investments of $25.0 million, partially offset by purchases of investments of $9.0 million and $2.6 million in capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were primarily related to our Healthcare business and IT systems.
Our purchases and proceeds from investments consist of time deposits and CDs. Purchasing of future investments may vary from period to period due to interest and foreign currency exchange rates.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
The cash flow from financing activities primarily consists of cash dividends paid.
Cash used in financing activities of $0.4 million during fiscal 2022 resulted primarily from the $3.2 million used to pay dividends to shareholders, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock from stock option exercises.
Cash used in financing activities of $3.0 million during fiscal 2021 resulted primarily from cash used to pay dividends, partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock from stock option exercises.
All future payments of dividends are at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Dividend payments will depend on earnings, capital requirements, operating conditions and such other factors that the Board may deem relevant.
Contractual Obligations
Contractual obligations are presented in the table below as of May 28, 2022 (in thousands):
(1)
Lease obligations are related to certain warehouse and office facilities under non-cancelable operating leases as well as financing leases.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management continuously evaluates its critical accounting policies and estimates, including the allowance for doubtful accounts, revenue recognition, inventory obsolescence, intangible assets, loss contingencies and income taxes. Management bases the estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, however, actual results could differ from those estimates.
The policies discussed below are considered by management to be critical to understanding our financial position and the results of operations. Their application involves significant judgments and estimates in preparation of our consolidated financial statements. For all of these policies, management cautions that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and the best estimates routinely require adjustment.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Our allowance for doubtful accounts includes estimated losses that result from uncollectible receivables. The estimates are influenced by the following: continuing credit evaluation of customers’ financial conditions; aging of receivables, individually and in the aggregate; a large number of customers which are widely dispersed across geographic areas; and collectability and delinquency history by geographic area. Significant changes in one or more of these considerations may require adjustments affecting net income and net carrying value of accounts receivable. The allowance for doubtful accounts was approximately $0.2 million as of May 28, 2022 and $0.2 million as of May 29, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
Our customers are generally not resellers, but rather businesses that incorporate our products into their processes from which they generate an economic benefit. The goods are also distinct in that each item sold to the customer is clearly identified on both the purchase order and resulting invoice. Each product we sell benefits the customer independently of the other products. Each item on each purchase order from the customer can be used by the customer unrelated to any other products we provide to the customer.
The Company’s revenue includes the following streams:
•
Distribution
•
Manufacturing/assembly
•
Services revenue
Distribution typically includes products purchased from our suppliers, stocked in our warehouses and then sold to our customers. The distribution business does not include a separate service bundled with the product sold or sold on top of the product. Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods is transferred to our customers, which is simultaneous with the title transferring to the customer, in an amount that reflects the transaction price consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those goods. Control refers to the ability of the customer to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all of, the remaining benefits from the goods. Our transaction price consideration is fixed, unless otherwise disclosed below as variable consideration. Generally, our contracts require our customers to pay for goods after we deliver products to them. Terms are generally on open account, payable net 30 days in North America, and vary throughout Asia/Pacific, Europe and Latin America subject to customary credit checks.
Manufacturing/assembly typically includes the products that are manufactured or assembled in our manufacturing facility. These products can either be built to the customer’s prints/designs or are products that we stock in our warehouse to sell to any customer that places an order. The manufacturing business does not include a separate service bundled with the product sold or sold in addition to the product. Our contracts for customized products generally include termination provisions if a customer cancels its order. However, we recognize revenue at a point in time because the termination provisions normally do not require, upon cancelation, the customer to pay fees that are commensurate with the work performed. Each purchase order explicitly states the goods or service that we promise to transfer to the customer. The promises to the customer are limited only to those goods or service. The performance obligation is our promise to deliver both goods that were produced by the Company and resale of goods that we purchase from our suppliers. Our shipping and handling activities for destination shipments are performed prior to the customer obtaining control. As such, they are not a separate promised service. The Company elects to account for shipping and handling as activities to fulfill the promise to transfer the goods. The goods we provide to our customers are distinct in that our customers benefit from the goods we sell them through use in their own processes.
Repair, installation or training activities generate services revenue. The services we provide are relatively short in duration and typically completed in one or two weeks. Therefore, at each reporting date, the amount of unbilled work is insignificant. The services revenue has consistently accounted for less than 5% of the Company’s total revenues and is expected to continue at that level.
We record discounts taken based on historical experience. The policy varies by business unit. The Company allows returns with prior written authorization.
Inventories, net
Our consolidated inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value, generally using a weighted-average cost method. Our net inventories include approximately $66.6 million of finished goods, $8.0 million of raw materials and $5.8 million of work-in-progress as of May 28, 2022 as compared to approximately $57.0 million of finished goods, $3.9 million of raw materials and $2.6 million of work-in-progress as of May 29, 2021. The inventory reserve as of May 28, 2022 was $6.1 million compared to $5.9 million as of May 29, 2021.
At this time, we do not anticipate any material risks or uncertainties related to possible future inventory write-downs. Provisions for obsolete or slow-moving inventories are recorded based upon regular analysis of stock rotation privileges, obsolescence, the exiting of certain markets and assumptions about future demand and market conditions. If future demand changes in an industry or market conditions differ from management’s estimates, additional provisions may be necessary.
We recorded provisions to our inventory reserves of $0.5 million, $1.0 million and $1.0 million during fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, which were included in cost of sales. The provisions were primarily for obsolete and slow-moving parts. The parts were written down to estimated realizable value.
Intangible and Long-Lived Assets
Intangible assets are initially recorded at their fair market values determined by quoted market prices in active markets, if available, or recognized valuation models. Intangible assets that have finite useful lives are amortized over their useful lives either on a straight-line basis or over their projected future cash flows and are tested for impairment when events or changes in circumstances occur that indicate possible impairment. Our intangible assets represent the fair value for trade name, customer relationships, non-compete agreements and technology acquired in connection with the acquisitions.
We review property and equipment, definite-lived intangible assets and other long-lived assets for impairment whenever adverse events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of such assets may not be recoverable.
If adverse events do occur, our impairment review is based on an undiscounted cash flow analysis at the lowest level at which cash flows of the long-lived assets are largely independent of other groups of our assets and liabilities. This analysis requires management judgment with respect to changes in technology, the continued success of product lines and future volume, revenue and expense growth rates. We conduct annual reviews for idle and underutilized equipment and review business plans for possible impairment. Impairment occurs when the carrying value of the assets exceeds the future undiscounted cash flows expected to be earned by the use of the asset or asset group. When impairment is indicated, the estimated future cash flows are then discounted to determine the estimated fair value of the asset or asset group and an impairment charge is recorded for the difference between the carrying value and the estimated fair value.
Additionally, we also evaluate the remaining useful life each reporting period to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of depreciation or amortization. If the estimate of a long-lived asset’s remaining useful life is changed, the remaining carrying amount of the asset is amortized prospectively over that revised remaining useful life.
Loss Contingencies
We accrue a liability for loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. When only a range of possible loss can be established, the most probable amount in the range is accrued. If no amount within this range is a better estimate than any other amount within the range, the minimum amount in the range is accrued. If we determine that there is at least a reasonable possibility that a loss may have been incurred, we will include a disclosure describing the contingency.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities based on the differences between financial statement carrying amounts and the tax bases of assets and liabilities. We regularly review our deferred tax assets for recoverability and determine the need for a valuation allowance based on a number of factors, including both positive and negative evidence. These factors include historical taxable income or loss, projected future taxable income or loss, the expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences and the implementation of tax planning strategies. In circumstances where we, or any of our affiliates, have incurred three years of cumulative losses which constitute significant negative evidence, positive evidence of equal or greater significance is needed to overcome the negative evidence before a tax benefit is recognized for deductible temporary differences and loss carryforwards.
New Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU No. 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. ASU 2016-13 (as amended by ASU 2018-19, ASU 2019-04, ASU 2019-05, ASU 2019-10, ASU 2019-11 and 2020-02) introduces a new forward-looking approach, based on expected losses, to estimate credit losses on certain types of financial instruments, including trade receivables. The estimate of expected credit losses will require entities to incorporate considerations of historical information, current information and reasonable and supportable forecasts. This ASU also expands the disclosure requirements to enable users of financial statements to understand the entity’s assumptions, models and methods for estimating expected credit losses. The new standard is effective for smaller reporting companies for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2022. Early adoption is permitted. The Company is currently in the process of evaluating the impact of adoption on its consolidated financial statements.