Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion focuses on fiscal years 2021 and 2020 financial condition and results of operations and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2021 and 2020. Similar discussion of our fiscal year 2019 financial condition and results and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2020 and 2019 can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our final prospectus (File No. 333-260027) (the “Prospectus”) dated October 27, 2021 pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), for our initial public offering (the “IPO”).
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results may differ materially from those described in or implied by any forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors”.
Overview
We give customers ongoing access to our “unlimited closet” - with over 19,000 styles by over 780 designer brands - through our Subscription offering or the ability to rent a-la-carte through our Reserve offering. We also give our subscribers and customers the ability to buy our products through our Resale offering. These offerings allow us to engage and serve our subscribers and customers across diverse use cases from everyday life to special occasions. We have served over 2.5 million lifetime customers across all of our offerings and we had 159,544 ending total subscribers6 (active and paused) as of January 31, 2022. The majority of our revenue is highly recurring and is generated by our subscribers. For the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, 84% and 89% of our total revenue (including Reserve and Resale revenue) was generated by subscribers while they were active or paused.
The variety, breadth and quantity of products we carry is important to our business, and we strategically manage the capital efficient acquisition of a high volume of items every year. We have successfully disproved the myth that fashion apparel items and accessories only last one season as we are able to rent or “turn” our products multiple times over many years. We price our items at a fraction of their retail or comparable value, creating an attractive price and value proposition for our subscribers and customers.
We source virtually all of our products, which includes apparel, accessories and home goods, directly from designer brands. Prior to 2018, we purchased nearly all of our products from our brand partners typically at a discount to wholesale cost, which we refer to as “Wholesale” items. In late 2018, we began to procure products through Share by RTR and Exclusive Designs. See “-Our Product Acquisition Strategy” below for a description of the three ways in which we procure products.
6 Ending total subscribers represents the number of subscribers with an active or paused membership as of the last day of the period and excludes subscribers who had an active or paused subscription during the period, but ended their subscription prior to the last day of the fiscal period.
Recent Business Developments
Initial Public Offering. On October 29, 2021, we closed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 17,000,000 shares at the public offering price of $21.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $327.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Debt Paydown and Amendment. Concurrent with our IPO, we paid down our senior secured term loan with Ares Corporate Opportunities Fund V, L.P. (the “Ares Facility”) of $80.7 million in full and $60.0 million of our subordinated, junior lien term loan with Double Helix Pte Ltd. as administrative agent for Temasek Holdings (the “Temasek Facility”), resulting in a total debt repayment of $140.7 million. We also refinanced the remaining Temasek Facility (the “Amended Temasek Facility”).
Key Operating and Financial Results. We have achieved the following operating and financial results for the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively:
•Revenue was $203.3 million and $157.5 million, respectively, representing 29.1% growth year-over-year
•115,240 and 54,797 ending Active Subscribers7 (excluding paused subscribers), respectively, representing 110% growth year-over-year.
•159,544 and 95,245 ending Total Subscribers (including paused subscribers), respectively, representing 68% growth year-over-year
•Gross Profit was $69.7 million and $15.5 million, respectively, representing a gross margin of 34.3% and 9.8%, respectively
•Net Loss was $(211.8) million and $(171.1) million, respectively. Net Loss as a percentage of revenue was (104.2)%, as compared to (108.6)% in fiscal year 2020. Net Loss in fiscal year 2021 included $(51.5) million of non-recurring or one-time charges that were primarily non-cash, including a $(24.9) million non-recurring, non-cash loss on the revaluation of warrants that were exercised or reclassified at IPO, a $(12.2) million non-recurring, primarily non-cash loss on the extinguishment of debt paid down concurrently with the IPO, and a $(14.4) million non-cash charge associated with the one-time satisfaction of the liquidity based vesting conditions for certain RSUs upon the effectiveness of our IPO.
•Adjusted EBITDA was $(19.2) million and $(20.3) million, respectively, representing an Adjusted EBITDA margin of (9.4)% and (12.9)%, respectively
•Net cash used in operating activities plus net cash used in investing activities was $(64.8) million and $(101.2) million, respectively; and
•Net cash used in operating activities plus net cash used in investing activities as a percentage of revenue was (31.9)% and (64.3)%, respectively.
•Cash and Cash Equivalents was $247.6 million and $95.3 million, respectively, after paydown of $140.7 million of debt and accrued interest (approximately one-third of the company’s pre-IPO debt balance) with a portion of the IPO proceeds.
Our Product Acquisition Strategy
We acquire and monetize products in three ways: Wholesale, Share by RTR and Exclusive Designs. Wholesale items are acquired directly from brand partners, typically at a discount to wholesale price. Share by RTR items are acquired directly from brand partners on consignment, at zero to low upfront cost with performance-based revenue share payments to our brand partners over time. Exclusive Designs items are designed using our data in collaboration with our brand partners. These units are manufactured through third-party partners with a low upfront fee and minimal revenue share payments to our brand partners over time.
7 Active Subscribers is defined as ending total subscribers as of period end, excluding paused subscribers.
Our three product acquisition methods are strategic levers to manage our capital efficiency, profitability and product risk. Our Exclusive Designs channel uses data insights to acquire items at a lower cost, which are designed to generate higher profitability over time. Share by RTR meaningfully reduces our upfront spend and de-risks our investment since we pay brands primarily based on item performance. Our Share by RTR arrangements with brands target delivering 85% to 100% of comparable wholesale cost to the brand in the first year; however there is no minimum commitment other than the upfront payment if applicable. Nearly all Share by RTR deals consummated after September 2020 include a cap on total potential payments to the brand partner.
In fiscal year 2021, 45% of new items were acquired through Wholesale, 33% through Share by RTR and 22% through Exclusive Designs, compared to 46% Wholesale, 36% Share by RTR and 18% Exclusive Designs in fiscal year 2020. In total, approximately 55% of new items were acquired through the more capital-efficient channels in fiscal year 2021, approximately 54% in fiscal year 2020 and approximately 26% in fiscal year 2019. Both our purchasing power and the diversification into Share by RTR and Exclusive Designs have led to a decrease in average upfront cost per item over time. We expect to decrease the percentage of units acquired through Wholesale and increase the percentage of units acquired through our more capital-efficient channels, Exclusive Designs and Share by RTR, in fiscal year 2022.
For additional details about our business model and our product acquisition strategy, see Part I, Item 1, “Business”.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a variety of factors that present significant opportunities for our business, but also present risks and challenges that could adversely impact our growth and profitability.
Subscribers and Customers
Our Attractive Cohort Trends. We believe that we have a significant market opportunity ahead of us to increase our base of subscribers and customers, and our long-term growth depends in large part on our continued ability to acquire and retain customers and subscribers.
We partly assess the health of our business by analyzing the performance of our historical customer cohorts over time. A significant portion of our total revenue in each year is generated from customers acquired in previous years. We therefore believe that the performance of our customer cohorts supports our strategies of investing in subscriber and customer acquisition and retention and enhancing the scale of our platform.
The chart below indicates cumulative revenue per customer by customer cohort, which is defined as cumulative total revenue generated by a cohort across all of our product offerings, divided by the original number of customers in the cohort. Customers are placed in cohorts based on the fiscal year in which they first transacted with RTR. Data points reflect only the monthly cohorts that have reached each respective life to date period. Our customer cohorts demonstrate the continued spend and expansion of our customers:
•Each successive customer cohort has higher spending patterns, except for the FY 2020 cohort, which was most impacted by COVID-19.
•Higher spending is driven by increased customer loyalty and customers renting for more days per year, particularly through our Subscription offering.
•Our FY 2021 cohort which is less impacted by COVID-19, exhibited better trends than the FY 2016-2020 historical cohorts.
•Over the last three years, we have increasingly directed customers to our higher revenue Subscription offerings, which has driven a year-over-year improvement in cumulative revenue per customer by cohort as a greater percentage of our customers are subscribers. After the first six months as a customer, we see an inflection in spending as our most loyal customers remain on the platform.
We define CAC as total marketing expense, other than employee expenses, divided by the number of new customers acquired in that period. We acquire customers efficiently as evidenced by over 80% of our lifetime customers having joined organically.
We also specifically assess the behavior of subscribers given they contribute to the majority of our revenue. Cumulative revenue per subscriber by cohort is defined as cumulative total revenue generated across all of our product offerings (which includes Subscription and Reserve Rental Revenue and Other Revenue) by customers who are current or previous subscribers, divided by the original number of subscribers in the cohort. Subscribers are placed in cohorts based on the fiscal year in which they first joined a subscription program. Data points reflect only the monthly cohorts that have reached each respective life to date period.
•Within 3, 6 and 12 months, subscribers from our fiscal year 2018 and 2019 cohorts generated an average of $286, $460 and $691 in cumulative revenue, respectively.
•Our FY 2020 subscriber cohort generated an average of $255, $395 and $622 in cumulative revenue within 3, 6 and 12 months, respectively.
•Our FY 2021 subscriber cohort exhibited better trends in FY 2021 compared to our FY 2018, FY2019 and FY 2020 cohorts, generating $300 in cumulative revenue in 3 months and $497 in 6 months, largely due to the changes we made in 2021 to our subscription programs which have resulted in higher gross margins and revenue per order.
We provide a flexible offering that allows our subscribers to customize their subscription as their everyday life changes, choosing to pause and reactivate their membership as needed. We have historically seen that many subscribers who cancel their subscription will often return to the platform and resubscribe when membership again makes sense for their everyday life.
Brands and Products
Ability to Acquire and Monetize Products Efficiently. Our ability to deliver an elevated experience for our subscribers and customers that keeps them loyal to RTR depends on us having the right assortment. Due to our deep partnerships with brands, we can acquire products directly from them in multiple ways, and due to our expertise in reverse logistics and garment restoration we can monetize our products effectively over their useful life. Diversifying our product acquisition away from 100% Wholesale has driven higher overall product return on investment and reduced the capital needs of the business. In fiscal year 2021, approximately 55% of new items were acquired through our more capital efficient non-Wholesale channels, compared to 54% in fiscal year 2020 and 26% in fiscal year 2019. We continuously evaluate our product acquisition mix to maximize our strategic priorities.
Upfront cost per item is defined as total upfront spend for items acquired in a period divided by the number of items acquired. We define total upfront spend as the total costs of products acquired in a period excluding performance based revenue share payments which are paid out over time. Total upfront spend includes the total acquisition cost for Wholesale items, upfront payments to brand partners for Share by RTR and Exclusive Designs items, third party manufacturing or other similar acquisition costs for Exclusive Designs items, and other ancillary upfront costs such as freight, where applicable. For fiscal year 2021 our average upfront cost per item was $95, representing a 14% decrease from an average upfront cost of $111 in fiscal year 2019. Our diversification into non-Wholesale channels has meaningfully reduced our upfront spend.
Ability to Achieve Leverage in our Cost Structure. Improving operational efficiency of our platform is imperative to maintaining or increasing profitability. We expect our operating costs to increase as we make investments to grow subscribers and revenue and to enhance the customer experience. Though we anticipate quarterly fluctuations in operating leverage, we do not expect these costs to generally grow at the same pace as our total revenue on an annual basis.
We use technology and customer data to drive efficiency across products, fulfillment expenses and operating costs. Our data has allowed us to build a differentiated and proprietary rental reverse logistics platform with a vertically integrated cleaning and restoration process. We have invested in technology and automation in order to drive operating leverage and higher margins as we grow and scale our business.
Over time, we have improved our margins, profitability and cash flow, and we believe we will continue to benefit from economies of scale and are focused on driving additional efficiencies in our operating expenses.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage of our business prior to capital expenditures. We also measure the cash consumption of the business including capital expenditures by assessing net cash used in operating activities and net cash used in investing activities on a combined basis.
Seasonality
We experience seasonality in our business, which has been impacted and may in the future change due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. For our subscription rentals, we typically acquire the highest number of subscribers in March through May and September through November, as these are the times customers naturally think about changing over their wardrobes. We generally see a higher rate of subscribers pause in the summer, and in mid-December through the end of January. We historically had typically realized a higher portion of revenue from Reserve rentals during our third and fourth fiscal quarters as a result of increased wedding and holiday events.
The third and fourth fiscal quarters of 2021 demonstrated subscriber seasonality patterns that are generally consistent with our historical trends, though our fourth quarter of 2021 saw a higher rate of pause activity due to the Omicron variant impact. In addition, our seasonality trends are seeing effects from COVID-19 generally, as Reserve orders and revenue are impacted by fewer large-scale holiday and special events compared to pre-COVID-19, especially those typically occurring in the third and fourth quarters. Subscriber acquisition was also impacted by COVID-19 in the fourth quarter of 2021 due to fewer large-scale holiday and special events.
We also experience seasonality in the timing of expenses and capital outlays. Transportation expense, and therefore fulfillment cost, is typically highest in the fiscal fourth quarter, given higher service levels, such as more costly expedited shipping, and competition during holidays. Our most significant product capital expenditures typically occur in the first fiscal quarter and the third fiscal quarter, when we acquire product for the upcoming fall and spring seasons, though impact on cash is dependent on timing of receipt of product.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic materially adversely affected our fiscal year 2020 operating and financial results. In March 2020, we instituted numerous health and safety measures and took immediate financial actions to withstand COVID-19 including pausing of paid advertising and marketing activities and other cost-saving measures to reduce operating and capital expenditures in the short term, including salary reductions, closing of brick and mortar stores and right sizing of labor in our fulfillment centers. These actions significantly reduced these costs as a percentage of revenue throughout fiscal year 2020. Rental product depreciation and revenue share as a percentage of revenue increased throughout fiscal year 2020 due to the levels of rental product on hand relative to the reduced subscriber levels.
In fiscal year 2021, our financial results continued to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 subscriber acquisition and engagement increased as shelter-at-home restrictions were lifted. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 the Omicron variant negatively impacted us in three key ways by: 1) significantly decreased revenue from our Reserve business as most holiday events were canceled; 2) reduced subscriber acquisition in the second half of quarter; and 3) drove a higher rate of subscriber pause. In fiscal year 2021, results also continued to be impacted by consumers working primarily from home and by special events and occasions not being back to pre-pandemic levels.
We expect the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and related macro-economic trends, including the spread of potential new variants, to have a continued impact on our business, results of operations, growth rates, and financial condition into fiscal year 2022. In fiscal year 2022, we currently expect an operating environment that, while improved from fiscal year 2021, continues to be impacted by COVID-19. However, we also believe that the backlog of special events and leisure travel that have been pushed to 2022 and 2023 will contribute to additional COVID-19 recovery in those periods.
We continue to take actions to adjust to the changing COVID-19 business environment and related inflationary pressure. For example, we increased wage rates throughout fiscal year 2021 to attract and retain talent at our fulfillment centers and we expect to continue to be impacted by rising labor costs in fiscal year 2022. We also expect transportation costs to continue to increase in fiscal year 2022, and we are focused on diversifying our transportation network to mitigate these rising costs and service delays. Examples of these mitigation efforts include increasing volumes with regional and last-mile carriers and consolidating shipments, such as through the launch of an at-home pickup service in certain markets. Although we continue to face a challenging environment due to the COVID-19 pandemic, rising wages, a decreased level of workforce participation and nationwide shipping carrier delays, we have been able to and plan to continue hiring and are diversifying our transportation network in order to support increasing and/or fluctuating demand for our offerings.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic, including the spread of any new variants, will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, growth rates, and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. Given the uncertainty, we cannot estimate the financial impact of the pandemic on our future results of operations, cash flows, or financial condition. For additional details, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Business and Financial Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key business and financial metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions. The calculation of the key business and financial metrics discussed below may differ from similarly titled metrics used by other companies, securities analysts or investors, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes. These key business and financial metrics are not meant to be considered as indicators of our financial performance in isolation from or as a substitute for our financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP and should be considered in conjunction with other metrics and components of our results of operations, such as each of the other key business and financial metrics, and our revenue and net loss.
__________
(1)Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure; for a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, net loss, and why we consider Adjusted EBITDA to be a useful metric, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Metrics” below.
Active Subscribers: Active Subscribers represents the number of subscribers with an active membership as of the last day of any given period and excludes paused subscribers. In fiscal year 2020, we saw our Active Subscribers decrease due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, a significant number of our subscribers put their membership on pause rather than canceling. As of January 31, 2022, we had 115,240 Active Subscribers, up 110% year-over-year. Our Active Subscribers as of January 31, 2022, were impacted by the Omicron variant of COVID-19, which reduced subscriber acquisition in the second half of the fourth quarter and drove a higher rate of subscriber pause.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin: We define Gross Profit as total revenue less fulfillment expense, rental product depreciation and revenue share. We depreciate owned apparel assets over three years and owned accessory assets over two years net of 20% and 30% salvage values, respectively, and recognize the depreciation and remaining cost of items when sold or retired on our statement of operations. Rental product depreciation expense is time-based and reflects all items we own. We use Gross Profit and Gross Profit as a percentage of revenue, or Gross Margin, to measure the continued efficiency of our business after the cost of our products and fulfillment costs are included. Gross Profit was $69.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $15.5 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 representing Gross Margins of 34.3% and 9.8%, respectively. The increase in Gross Profit and Gross Margin for the year ended January 31, 2022 was driven by the improvement in some areas of fulfillment costs and lower rental product depreciation and revenue share, which represented a lower percentage of total revenue than in the prior periods. The increase was partially offset by higher operations wage rates and transportation costs. We expect to have the opportunity to improve Gross Profit and Gross Margin over time by driving growth in total revenue and revenue per subscriber, fulfillment and operational efficiency gains, and strategically evolving our mix of product acquisition.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin: We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted to exclude interest expense, rental product depreciation, other depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, write-off of liquidated assets, certain non-recurring or one-time costs (see below footnotes to the reconciliation table), income taxes, warrant liability revaluation gains / losses, debt extinguishment gains / losses, other income and expense, and other gains / losses. We define Adjusted EBITDA Margin as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenue, net for a period. Adjusted EBITDA was $(19.2) million for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $(20.3) million for the year ended January 31, 2021, representing margins of (9.4)% and (12.9)%, respectively. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin have increased for the year ended January 31, 2022 due to the improvement in Gross Profit and Gross Margin, and improved operating leverage across technology and general and administrative expenses excluding one-time costs and share-based compensation. We have the opportunity to improve Adjusted EBITDA as we increase revenue and drive higher revenue per subscriber, fulfillment and operational efficiency gains, and operating expense leverage.
Components of Results of Operations
Total Revenue, Net
Our total revenue, net consists of Subscription and Reserve rental revenue and Other revenue. Total revenue is presented net of promotional discounts, credits and refunds, and taxes.
Subscription and Reserve Rental Revenue. We generate Subscription and Reserve rental revenue from subscription and Reserve rental fees. We recognize subscription fees ratably over the subscription period, commencing on the date the subscriber enrolls in a subscription program. These fees are collected upon enrollment and any revenue from an unrecognized portion of the subscription period is deferred to the following fiscal period. We recently announced a price increase for our subscription plans, which we expect will generally increase revenue per subscriber by program over time. We recognize Reserve fees over the rental period, which starts on the date of delivery of the product to the customer. Reserve orders can be placed up to four months prior to the rental start date and the customer’s payment form is charged upon order confirmation. We defer recognizing the rental fees and any related promotions for Reserve rentals until the date of delivery, and then recognize those fees evenly over the four- or eight-day rental period.
Other Revenue. We generate Other revenue primarily from the sale of products while they are in rental condition. We offer the ability for subscribers and customers to purchase products at a discount to retail price. Payment for the sale of products occurs upon order confirmation while the associated revenue is recognized either at the time the sold product is delivered to the customer or when purchased, if the item is already at home with the customer.
Costs and Expenses
Fulfillment. Fulfillment expenses consist of all costs to receive, process and fulfill customer orders. This primarily includes shipping costs to/from customers and personnel and related costs, which includes salaries and bonuses, and employee benefit costs. Personnel and related costs are related to processing inbound and outbound customer orders, cleaning, restoring and repairing items received from customers, tracking and managing items within our fulfillment center network and ingesting new items received from brands. Fulfillment expenses also include costs of packing materials, cleaning supplies, and other fulfillment-related expenses. We expect fulfillment costs to increase in the future as order volume increases and because costs to ship and process orders to/from customers are expected to increase due to increasing prices in the transportation market which we started to see in the third and fourth quarters of fiscal year 2021. We also expect fulfillment expense to increase due to competitive pressures in the labor market which could lead to continued higher wage rates. We increased warehouse wage rates during the year ended January 31, 2022 and believe we will continue to be impacted by rising wage rates. We expect to continue to invest in automation and other process improvements to support and drive efficiencies in our operations. To the extent we are successful in becoming more efficient in fulfilling orders, and at a magnitude that is able to offset increasing shipping costs, wage rates and cleaning/packing supply price increases, we would expect these expenses to decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the longer term.
Technology. Technology expenses consist of personnel and related costs for employees engaged in software development and engineering, quality assurance, product, customer experience, data science, analytics and information technology-related efforts, net of personnel costs associated with capitalized software. Technology expenses also include professional services, third-party hosting expenses, website monitoring costs, and software and license fees. We expect to increase technology expenses as we continue to improve the customer and subscriber experience and invest in our technology stack and infrastructure to support overall growth in our business and distribution network. While these expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of total revenue, we expect them to decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the longer term.
Marketing. Marketing expenses include online and mobile marketing, search engine optimization and email costs, marketing personnel and related costs, agency fees, brand marketing, printed collateral, consumer research, and other related costs. We expect marketing expenses to increase as we intend to increase marketing spend to drive the growth of our business and increase our brand awareness. The trend and timing of our brand marketing expenses will depend in part on the timing of marketing campaigns.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of all other personnel and related costs, including customer service, finance, tax, legal, human resources, fashion and photography and fixed operations costs. General and administrative expenses also include occupancy costs (including warehouse-related), photography costs, professional services, credit card fees, general corporate and warehouse expenses, other administrative costs, gains and losses due to foreign exchange rate fluctuations associated with consolidating our foreign subsidiary at each period end, and gains and losses associated with asset disposals and operating lease terminations. We expect to increase general and administrative expenses as we grow our infrastructure to support operating as a public company and the overall growth of the business. We also expect rent expense and other facilities-related costs to increase in the future as we expand our distribution network to support overall business growth and fulfillment cost-reduction initiatives. While these expenses may vary from period to period as a percentage of total revenue, we expect them to decrease as a percentage of total revenue over the longer term.
Rental Product Depreciation and Revenue Share. Rental product depreciation and revenue share expenses consist of depreciation and write-offs of rental products, and payments under revenue share arrangements with brand partners. We depreciate the cost, less an estimated salvage value, of our owned products (Wholesale and Exclusive Designs items), over the estimated useful lives of these items and, if applicable, accelerate depreciation of the items when they are no longer in rental condition. We recognize the cost of items acquired under Share by RTR, as incurred, through upfront payments and performance-based revenue share payments. We expect rental product depreciation and revenue share expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to support subscriber and customer growth. The amount and proportion of rental product depreciation and revenue share will vary from period to period based on how we acquire items as well as the mix of our rental product base.
Other Depreciation and Amortization. Other depreciation and amortization expenses consist of depreciation and amortization amounts for fixed assets, intangible assets including capitalized software, and financing right-of-use assets.
Interest Income / (Expense). Interest income / (expense) consists primarily of accrued paid-in-kind interest, cash interest and debt issuance cost amortization associated with our Amended Temasek Facility going forward.
Gain / (Loss) on Warrant Liability Revaluation, Net. Gain / (loss) on warrant liability revaluation is associated with revaluing liability classified warrants to the respective fair value at period end or prior to conversion. As of January 31, 2022, all outstanding warrants are equity classified and therefore do not require remeasurement going forward.
Gain / (Loss) on Debt Extinguishment, Net. Gain / (loss) on debt extinguishment is associated with debt extinguishment including the write off of the unamortized debt issuance costs which most recently occurred at the time of our IPO. These are primarily non-cash and are associated with debt paydown transactions which are non-recurring.
Other Income / (Expense). Other income / (expense) consists primarily of proceeds from previous insurance claims and proceeds from monetizing tax credits associated with growth.
Income Tax Benefit / (Expense). Income taxes consist primarily of state minimum taxes and Irish refundable tax credits. We have established a valuation allowance for our U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets, including net operating losses. We expect to maintain this valuation allowance until it becomes more likely than not that the benefit of our federal and state deferred tax assets will be realized by way of expected future taxable income in the United States.
Results of Operations
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
Comparison of the years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021
Total Revenue, Net. Total revenue, net was $203.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $45.8 million, or 29.1%, compared to $157.5 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in overall demand, including subscriber count, directly attributable to the COVID-19 recovery compared to last year.
Subscription and Reserve Rental Revenue. Subscription and Reserve rental revenue was $185.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $49.9 million, or 36.7%, compared to $135.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by the 110% year-over-year increase in active subscriber count and the increase in Reserve rental revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic recovery as compared to last year. In the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 Omicron negatively impacted our Reserve revenue as most holiday events were canceled. In addition, our active subscriber count was impacted due to a reduction in subscriber acquisition in the second half of the fourth quarter and a higher rate of subscriber pause. We recently announced a price increase for our subscription plans, which we expect will generally increase revenue per subscriber by program over time.
Other Revenue. Other revenue was $17.5 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, a decrease of $4.1 million, or 19.0%, compared to $21.6 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily driven by an intentional mix shift of revenue during fiscal year 2020 (and especially at the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic) from Subscription and Reserve rental revenue to Other revenue which was not the Company’s strategy in fiscal year 2021. In the prior period, we launched additional resale initiatives and increased promotional activities for resale items in order to increase revenue from subscribers. These promotional activities were reduced in fiscal year 2021 which resulted in Other revenue representing 8.6% of total revenue, down from 13.7% in fiscal year 2020.
Costs and Expenses. Total costs and expenses were $329.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $41.2 million, or 14.3%, compared to $288.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by $26.6 million of share-based compensation, of which $14.4 million was due to the one-time satisfaction of the liquidity-based vesting conditions for certain RSUs previously outstanding and certain RSUs which were granted upon the effectiveness of our IPO in October 2021. The increase was also driven, to a lesser extent, by an increase in marketing initiatives, fulfillment expenses to support demand related growth, and hiring to support our increased growth and transition to a public company. The increase compared to the prior period was partially offset by lower rental product depreciation driven by fewer units sold and fewer units on hand requiring depreciation, as product depreciation is time based.
Fulfillment. Fulfillment expenses were $61.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $8.9 million, or 16.8%, representing 30.4% of revenue, compared to $53.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, representing 33.7% of revenue. The increase in fulfillment dollars was primarily driven by an increase in demand-related growth and an increase in wage rates and transportation costs which are expected to continue in fiscal year 2022, partially offset by fulfillment labor process improvements. Fulfillment expenses as a percentage of revenue were 30.4% for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared with 33.7% last year.
Technology. Technology expenses were $45.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $7.6 million, or 20.2%, compared to $37.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in personnel costs during fiscal year 2021 to support future growth initiatives, compared to the prior period which was impacted by COVID-19 related personnel cost reductions. This increase was also driven by $4.2 million of share-based compensation for technology personnel, of which $1.9 million is related to the one-time satisfaction of the liquidity-based vesting conditions for certain RSUs upon the effectiveness of our IPO in October 2021. Technology expenses were 22.3% of revenue for the year ended January 31, 2022 and included the one time share-based compensation charge representing 0.9% of revenue. Technology expenses as a percentage of revenue were 23.9% last year. We expect technology expenses to increase in fiscal year 2022, driven by continued strategic investments.
Marketing. Marketing expenses were $26.5 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $18.4 million, or 227.2%, compared to $8.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was driven by the increased marketing initiatives as compared to the same period last year which had reduced paid and brand marketing spend during the COVID-19 pandemic, in addition to marketing personnel cost reductions. The current period also includes $1.0 million of share-based compensation for marketing personnel, of which $0.3 million is related to the one-time satisfaction of the liquidity-based vesting conditions for certain RSUs upon the effectiveness of our IPO in October 2021, which represented 0.1% of revenue. Marketing expenses unrelated to personnel costs were $20.6 million in the year ended January 31, 2022 and 10.1% of revenue, of which 1.2% was related to a small brand campaign. Marketing expenses unrelated to personnel costs were $4.2 million last year and 2.7% of total revenue. We expect marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars in fiscal year 2022, in particular in the first half, in order to drive subscriber growth and higher recurring revenue earlier in the year.
General and Administrative. General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses were $104.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $27.2 million, or 35.2%, compared to $77.2 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was driven by $21.4 million of share-based compensation for G&A personnel, of which $12.2 million was related to the one-time satisfaction of the liquidity-based vesting conditions for certain RSUs previously outstanding and certain RSUs which were granted upon the effectiveness of our IPO in October 2021. The increase was also driven, to a lesser extent, by the increase in personnel costs required to support our growth and transition to a public company and increased legal and consulting fees required to support our public company transition. The prior period was also more impacted by cost saving initiatives at the onset of COVID-19 including personnel cost reductions. The increase was partially offset by lower customer experience personnel costs due to fewer subscribers requiring support during the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to the support required at the onset of COVID-19 and a $1.5 million increase in the gain/loss from liquidated rental product sales. G&A expenses as a percentage of revenue were 51.4% and included $12.2 million of costs associated with the one-time share-based compensation charge representing 6.0% of revenue. G&A expenses as a percentage of revenue were 49.0% last year.
Rental Product Depreciation and Revenue Share. Rental product depreciation and revenue share was $71.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, a decrease of $17.3 million, or 19.4%, compared to $89.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. Rental product depreciation and revenue share was 35.3% of revenue in the year ended January 31, 2022, down from 56.5% in the prior period. The decrease is a result of fewer units sold and fewer units on hand requiring depreciation, as product depreciation is time based, partially offset by an increase in revenue share.
Other Depreciation and Amortization. Other depreciation and amortization was $19.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, a decrease of $3.6 million, or 15.7%, compared to $23.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily driven by the decrease in capitalized software amortization and lower depreciation associated with our reusable garment bags. Reusable bag depreciation is time based and fewer bags were purchased and depreciated, as a result of the reduction in shipment volume in fiscal year 2020 which was more heavily impacted by COVID-19.
Interest Income / (Expense), Net. Interest expense, net was $53.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $6.4 million, or 13.7%, compared to $46.6 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This increase was driven by the incremental accrued payment-in-kind interest related to the additional Ares debt incurred in October 2020 and paid down in full in October 2021. Of the $53.0 million total interest expense in the year ended January 31, 2022, $38.8 million was the accrual of paid-in kind (“PIK”) interest, $8.3 million was cash, financing lease interest and other interest and $5.9 million was debt discount amortization, compared with $36.9 million of PIK interest, $4.7 million of cash, financing lease interest and other interest and $5.0 million of debt discount amortization in the year ended January 31, 2021.
Gain / (Loss) on Warrant Liability Revaluation, Net. Gain / (loss) on warrant liability revaluation, net was $(24.9) million for the year ended January 31, 2022, a decrease of $25.3 million compared to $0.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease was driven by the non-recurring and non-cash revaluation of liability classified warrants associated with prior lender facilities to their fair value in the current period or prior to conversion. As of January 31, 2022, all outstanding warrants are equity classified and therefore remeasurement after the third quarter of fiscal year 2021 is not required.
Gain / (Loss) on Debt Extinguishment, Net. Gain / (loss) on debt extinguishment, net was $(12.2) million for the year ended January 31, 2022, an increase of $11.6 million, compared to $(0.6) million for the year ended January 31, 2021. The costs in the current period were associated with the fees and unamortized debt issuance costs related to the Ares debt paydown upon the IPO in October 2021, compared to the prior lender debt extinguishment in the prior period. These charges were primarily non-cash and are associated with debt paydown transactions which are non-recurring.
Other Income / (Expense), Net. Other income / (expense), net was $3.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, a decrease of $2.3 million, compared to $6.2 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. This decrease was primarily driven by $5.0 million of insurance claim proceeds and $1.3 million of monetized tax credits settled during fiscal year 2020 compared to $4.0 million of insurance claim proceeds, settled during fiscal year 2021.
Non-GAAP Financial Metrics
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP financial metrics are useful in evaluating our performance. These non-GAAP financial metrics are not meant to be considered as indicators of our financial performance in isolation from, or as a substitute, for our financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP and should be read only in conjunction with financial information presented on a GAAP basis. There are limitations to the use of the non-GAAP financial metrics presented in this Annual Report. For example, our non-GAAP financial metrics may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate non-GAAP financial metrics differently than we do, limiting the usefulness of those measures for comparative purposes.
The reconciliation of the below non-GAAP financial metrics to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is presented below. We encourage reviewing the reconciliation in conjunction with the presentation of the non-GAAP financial metrics for each of the periods presented. In future periods, we may exclude similar items, may incur income and expenses similar to these excluded items, and may include other expenses, costs and non-recurring items.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin are key performance measures used by management to assess our operating performance and the operating leverage of our business prior to capital expenditures. Our Adjusted EBITDA margins have improved from (12.9)% in the year ended January 31, 2021 to (9.4)% in the year ended January 31, 2022.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
__________
(1)Includes debt discount amortization of $5.9 million in the year ended January 31, 2022, $5.0 million in the year ended January 31, 2021, and $4.0 in the year ended January 31, 2020.
(2)Includes non-rental product depreciation and capitalized software amortization.
(3)Reflects the non-cash expense for share-based compensation. The year ended January 31, 2022 includes $14.4 million related to the one-time satisfaction of the liquidity-based vesting conditions for certain RSUs previously outstanding and certain RSUs which were granted upon the effectiveness of our IPO in October 2021.
(4)Reflects the write-off of the remaining book value of liquidated products that had previously been held for sale.
(5)Non-recurring adjustments for the year ended January 31, 2022 includes $5.2 million of public readiness preparation costs, for the year ended January 31, 2021 includes $3.2 million of costs related to COVID-19 related matters including severance, furlough benefits, one-time bonuses, and related legal fees and $0.5 million of shipping carrier transition costs, and for the year ended January 31, 2020, $2.8 million of costs related to a September 2019 software outage and $1.0 million related to legal costs and settlements.
(6)Includes the expense associated with revaluing prior liability classified lender warrants to the respective fair value at period end, or prior to conversion. As of January 31, 2022, all outstanding warrants are equity classified and therefore do not require remeasurement going forward.
(7)Includes debt extinguishment costs related to debt paydown in the periods presented.
(8)Primarily includes $(4.0) million of insurance claim proceeds for the year ended January 31, 2022 and $(5.0) million of insurance claim proceeds and $(1.3) million of proceeds from monetizing tax credits for the year ended January 31, 2021.
(9)Includes costs associated with the write-off of asset disposals, operating lease terminations and foreign exchange.
(10)Adjusted EBITDA Margin calculated as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our founding, we have financed our operations primarily from net proceeds from the sale of redeemable preferred stock, common stock and debt financings. As of January 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $247.6 million and restricted cash of $12.0 million ($5.4 million current and $6.6 million noncurrent), and an accumulated deficit of $(801.2) million.
As disclosed above, on October 29, 2021, we closed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 17,000,000 shares at a public offering price of $21.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $327.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
Concurrent with our IPO, we paid down our senior secured term loan of $80.7 million (including accrued interest) with Ares Corporate Opportunities Fund V, L.P. (the “Ares Facility”) in full and $60.0 million of our Temasek Facility and refinanced the remaining Temasek Facility, resulting in a total debt repayment of $140.7 million. Our total indebtedness as of January 31, 2022 was $260.8 million. For a description of the terms of our current and prior credit agreements, see “Note 7 - Long-Term Debt” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We expect that operating losses and negative cash flows from operations could continue in the foreseeable future as we continue to acquire products and increase other investments in our business. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, and cash generated from our operations, will be sufficient to sustain our business operations, to satisfy our debt service obligations and to comply with our amended debt covenants for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, growth in the number of customers and Active Subscribers and the timing of investments in technology and personnel to support the overall growth of our business. To the extent that current and anticipated future sources of liquidity are insufficient to fund our future business activities and requirements, we may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. The sale of additional equity would result in additional dilution to our stockholders. The incurrence of debt financing would result in debt service obligations and the instruments governing such debt could provide for operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to negotiate terms acceptable to us or at all. In particular, the recent COVID-19 pandemic has caused disruption in the global financial markets, which could reduce our ability to access capital and negatively affect our liquidity in the future. If we are unable to raise additional capital when required, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows would be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
We also measure the cash consumption of the business including capital expenditures, by assessing net cash used in operating activities and net cash used in investing activities on a combined basis, which improved from $(101.2) million in the year ended January 31, 2021 to $(64.8) million in the year ended January 31, 2022.
The sum of net cash used in operating activities and net cash used in investing activities, as a percentage of revenue, improved from (64.3)% in the year ended January 31, 2021 to (31.9)% in the year ended January 31, 2022.
Net cash (used in) provided by operating activities. For the year ended January 31, 2022, net cash used in operating activities was $(42.3) million, which consisted of a net loss of $(211.8) million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $171.3 million, proceeds from sale of rental product of $12.9 million and a net change of $11.1 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges were primarily comprised of $49.7 million of rental product depreciation and write-off expenses, $38.8 million of payment-in-kind interest, $24.9 million loss on remeasurement of warrant liability, $26.6 million of share-based compensation, $5.9 million of debt discount amortization, $12.2 million loss on debt extinguishment (primarily non-cash), $19.5 million of other fixed and intangible asset depreciation and amortization, and $(6.3) million of previously accrued PIK interest which was settled in the period in connection with the extinguishment of our Ares Facility.
For the year ended January 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $(42.8) million, which consisted of a net loss of $(171.1) million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $145.2 million, proceeds of sale of rental product of $17.9 million and a net change of $1.0 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges were primarily comprised of $70.8 million of rental product depreciation and write-off expenses, $36.9 million of payment-in-kind interest, $8.2 million of share-based compensation, $5.0 million of debt discount amortization, $0.6 million loss on debt extinguishment and $24.1 million of other property and equipment and software depreciation and amortization.
Net cash (used in) provided by investing activities. For the year ended January 31, 2022, net cash used in investing activities was $(22.5) million, primarily consisting of $(30.8) million of purchases of rental product incurred in the period and $(10.3) million of purchases of fixed and intangible assets. The investment in rental product does not include an additional $6.5 million of cost for units received in the current period but not yet paid for, but does include $(3.6) million of cost for units paid for in the current period but received in the prior period (see the Supplemental Cash Flow Information in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data). The investment in rental product was to support our growth in customer demand as a result of the COVID-19 recovery. The majority of the investment in fixed and intangible assets was related to investments in automation assets, additional processing machinery and equipment for our Secaucus and Arlington warehouses, reusable bags and capitalized technology labor. The cash used in investing activities was partially offset by $12.9 million of proceeds from the sale of owned rental products and $5.7 million of proceeds from sales of liquidated rental products.
For the year ended January 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $(58.4) million, primarily consisting of $(54.9) million of purchases of rental product and $(23.8) million of purchases of fixed and intangible assets. The investment in rental product did not include the additional $3.6 million of cost for units received in the current period but not yet paid for, but did include $(3.7) million of cost for units paid for in the current period but received in the prior period (see Supplemental Cash Flow Information in Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data). The investment in rental product was to support growth in planned customer demand prior to the onset of COVID-19. The majority of the investment in fixed and intangible assets was related to the build-out of our new headquarters in Brooklyn, NY, the investment in automation assets and additional processing machinery and equipment for our warehouses in addition to capitalized technology labor . The cash used in investing activities was partially offset by $17.9 million of proceeds from sales of owned rental products and $2.4 million of proceeds from sales of liquidated rental products.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities. During the year ended January 31, 2022, net cash provided by financing activities was $215.2 million, consisting primarily of $327.3 million from the sale of Class A common stock in our IPO which is net of the underwriting discounts of $(24.1) million and deferred equity issuance costs of $(5.6) million, $21.2 million from the issuance of redeemable preferred stock, $3.3 million from the exercise of options and $3.1 million of net proceeds from short term financing agreements and other financing payments. The cash from financing activities was partially offset by $(139.7) million in debt payments and extinguishment costs.
During the year ended January 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $168.5 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from issuance of debt of $111.0 million and proceeds from the issuance of redeemable preferred stock of $60.4 million.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In October 2021, we paid down outstanding principal and accrued interest of our Ares Facility in full and a portion of our Temasek Facility. Additionally, we entered into the Amended Temasek Facility. As of January 31, 2022, we had approximately $260.8 million of total debt outstanding, none of which is payable within the next 12 months. See “Note 7 - Long-Term Debt” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
As of January 31, 2022, we had approximately $88.9 million of long-term operating lease obligations of which $13.6 million of lease obligations are payable within the next 12 months. See also “Note 4 - Leases - Lessee Accounting” and “Note 16 - Subsequent Events” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which describes a reduction of $10.6 million in the Company’s minimum fixed lease obligations subsequent to the Company’s fiscal year-end.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates using assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods, as well as related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Rental Product
We consider rental product to be a long-term productive asset and, as such, classify it as a noncurrent asset on the consolidated balance sheets. Rental product is stated at cost, less accumulated depreciation. We depreciate rental product, less salvage value, over the useful lives of the assets using the straight-line method. Depreciation on rental products is an estimate based on the following assumptions:
•Useful life: our projection of the period over which we can monetize our rental products through our Subscription or Reserve rental offerings
•Salvage value: our projection of the proceeds that can be expected to be generated from rental product once it is no longer considered rentable, expressed as a percentage of the acquisition cost
The useful life is determined based on historical trends and an assessment of any future changes. The salvage value considers the historical trends and projected liquidation proceeds for the assets. A change in the assumption used for useful life or salvage value would either increase or decrease accumulated depreciation and depreciation expense reflected on our consolidated balance sheets within rental product, net and on our consolidated statements of operations within rental product depreciation and revenue share, respectively. Our historical results continue to support the use of these assumptions.
Right-of-Use Assets and Lease Liabilities
Right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities are measured and recognized at the lease commencement date or lease modification date based on the present value of fixed lease payments over the expected lease term. Because the majority of our leases do not include an implicit discount rate, we use an estimated incremental borrowing rate (“IBR”), to determine the present value of future minimum lease payments. The sensitivity of the estimate is due to the judgement used in the determination of the synthetic credit rating and the development of the related benchmark yield curves.
Share-Based Compensation
We measure share-based compensation expense for all equity classified awards based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. The fair value of stock options is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. We estimate grant date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including the following:
•Fair value of common stock. Following the closing of our IPO, the fair market value of our common stock is based on the closing price as reported on the date of grant on the Nasdaq Stock Market, on which the Company’s stock is traded. Prior to the close of our IPO, because our common stock was not yet publicly traded, we were required to estimate the fair value of its common stock. The fair value of the shares of common stock underlying the stock options was historically determined by a third-party valuation firm and approved by our board of directors. The fair value of our common stock was determined by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including: the valuation of comparable companies, sales of preferred stock to unrelated third parties, our operating and financial performance, the lack of liquidity of common stock and general and industry specific economic outlook, among other factors.
•Expected volatility. As a result of the lack of historical and implied volatility data of our common stock, the expected stock price volatility has been estimated based on the historical volatilities of a specified group of companies in its industry for a period equal to the expected life of the option. We selected companies with comparable characteristics, including enterprise value, risk profiles, and position within the industry, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected term of the stock options. The historical volatility data has been computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies.
•Expected term. The expected term of stock options represents the weighted-average period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding and is estimated under the simplified method using the vesting and contractual terms.
•Risk-free interest rate. The expected risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options.
•Expected dividend yield. The expected dividend assumption is based on our history and expectation of dividend. We have not paid dividends and do not expect to do so in the foreseeable future.
Upon grant of awards, we also estimate an amount of forfeitures that will occur prior to vesting. We estimate forfeitures based on the dynamic forfeiture model based on our historical forfeitures of stock options adjusted to reflect future changes in facts and circumstances, if any.
Warrants
Warrants held prior to the IPO did not meet the criteria for equity treatment were recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classified the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusted the warrants to fair value at each previous reporting period. This liability was subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value was recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. The warrants were valued using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. The assumptions used in preparing the model include estimates such as fair value of the underlying shares, expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. This valuation model used unobservable market share price input on a recurring basis, and therefore the liability was classified as Level 3. As of January 31, 2022, the Company had no outstanding warrants classified as liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted.
JOBS Act
We currently qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Accordingly, we are provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting guidance either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. We have elected to adopt new or revised accounting guidance within the same time period as private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. Accordingly, our utilization of these transition periods may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the transition periods afforded under the JOBS Act.