Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Revolution Healthcare Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K
includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 11, 2021, for the purpose of effectuating a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (herein referred to as “Initial Business Combination”). Our initial stockholders are REV Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (our “Sponsor”), and Health Assurance Economy Foundation, a charitable foundation (“Foundation”, and together with the Sponsor, collectively, the “Initial Stockholders”), and includes any other holders of Alignment Shares.
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on March 17, 2021, the “Initial Public Offering”. On March 22, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 55,000,000 Stakeholder Aligned Initial Listing securities, or SAILSM
securities (each, a “SAIL”, and collectively, “SAILs”), including 5,000,000 SAILs as a result of the underwriters’ exercise in part of their over-allotment option. The SAILs were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per SAIL, generating gross proceeds of $550.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $31.0 million, of which approximately $19.3 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 12,000,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant with our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $18.0 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, $550.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in money market funds meeting the conditions of paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3) and
(d)(4) of Rule 2a-7
under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an Initial Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we do not complete an Initial Business Combination within this period of time (and stockholders do not approve an amendment to the amended and restated certificate of incorporation to extend this date), it will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share
price, payable in cash, of $10.00, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law. The Initial Stockholders, officers and directors entered into a letter agreement with us, pursuant to which they agreed to (i) waive their redemption rights with respect to any Alignment Shares and Public Shares they hold in connection with the completion of the Initial Business Combination, (ii) waive their redemption rights with respect to any Alignment Shares and Public Shares they hold in connection with a stockholder vote to approve an amendment to our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of its Public Shares if we have not consummated an Initial Business Combination within the Business Combination Period (as defined in Note 1) or with respect to any other material provisions relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-combination
transaction activity and (iii) waive their rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Alignment Shares they hold if we fail to complete the an Initial Business Combination within the Business Combination Period (although they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Public Shares they hold if we fail to complete an Initial Business Combination within the Business Combination Period).
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective Initial Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $21.4 million, which consisted of $24.9 million for change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $153,000 of income from investments held in Trust Account, offset by approximately $1.4 million of financing costs-derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $2.1 million of general and administrative expenses (including approximately $0.9 million of general and administrative expenses -related party), and approximately $195,000 of franchise tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $3.4 million in cash and working capital of approximately $3.9 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a cash contribution of $25,000 from our Sponsor to purchase Alignment Shares, a loan of approximately $277,000 from our Sponsor pursuant to the Note (as defined in Note 4), and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. The we repaid the Note in full on March 24, 2021. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an Initial Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan (as defined in Note 4).
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective Initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Initial Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than for an agreement to pay our Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative support provided to members of our management team. In addition, each independent director will receive quarterly cash compensation of $50,000 and $75,000 (or between $200,000 and $300,000 in the aggregate per year).
Registration Rights
The holders of the Alignment Shares, Private Placement Warrants, and Private Placement Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock into which such securities may convert and that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the Alignment Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering, requiring us to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we registered such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the Initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriter a 45-day
option to purchase up to 7,500,000 additional SAILs, to cover any over-allotment, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On March 22, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 5,000,000 SAILs.
The underwriter was entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per SAIL, or $11.0 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per SAIL, or approximately $19.3 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an Initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Investments Held in the Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities and generally have a readily determinable fair value, or a combination thereof. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of U.S. government securities, the investments are classified as trading securities. When our investments held in the Trust Account are comprised of money market funds, the investments are recognized at fair value. Trading securities and investments in money market funds are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in income from investments held in the Trust Account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”), Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”). and Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging
(“ASC 815”), paragraph 15 Embedded Derivatives
(“ASC 815-15”).
The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (the “Public Warrants”) and the Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815, paragraph 40, Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity
(“ASC 815-40”).
Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the Public Warrants issued in connection with the Public Offering and Private Placement Warrants were initially measured at fair value utilizing modified Black-Scholes Model. The fair value of Public Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants at December 31, 2021. The fair value of the Private Placement Warrants continues to be measured utilizing a modified Black-Scholes Model.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 55,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99,
we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income per common stock is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 23,000,000 shares of common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. The Company has considered the effect of shares of Class B common stock that were excluded from the weighted average number of basic shares outstanding as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, the Company has included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Excess Change in Fair Value of Private Placement Warrants
We record non-cash
compensation recognized as a result of the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants being in excess of the amount paid by the Sponsor, pursuant to ASC 718, “Share-based Compensation”. For the period from January 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we recorded $13.9 million. This amount is included in the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities on the statement of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity
(“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06
on January 11, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.