Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We have been an investor in ethanol production facilities beginning in 2006 and a refined coal production facility during the period from 2017 through November 2021. We currently have equity investments in three ethanol production entities, two of which are majority ownership interests. Our refined coal business ceased operations in November 2021 and the facility was subsequently sold. We have classified the refined coal business as discontinued operations. We may make additional alternative energy investments in the future and are currently working on a carbon sequestration project near our One Earth Energy location.
Our ethanol operations are highly dependent on commodity prices, especially prices for corn, ethanol, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil and natural gas. As a result of price volatility for these commodities, our operating results can fluctuate substantially. The price and availability of corn is subject to significant fluctuations depending upon a number of factors that affect commodity prices in general, including crop conditions, weather, federal policy and foreign trade. Because the market price of ethanol is not always directly related to corn prices, at times ethanol prices may not follow movements in corn prices and, in an environment of higher corn prices or lower ethanol prices, reduce the overall margin structure at the plants. As a result, at times, we may operate our plants at negative or minimally positive operating margins.
We expect our ethanol plants to produce at least 2.8 gallons of denatured ethanol for each bushel of grain processed in the production cycle. We refer to the actual gallons of denatured ethanol produced per bushel of grain processed as the realized yield. We refer to the difference between the price per gallon of ethanol and the price per bushel of grain (divided by the realized yield) as the “crush spread.” Should the crush spread decline, it is possible that our ethanol plants will generate operating results that do not provide adequate cash flows for sustained periods of time. In such cases, production at the ethanol plants may be reduced or stopped altogether in order to minimize variable costs at individual plants.
We attempt to manage the risk related to the volatility of commodity prices by utilizing forward grain and natural gas purchase contracts, forward ethanol, distillers grains and non-food grade corn oil sale contracts and commodity futures and swap agreements as management deems appropriate. We attempt to match quantities of these sales contracts with an appropriate quantity of grain purchase contracts over a given period of time when we can obtain an adequate gross margin resulting from the crush spread inherent in the contracts we have executed. However, the market for future ethanol sales contracts generally lags the spot market with respect to ethanol price. Consequently, we generally execute fixed price contracts for no more than four months into the future at any given time and we may lock in our corn or ethanol price without having a corresponding locked in ethanol or corn price for short durations of time. As a result of the relatively short period of time our fixed price contracts cover, we generally cannot predict the future movements in our realized crush spread for more than four months; thus, we are unable to predict the likelihood or amounts of future income or loss from the operations of our ethanol facilities. We utilize derivative financial instruments, primarily exchange traded commodity future contracts and swaps, in conjunction with certain of our grain procurement and commodity marketing activities.
We reported net income attributable to REX common shareholders of $52.4 million in fiscal 2021 compared to approximately $3.0 million in fiscal 2020. Our ethanol business bounced back strongly in fiscal 2021 particularly in the fourth quarter in comparison to fiscal 2020, which was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The two largest drivers of ethanol profitability are corn and ethanol pricing, both of which experienced significant volatility within the year. Chicago Board of Trade corn prices per bushel ranged from a low of $5.10 in September 2021 to a high of $7.40 in April 2021. S&P Global Platts ethanol pricing per gallon ranged from a low of $1.64 in February 2021 to a high of $3.80 in November 2021.
On August 10, 2017, we purchased, through a 95.35% owned subsidiary, the entire ownership interest of an entity that owned a refined coal facility. We began operating the refined coal facility immediately after the acquisition. As the plant was no longer eligible to receive federal production tax credits beginning on November 18, 2021, we ceased operations on that date. We began classifying this operation as discontinued operations in the third quarter of fiscal 2021.
The Company is working with the University of Illinois and is in the exploratory stage of a carbon sequestration project near the One Earth Energy ethanol plant. A test well has been drilled and three-dimensional seismic testing has been performed. We are working on simulation models to predict the movement of carbon dioxide injection into the subsurface, additional testing and completion of a class VI permit application. A front-end engineering design study has been completed for a carbon dioxide liquification facility for the One Earth Energy plant, and we plan to begin seeking bids once we have completed additional engineering work. At this time we do not know total cost to complete or the feasibility of the project.
During fiscal year 2013, we entered into a joint venture to file and defend patents for eSteam technology. The patented technology is an enhanced method of heavy oil recovery involving zero emissions downhole steam generation. To date, we have not successfully had a field operation nor demonstrated that the technology is commercially feasible. We own 60% and our partner owns 40% of the entity named Future Energy, LLC, an Ohio limited liability company. We have no current plans to operate this technology and are maintaining patents in limited countries.
We plan to seek and evaluate various investment opportunities including ethanol and/or energy related, carbon sequestration, agricultural or other ventures we believe fit our investment criteria. We can make no assurances that we will be successful in our efforts to find such opportunities.
Ethanol Investments
In fiscal year 2006, we entered the ethanol industry by investing in several entities organized to construct and subsequently operate, ethanol producing plants. We are invested in three entities as of January 31, 2022, utilizing equity investments. The following table is a summary of our ethanol entity ownership interests at January 31, 2022:
Entity
REX’s Current
Ownership Interest
One Earth Energy, LLC 75.8%
NuGen Energy, LLC 99.7%
Big River Resources, LLC:
Big River Resources W Burlington, LLC
Big River Resources Galva, LLC
Big River United Energy, LLC
Big River Resources Boyceville, LLC
10.3%
10.3%
5.7%
10.3%
The three entities own a total of six ethanol production facilities, which in aggregate shipped approximately 699 millions gallons of ethanol over the twelve-month period ended January 31, 2022. REX’s effective ownership of gallons shipped, for the twelve-month period ended January 31, 2022, by the ethanol production facilities in which we have ownership interests was approximately 282 million gallons.
Trends and Uncertainties
Renewable Fuel Standard II (“RFS II”), established in October 2010, has been an important factor in the growth of ethanol usage in the United States. In recent years, there has been much uncertainty on the enforcement of
RFS II. When it was originally established, RFS II required the volume of “conventional” or corn derived ethanol to be blended with gasoline to increase each year until it reached 15.0 billion gallons in 2015 and was to remain at that level through 2022. There are no established congressional target volumes beginning in 2023. The EPA has the authority to waive the biofuel mandate, in whole or in part, if there is inadequate domestic renewable fuel supply or the requirement severely harms the domestic economy or environment. In addition, under RFS II, a small refiner that processes less than 75,000 barrels of oil per day can petition the EPA for a waiver of their requirement to submit renewable identification numbers (“RINs”). The EPA, through consultation with the Department of Energy and the Department of Agriculture, can grant the refiner a full or partial waiver, or deny the waiver. The EPA issued 85 refinery exemptions for 2016-2018 compliance years, undercutting the statutory renewable fuel volumes by a total of 4.0 billion gallons.
On December 7, 2021, the EPA issued proposed volumes for 2021 and 2022 and reduced the previously finalized volumes for 2020 to account for challenges for that year including the COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed volumes for conventional biofuels were 13.32 billion gallons and 15.0 billion gallons for 2021 and 2022, respectively. The 2020 volumes were proposed at 12.5 billion gallons, down from the previously finalized 15.0 billion gallons. In addition, the EPA proposed denying 65 pending applications for SREs in response to the 2020 decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 10th Circuit. The EPA also proposed adding 250 million gallons of “supplemental obligation” to the 2022 proposed volumes and stated its intent to add another 250 million gallons to 2023 to address the remand of the 2016 waiver by the D.C Circuit. The EPA implemented a public notice and comment process on this announcement.
Due to the Russian-Ukraine conflict, there is a concern that the corn supply will be adversely affected, with a potential impact on price and corn availability in the United States.
Should these trends and uncertainties continue, our future operating results are likely to be negatively impacted.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results from operations (amounts in thousands):
The following table summarizes net sales and revenue by product group:
1 Refined coal sales were recorded net of the cost of coal as the Company purchased the coal feedstock from the same customer to which the processed refined coal was sold.
The following table summarizes selected operating data:
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020 (Consolidated Results)
Continuing Operations
Net Sales and Revenue - Net sales and revenue in fiscal year 2021 increased approximately 108% compared to fiscal year 2020. Both of our consolidated plants produced at or near capacity during fiscal year 2021. In addition, stronger commodity pricing in fiscal year 2021 contributed to the increase in sales between the two fiscal years.
Ethanol sales increased in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 as the number of gallons increased 28% and the average selling price increased 70% over the same period. The increase in ethanol selling price resulted primarily from an increase in demand and an increase in commodity prices.
Dried distillers grains sales increased 74% in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 as the number of tons sold increased 27% and the average selling price per ton increased 37%.
Non-food grade corn oil sales increased 158% as the number of pounds sold increased 31% and the average selling price increased 92% in fiscal year 2021 over the prior fiscal year.
Modified distillers grains sales increased 247% in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 as the number of tons sold increased 164% and the average selling price per ton increased 31%.
Losses on derivative financial instruments were approximately $12.1 million during fiscal year 2021, compared to $1.2 million in fiscal year 2020. The increase in losses on derivative financial instruments resulted primarily from an increase in volatility in the commodity markets during 2021.
The volume increases discussed above were primarily a result of operating near full capacity in the current year versus fiscal 2020, which was negatively impacted by lower demand due to the COVID-19 outbreak, lower ethanol pricing, an oversupply of oil and diminished local supplies of corn from a poor 2019 harvest caused by localized weather conditions. These factors resulted in idling both of our consolidated ethanol plants in March of 2020. In May of 2020, businesses and other activities slowly began to reopen, which led to an increase in demand for gasoline and ethanol, and in related prices. As a result, we resumed production at the One Earth ethanol plant in May of 2020 and at the NuGen ethanol plant in June of 2020. In addition, stronger commodity pricing during fiscal year 2021 contributed to the increase in sales between the two fiscal years.
Gross Profit - Gross profit for fiscal year 2021 increased approximately $78.0 million, or 399%, over fiscal year 2020. Gross profit in fiscal year 2021 was 12.6% of net sales and revenue, versus approximately 5.2% of net sales and revenue in fiscal year 2020. The primary contributor to the increase in gross profit was the increased crush spread and improved pricing for distillers grain and corn oil. The crush spread for fiscal year 2021 was approximately $0.16 per gallon of ethanol sold compared to approximately $0.03 per gallon of ethanol sold during fiscal year 2020. Additionally, both of our consolidated ethanol plants were idled for portions of fiscal year 2020. Consequently, a return to operating at or near capacity during fiscal year 2021 contributed to the increased gross profit for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. Given the inherent volatility in ethanol, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil, grain and natural gas prices, we cannot predict the likelihood that the spread between ethanol, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil and grain prices in future periods will be consistent with prices in historical periods.
Grain accounted for approximately 84% ($568.9 million) of our cost of sales during fiscal year 2021 compared to approximately 78% ($274.6 million) during fiscal year 2020. Natural gas accounted for approximately 4% ($29.4 million) of our cost of sales during fiscal year 2021 compared to approximately 5% ($17.7 million) during fiscal year 2020. Both the grain and natural gas dollar increases were primarily attributable to an increase in the cost per unit. Incrementally, the higher production levels incurred in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 also contributed to the increase.
We attempt to match quantities of ethanol, distillers grains and non-food grade corn oil sale contracts with an appropriate quantity of grain purchase contracts over a given period of time when we can obtain an adequate margin resulting from the crush spread inherent in the contracts we have executed. However, the market for future ethanol sales contracts generally lags the spot market with respect to ethanol price. Consequently, we generally execute fixed price contracts for no more than four months into the future at any given time and we may lock in our corn or ethanol price without having a corresponding locked in ethanol or corn price for short
durations of time. As a result of the relatively short period of time our fixed price contracts cover, we generally cannot predict the future movements in our realized crush spread for more than four months. We utilize derivative financial instruments, primarily exchange traded commodity future contracts and swaps, in conjunction with our grain procurement and commodity marketing activities.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses - SG&A expenses for fiscal year 2021 were approximately $28.5 million (3.7% of net sales and revenue), an increase of approximately $10.9 million or 61% from approximately $17.6 million (4.7% of net sales and revenue) for fiscal year 2020. The increase was due, in part, to higher outbound freight expense, as more of our sales contracts provided for shipping to be paid by us in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. In addition, the increase reflected higher incentive compensation expense associated with higher profitability levels in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
Equity in Income of Unconsolidated Ethanol Affiliates - During fiscal years 2021 and 2020, we recognized income of approximately $6.6 million and $0.5 million, respectively, from our equity investment in Big River Resources, LLC (“Big River”). Our investment in Big River, which has interests in four ethanol production plants, represents an effective ownership of approximately 365 million gallons of ethanol shipped in the trailing twelve months ended January 31, 2022. Big River’s 2020 financial results were impacted by reduced ethanol demand related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We expect the operating experience of Big River to be generally consistent with the trends in crush spread margins described in the “Overview” section as Big River’s results are dependent on the same key drivers as our other ethanol investments (ethanol, corn, dried distillers grains and natural gas pricing).
Interest and Other Income - Interest and other income for fiscal year 2021 was approximately $0.1 million compared to approximately $1.8 million for fiscal year 2020. Interest income decreased as yields on our excess cash decreased in fiscal year 2021.
Income from Continuing Operations Before Income Taxes - As a result of the foregoing, income from continuing operations before income taxes was approximately $75.8 million for fiscal year 2021 versus approximately $4.2 million for fiscal year 2020.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes - Our effective tax rate was a provision of 25.1% and a benefit of 13.0% for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective rate is impacted by the noncontrolling interests of the companies we consolidate, as we recognize 100% of their income or loss before income taxes and noncontrolling interests. However, we only provide an income tax provision or benefit for our portion of the subsidiaries’ income or loss. During fiscal years 2021 and 2020, our effective tax rate decreased 6.8% (approximately $5.2 million) and 47.7% (approximately $2.0 million), respectively, from the statutory rate, as a result of research and experimentation credits earned by our ethanol plants. The amount of these credits earned in future periods will vary depending on the level of qualifying research expenditures at our ethanol plants. The provision for uncertain tax positions increased our effective tax rate 10.9% (approximately $8.3 million) and 24.8% (approximately $1.0 million) in fiscal year 2021 and 2020, respectively, from the statutory rate.
Net Income from Continuing Operations - As a result of the foregoing, net income from continuing operations was approximately $56.8 million for fiscal year 2021 versus approximately $4.8 million for fiscal year 2020.
Noncontrolling Interests (continuing operations) - Income attributable to noncontrolling interests (continuing operations) was approximately $9.2 million and $2.9 million during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively, and represents the other owners’ share of the income of NuGen and One Earth.
Net Income Attributable to REX Common Shareholders (continuing operations) - As a result of the foregoing, net income attributable to REX common shareholders (continuing operations) was approximately $47.6 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to $1.9 million for fiscal year 2020.
Discontinued Operations
Results from discontinued operations include the consolidated financial results of our refined coal business and certain administrative expenses. We acquired the refined coal entity during the third quarter of fiscal year 2017. Our refined coal facility was eligible to earn Section 45 production tax credits. The Company ceased operation of its refined coal business as tax credits could no longer be earned on its operation beginning November 18, 2021. Beginning in the third quarter of fiscal year 2021, the results of the operation of the refined coal business have been recognized as discontinued operations. The refined coal business operated at a loss but generated tax credits that normally exceeded the operating loss.
The refined coal entity sold one product, refined coal. We recorded sales in the refined coal segment net of the cost of coal as we purchased the coal feedstock from the customer to which refined coal is sold. Sales increased from approximately $182,000 in the prior year to approximately $400,000 in the current year. During fiscal year 2020, operating results were adversely affected by lower utility plant demand from our only customer. Throughout our ownership of the refined coal business, sales varied depending on fluctuations in demand from the site host utility, which generally changed based upon weather conditions in the geographic markets the utility served and competing fuel prices and supplies.
Gross loss was approximately $8.2 million in fiscal year 2021, which was approximately $2.5 million higher compared to approximately $5.7 million of gross loss in fiscal year 2020. The increase in gross loss results primarily from higher refined coal production in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
The benefit for income taxes was approximately $13.3 million and approximately $6.6 million during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. These amounts include the benefit of Section 45 production tax credits and a benefit related to operating loss before income taxes. The increase in the benefit for income taxes primarily results from higher production in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
Loss related to noncontrolling interests was approximately $0.4 million and $0.3 million during fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively. This amount represents the other owner’s share of the pre-tax loss of refined coal operations.
Net income attributable to REX common shareholders from discontinued operations, net of tax, for fiscal year 2021 was approximately $4.8 million, an increase of $3.7 million from the net income attributable to REX common shareholders from discontinued operations, net of tax, of approximately $1.1 million for fiscal year 2020.
Net Income
As a result of the foregoing, including results from both continuing and discontinued operations, net income attributable to REX common shareholders was approximately $52.4 million and approximately $3.0 million for fiscal years 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2020 and 2019
See “Item 7 Management’s discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of cash have been income from operations. Our primary uses of cash have been capital expenditures at our ethanol plants, stock repurchases and contributions to fund refined coal operating losses.
Outlook - Our cash and short-term investments balance of approximately $255.7 million at January 31, 2022 included approximately $212.8 million held by One Earth and NuGen. We expect that One Earth and NuGen will use a majority of their cash for working capital needs, capital expenditures, general corporate purposes and dividend payments. We expect our equity method investee to limit the payment of dividends based upon working capital needs.
We are investigating various uses of our excess cash. We have a stock buyback program with an authorization level of an additional approximately 449,000 shares at January 31, 2022. We typically repurchase our common stock when our stock price is trading at prices we deem to be a discount to the underlying value of our net assets. We plan to seek and evaluate various investment opportunities including ethanol and/or energy related, carbon sequestration related, agricultural or other ventures we believe fit our investment criteria.
We expect capital expenditures to be in the range of approximately $15 million to $20 million in fiscal year 2022 for various projects at our consolidated ethanol plants and our carbon sequestration project. However, actual capital expenditures could vary from this range for unexpected expenditures as our plants continue to age or potential projects materialize. We expect to fund these capital expenditures with available cash at our ethanol plant subsidiaries.
Operating Activities - Net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $91.7 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to approximately $8.6 million in fiscal year 2020. During fiscal year 2021, operating cash flow was provided by net income from continuing operations of approximately $56.8 million and adjustments of approximately $31.4 million, which consisted of depreciation, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets, stock based compensation expense, income from equity method investments, interest income from investments, and the deferred income tax provision. Big River paid dividends to REX of approximately $5.5 million during fiscal year 2021. Accounts receivable increased approximately $6.1 million, primarily a result of the timing of products shipped and the receipt of customer payments at One Earth and NuGen. Inventory increased approximately $4.8 million, primarily a result of larger quantities of finished goods and higher per unit costs at January 31, 2022. Prepaid expenses and other assets decreased approximately $0.2 million, primarily a result of a slight change in fair values of forward purchase contracts. Accounts payable increased approximately $16.0 million, primarily a result of the timing of inventory receipts and vendor payments. Refundable income taxes increased $1.1 million as a result of the timing of estimated tax payments. Accrued expenses and other liabilities increased approximately $0.5 million, which was primarily a result of operating lease payments and higher incentive compensation in fiscal year 2021. Discontinued operations used cash of $6.7 million in fiscal year 2021.
Net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $8.6 million for fiscal year 2020. During fiscal year 2020, operating cash flow was provided by net income from continuing operations of approximately $4.8 million and adjustments of approximately $21.9 million, which consisted of depreciation, amortization of operating lease right-of-use assets, stock based compensation expense, income from equity method investments, interest income from investments, and the deferred income tax provision. Big River paid dividends to REX of approximately $3.5 million during fiscal
year 2020. Accounts receivable increased approximately $6.7 million, primarily a result of the timing of products shipped and the receipt of customer payments at One Earth and NuGen. Inventory increased approximately $2.3 million, primarily a result of larger quantities of finished goods and higher per unit costs at January 31, 2021. Prepaid expenses and other assets increased approximately $3.2 million, primarily a result of higher fair values of forward purchase contracts. Accounts payable decreased approximately $2.6 million, primarily a result of the timing of inventory receipts and vendor payments. Accrued expenses and other liabilities decreased approximately $3.5 million, which was primarily a result of operating lease payments and lower incentive compensation in fiscal year 2020. Discontinued operations used cash of $2.8 million in fiscal year 2021.
Investing Activities - Net cash provided by investing activities was approximately $5.3 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to net cash used of approximately $20.8 million during fiscal year 2020. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2021 totaled approximately $5.1 million, the majority of which were various projects at One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2021, we used cash of approximately $88.9 million for purchases of short-term investments and received cash of approximately $99.3 million related to maturities of these investments.
Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $20.8 million during fiscal year 2020. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2020 totaled approximately $10.4 million, the majority of which were various projects at One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2020, we used cash of approximately $96.2 million for purchases of short-term investments and received cash of approximately $86.3 million related to maturities of these investments as certain of these investments remained outstanding at January 31, 2021.
Financing Activities - Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $11.1 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to approximately $22.4 million for fiscal year 2020. During fiscal year 2021, we purchased approximately 84,000 shares of our common stock for approximately $6.6 million in open market transactions. During fiscal year 2021, we used cash of approximately $4.8 million to purchase shares from and pay dividends to noncontrolling members of the entities that own One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2021, we received approximately $0.3 million in capital contributions from the minority investor in the refined coal business which is now classified as discontinued operations.
Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $22.4 million during fiscal year 2020. During fiscal year 2020, we purchased approximately 315,000 shares of our common stock for approximately $19.6 million in open market transactions. During fiscal year 2020, we used cash of approximately $2.9 million to purchase shares from and pay dividends to noncontrolling members of the entities that own One Earth’s and NuGen’s ethanol plants. During fiscal year 2020, we received approximately $0.1 million in capital contributions from the minority investor in the refined coal business which is now classified as discontinued operations.
Based on our forecasts, which are primarily based on estimates of plant production, prices of ethanol, corn, distillers grains, non-food grade corn oil and natural gas as well as other assumptions, management believes that cash flow from operating activities together with working capital will be sufficient to meet One Earth’s and NuGen’s respective liquidity needs. However, if a material adverse change in the financial position of One Earth or NuGen should occur, or if actual sales or expenses are substantially different than what has been forecasted (because of the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors), One Earth’s and NuGen’s liquidity, and ability to fund future operating and capital requirements could be negatively impacted.
Approximately 2.8% of our net assets are restricted pursuant to the terms of various loan agreements of our equity method investee as of January 31, 2022. None of our consolidated subsidiaries or the parent company has restricted net assets at January 31, 2022.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements under which we are legally obligated to make future cash payments. These agreements include obligations related to purchasing inventory and leasing rail cars. Aggregate minimum lease payments under the operating lease agreements for future fiscal years as of January 31, 2022 totaled $11.7 million, with $5.0 million payable in the next twelve months. Refer to Note 7 - Leases included in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information. As of January 31, 2022, we had contracted future purchases of grain, natural gas, natural gas pipeline and other contracts valued at approximately $107.0 million, with $103.1 payable in the next twelve months. Refer to Note 11 - Commitments included in the notes to consolidated financial statements for more information.
Seasonality and Quarterly Fluctuations
Our business is directly affected by the supply and demand for ethanol. The demand for ethanol typically increases during the spring and summer months and during holiday travel.
Critical Accounting Policies
We believe the application of the following accounting policies, which are important to our financial position and results of operations, require significant assumptions, judgments and estimates on the part of management. We base our assumptions, judgments, and estimates on historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant at the time our consolidated financial statements are prepared. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. Further, if different assumptions, judgments and estimates had been used, the results could have been different and such differences could be material. For a summary of all of our accounting policies, including the accounting policies discussed below, see Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Management believes that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
Revenue Recognition - We recognize sales of ethanol, distillers grains and non-food grade corn oil when obligations under the terms of the respective contracts with customers are satisfied; this occurs with the transfer of control of products, generally upon shipment from the ethanol plant or upon loading of the rail car used to transport the products.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - We review our long-lived assets, consisting of property and equipment, equity method investments and operating lease right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. We assess long-lived assets for impairment by first determining the forecasted, undiscounted cash flows the asset group is expected to generate. If this total is less than the carrying value of the asset, we will then determine the fair value of the asset group. An impairment loss would be recognized in the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeded the fair value of the asset. Significant management judgement is required to determine the fair value of long-lived assets, which includes discounted cash flows. Such estimates could be significantly affected by future changes in market conditions. We recorded no impairment charges in fiscal years 2021, 2020, and 2019. During fiscal year 2020, we concluded the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our industry and our operating results was an indicator that impairment may exist related to certain of our long-lived assets. As a result, we performed a recoverability test for the One Earth and NuGen asset groups (the lowest level at which
related cash flows can be identified) and determined that there was no impairment as the gross undiscounted future cash flows substantially exceeded the respective carrying values.
Income Taxes - Income taxes are recorded based on the current year amounts payable or refundable, as well as the consequences of events that give rise to deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences in how those events are treated for tax purposes, net of valuation allowances. We base our estimate of deferred tax assets and liabilities on current tax laws and rates and other expectations about future outcomes. Changes in existing regulatory tax laws and rates and future business results may affect the amount of deferred tax liabilities or the valuation of deferred tax assets over time. We have established valuation allowances for certain state net operating loss carryforwards. We assessed all available positive and negative evidence to determine whether we expect sufficient future taxable income will be generated to allow for the realization of existing federal deferred tax assets. We believe there is sufficient objectively verifiable income for management to conclude that it is more likely than not that the Company will utilize available federal deferred tax assets prior to their expiration. However, realization of these deferred tax assets is not certain. Changes in our current estimates for factors such as unanticipated market conditions and legislative developments could have a material effect on our ability to utilize deferred tax assets.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information related to recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.