ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The consolidated financial statements and related disclosures have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make significant estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates, including those related to bad debts, inventory reserves and contingencies, on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be appropriate under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recorded in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for goods or services promised to customers. In accordance with ASC 606, we follow a five-step model to: (1) identify the contract with our customer; (2) identify our performance obligations in our contract; (3) determine the transaction price for our contract; (4) allocate the transaction price to our performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied. In accordance with this accounting principle, we recognize revenue using the output method at a point in time when finished goods have been transferred to the customer and there are no other obligations to customers after the title of the goods have transferred. Title of goods are transferred based on shipping terms for each customer - for shipments with terms of FOB Shipping Point, title is transferred upon shipment; for shipments with terms of FOB Destination, title is transferred upon delivery.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined using the weighted average cost method of accounting. Certain items in inventory may be considered obsolete or excess and, as such, we periodically review our inventories for excess and slow moving items and makes provisions as necessary to properly reflect inventory value. Because inventories have, during the past couple years, represented up to one-fourth of our total assets, any reduction in the value of our inventories would require us to take write-offs that would affect our net worth and future earnings.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We record our allowance for doubtful accounts based upon our assessment of various factors. We consider historical experience, the age of the accounts receivable balance, credit quality of our customers, current economic conditions and other factors that may affect a customer’s ability to pay.
Long-Lived Assets Including Goodwill
We assess property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, which are considered definite-lived assets, for impairment. Definite-lived assets are reviewed when there is evidence that events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We measure recoverability of these assets by comparing the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If property and equipment and intangible assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds its fair market value.
We amortize our intangible assets with definite useful lives over their estimated useful lives and reviews these assets for impairment.
We test our goodwill and trademarks and indefinite-lived assets for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate these assets may be impaired. These events or circumstances require significant judgment and could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition and sale or disposition of all or a portion of a division. This analysis requires significant judgments, including estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, estimation of the long-term rate of growth for our business, estimation of the useful life over which cash flows will occur, and determination of our weighted average cost of capital.
Income Taxes
We record a tax provision for the anticipated tax consequences of the reported results of operations. Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates as of the date of the financial statements that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions by determining if it is “more likely than not” that a tax position will be sustained by the appropriate taxing authorities upon examination based on the technical merits of the position. An uncertain income tax position is not recognized if it has less than a 50% likelihood of being sustained. We recognize interest and penalties related to certain uncertain tax positions as a component of income tax expense and the accrued interest and penalties are included in deferred and income taxes payable in our consolidated balance sheets. See Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Report for more information on our accounting for uncertain tax positions.
The calculation of the tax provision involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Stock-based Compensation
We use the Black-Scholes model to value the stock option grants. This valuation is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of inputs which involve significant judgments and estimates. These inputs include the expected term of employee stock options, the expected volatility of the stock price, the risk-free interest rate and expected dividends.
RECENTLY ISSUED ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
For recently issued accounting pronouncements that may affect us, see Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
OVERVIEW
During the periods covered by this Annual Report, we marketed a variety of connector products, including connectors and cables, standard and custom cable assemblies, wiring harnesses and fiber optic cable products to numerous industries for use in thousands of products. We aggregate our operating divisions into segments that have similar economic characteristics and are similar in the majority of the following areas: (1) the nature of the product and services; (2) the nature of the production process; (3) the type or class of customer for their products and services; (4) the methods used to distribute their products or services; and (5) if applicable, the nature of the regulatory environment. We have two reportable segments - the RF Connector and Cable Assembly (“RF Connector”) segment and the Custom Cabling Manufacturing and Assembly (“Custom Cabling”) segment - based upon this evaluation.
In the fiscal years covered by this Annual Report, the RF Connector segment was comprised of one division, while the Custom Cabling segment was comprised of four divisions. The five divisions that met the quantitative thresholds for segment reporting in the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021 were the RF Connector and Cable Assembly division, Cables Unlimited, Rel-Tech, C Enterprises and Schrofftech subsidiaries.
For the year ended October 31, 2021, most of our revenues were generated from the Custom Cabling segment from its sale of fiber optic cable, copper cabling, custom patch cord assemblies and wiring harnesses This segment sells customized cable assemblies and wiring harnesses that are integrated into customers’ products, as well as fiber optic cables used in the build out of wireless carrier 4G and 5G networks. In fiscal 2021, Custom Cabling sales increased due to increased sales to wireless carriers, including sales of fiber optic cables used in the build out of 4G and 5G networks. The percentage of our revenues generated by the Custom Cabling segment increased from 66% of our total sales in fiscal 2020 to 73% for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021.
Revenues from the RF Connector segment were generated from the sales of RF connector products and connector cable assemblies and accounted for 27% of our total sales for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021. This segment, which historically produces amongst the highest margins of the five production sites, is known for its quick turnaround of high-quality customized solutions in the form of cable assemblies.
In March 2020, the World Health Organization (the “WHO”) declared coronavirus (“COVID-19”) a pandemic emergency. The COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted regional and global economies, disrupted global supply chains, and created significant volatility and disruption of financial markets. The global impact of the outbreak has been rapidly evolving and certain jurisdictions, including in regions where we or third parties on which we rely have manufacturing facilities, have also reacted by instituting quarantines, restrictions on travel, social distancing protocols and restrictions on types of business that may continue to operate. While we have continued our operations during the pandemic, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has affected both our operations and those of our vendors and customers. Our operations in both fiscal 2020 and 2021 were negatively affected by partial shutdowns of our facilities (particularly in the Northeast), by changes that we had to make on our operating methods and procedures, and by a fluctuating workforce as at times, some of our employees stayed at home. Many of our customers and vendors have likewise had temporary closures of their facilities and have otherwise been impacted by changes in their industries. As a result, there has been some volatility in the overall demand for our products, and certain costs have increased. We have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, and we continue to work with our customers and vendors to minimize potential disruptions in addressing the challenges posed by this global pandemic.
The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related actions taken by domestic and international jurisdictions to prevent disease spread, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. The outbreak impacted our performance for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021. Because of the impact that COVID-19 has on our operations, in May 2020 we applied for and received loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the CARES Act totaling approximately $2.8 million (“PPP Loans”). The funds from the PPP Loans were used to retain employees, maintain payroll and benefits, and make lease and utility payments. Without the PPP Loans, we would have made material reductions in our workforce (particularly at Cables Unlimited). In February 2021, all of the $2.8 million of PPP Loans were forgiven and considered paid in full (including applicable interest) by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”).
In March 2021, the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) released Notice 2021-20, which retroactively eliminated the restriction that prevented employers who received a PPP loan from qualifying for the Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”). This action enabled us to apply for the ERC. The ERC is a refundable tax credit against certain employment wages. Upon determination that the employer has complied with all of the conditions required to receive the credit, a receivable is recognized and the credit reduces salaries and wages. For the year ended October 31, 2021, we qualified and filed to claim the ERC and have recorded this as an other receivable classified in other current assets, which is $1.8 million.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the financial assistance that the U.S. government provided to U.S. businesses in response to the pandemic significantly affected the Company’s operations and its financial results for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic negatively impacted the Company’s sales as customers curtailed their wireless infrastructure capital expenditures in response to the economic uncertainty created by the pandemic. Throughout the latter part of the prior fiscal year, and continuing into the first two quarters of fiscal 2021, net sales remained low and the Company experienced operating losses. As the COVID-19 pandemic seemed to be easing in early 2021, and as capital infrastructure project expenditures increased, so did the Company’s net sales. During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, net sales increased by $5.7 million (or 60%) from the third quarter of fiscal 2020 and further increased by an additional 38% from the third to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. During the Company’s fourth quarter, the Company’s operations returned to profitability. Because the Company experienced net losses from its operations in the first three quarters of fiscal 2021, the Company would have experienced net losses for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2021. However, because the impact of the ERC on the Company’s labor costs during the second and third quarters of fiscal 2021, and because of the PPP Loan forgiveness during those quarters, the Company realized net income for the fiscal year.
Financial Condition
The following table presents certain key measures of financial condition as of October 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our existing current assets and the amount of cash we expect that we will generate from current operations will be sufficient to fund our anticipated liquidity and capital resource needs for at least twelve months from the date of this Annual Report.
As of October 31, 2021, we had a total of $13.1 million of cash and cash equivalents compared to a total of $15.8 million of cash and cash equivalents as of October 31, 2020. As of October 31, 2021, we had working capital of $31.2 million and a current ratio of approximately 4.3:1 with current assets of $40.6 million and current liabilities of $9.4 million.
As of October 31, 2021, our backlog was $33.3 million compared to a backlog of $6.3 million as of October 31, 2020. Since purchase orders are submitted from customers based on the timing of their requirements, our ability to predict orders in future periods or trends in future periods is limited. Furthermore, purchase orders may be subject to shipment delays and to cancellation from customers, although we have not historically experienced material cancellations of purchase orders.
As of October 31, 2021, we used $3.1 million of cash in our operating activities despite our net income of $6.1 million. The net outflow of cash was due in part to increased inventory purchases (which increased our inventory balance by $2.6 million), and cash used for our trade accounts receivable ($7.9 million) due to the increase in sales and timing of collections. The foregoing cash usage was partially offset by an increase in noncash credits of $0.5 million from deferred income taxes and $0.7 million from stock-based compensation expense.
Our goal to expand and grow our business both organically and through acquisitions may require material additional capital equipment. In the past, we have purchased all additional equipment, or financed some of our equipment and furnishings requirements through capital leases. Currently, no additional capital equipment purchases have been identified that would require significant additional leasing or capital expenditures during the next twelve months. We also believe that based on our current financial condition, our current backlog of unfulfilled orders and our anticipated future operations, we would be able to finance our expansion, if necessary.
We have entered into the Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we expect to acquire Microlab by approximately April 2022. The acquisition may materially impact the Company’s liquidity in the future if the acquisition is consummated and financed on the terms currently anticipated. Under the Purchase Agreement, the Company has agreed to pay the $24,250,000 purchase price of Microlab in cash. This cash purchase price will be paid in part from the Company’s cash on hand and from borrowings the Company expects to obtain under a credit facility. The Company has received a non-binding commitment letter from a major commercial bank pursuant to which the Company is seeking to obtain an up to $20,000,000 credit facility. The credit facility has not yet been completed and is subject to certain conditions. Therefore, no assurance can be given that commercial bank will, in fact, extend the credit facility to the Company. By using some of its cash on hand to pay a portion of the Microlab purchase price, the Company will reduce the amount of cash it has available to fund its anticipated working capital and other needs. The monthly debt service obligations under the credit facility will require the Company to make significant monthly payments of principal and interest, which could negatively impact the Company’s liquidity. The credit facility, if obtained, will contain financial and other covenants, such as a limit on the ratio of debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. A breach of any of the covenants could result in a default under the credit facility. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under any the credit facility, the commercial bank could terminate all commitments to extend further credit and elect to declare amounts outstanding thereunder to be immediately due and payable. The credit facility will be secured by a lien on substantially all of the Company’s assets.
Results of Operations
The following summarizes the key components of our consolidated results of operations for the fiscal years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages):
Net sales for the year ended October 31, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”) increased by $14.4 million (or 33%) to $57.4 million, as compared to net sales of $43.0 million for the year ended October 31, 2020 (“fiscal 2020”). Most of the net sales for the year ($36.3 million of the $57.4 million) were realized in the second half of the fiscal year that is primarily attributable to the increase at the Custom Cabling segment. Net sales in the Custom Cabling segment increased by $13.3 million, or 47%, to $41.8 million compared to $28.5 million in fiscal 2020. The increase reflects the increase in sales to wireless carriers, primarily related to the sales of fiber optic cables used in the build out of 4G and 5G networks. Net sales for fiscal 2021at the RF Connector segment increased by $1.0 million, or 7%, to $15.6 million compared to $14.6 million in fiscal 2020.
Gross profit for fiscal 2021 increased by $6.2 million to $17.8 million, and gross margins increased to 30.9% of sales from 26.9% of sales in fiscal 2020. The increase in gross profit and gross margins was due to the ERC that the Company was eligible to claim for production employees. The ERC reduced our labor costs and thereby increased our gross profits. Excluding the benefit of the ERC, our gross profits for fiscal 2021 would have been $15.2 million, which is an increase of $3.6 million compared to fiscal 2020, and gross margins would have been 26.4%.
Engineering expenses decreased $0.5 million to $1.5 million for fiscal 2021 compared to $2.0 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the ERC the Company was eligible to claim for engineering employees. Excluding the benefit of the ERC, engineering expenses would have been $1.8 million, which is a decrease of $0.2 million compared to fiscal 2020. This decrease is due to a reduction in engineering marketing personnel, which costs are included in the engineering costs. Engineering expenses represent costs incurred relating to the ongoing development of new products.
Selling and general expenses increased by $1.9 million to $11.9 million (to 20.7% of sales) in fiscal 2021 compared to $10.0 million (23.2% of sales) in fiscal 2020 largely due to (i) increase in bonuses of ($0.8 million) due to the increase in sales and business performance, (ii) increase in commissions due to the increase in sales ($0.3 million), and (iii) acquisition related charges ($0.1 million). The increase is also due in part to the hiring of additional sales people in the last half of the 2020 fiscal year and in the first quarter of fiscal 2021. Excluding the benefit of the ERC, selling and general expenses would have been $12.4 million (22% of sales), which is a increase of $2.4 million compared to fiscal 2020
In February 2021, all of the $2.8 million of PPP Loans were forgiven and considered paid in full (including applicable interest), which debt forgiveness is reflected as “Other Income”.
For fiscal 2021, pretax (loss) income for the Custom Cabling segment and the RF Connector segment was $1.9 million and $2.5 million, respectively, as compared to $(2.4) million and $2.0 million for fiscal 2020. The pretax income at both the Custom Cabling and RF Connector segments in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to the ERC the Company was eligible to claim and the PPP Loan forgiveness.
The provision (benefit) for income taxes was $1.0 million or 14.4% and $(0.4) million or 82.0% of income before income taxes for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 and 2020 was primarily driven by the disproportionate impact of various permanent book-tax differences with respect to our forecasted book income or loss in each period.
For fiscal 2021, net income was $6.2 million and fully diluted earnings per share was $0.61 per share as compared to a net loss of $(0.1) million and fully diluted earnings per share of $0.01 per share for fiscal 2020.
Inflation and Rising Costs
The cost to manufacture the Company’s products is influenced by the cost of raw materials and labor. The Company has recently experienced higher costs as a result of the increasing cost of labor and the increasing cost of raw materials. The cost of raw materials is due in part to a shortage in the availability of certain products, the higher cost of shipping, and inflation. Labor costs have risen recently as a result of increases in the minimum wage laws and an increased demand for workers. The Company may, from time to time, try to offset these cost increases by increasing the prices of its products. However, because the prices of certain of the Company’s products, particularly those under longer-term manufacturing contracts for communications related products, are fixed until the goods are manufactured and delivered, implementing price increases often is often not feasible.