Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including statements that contain the words “believes,” “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends” and similar words and phrases. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results projected in any forward-looking statement. In addition to the factors specifically noted in the forward-looking statements, other important factors, risks and uncertainties that could result in those differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed under Item 1A to Part I “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report. The forward-looking statements are made as of the date of this Annual Report, and we assume no obligation to update the forward-looking statements, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Investors should consult all of the information set forth in this report and the other information set forth from time to time in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including our reports on Forms 10-Q and 8-K.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Overview
Rafael Holdings, Inc. (NYSE:RFL), (“Rafael Holdings”, “we” or the “Company”), a Delaware corporation, is a holding company with interests in clinical and early-stage pharmaceutical companies (the “Pharmaceutical Companies”), through an investment in Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals, Inc., formerly known as Rafael Pharmaceuticals Inc., a cancer metabolism-based therapeutics company a majority equity interest in LipoMedix Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (“LipoMedix”), a clinical stage pharmaceutical company, the activities of the Barer Institute Inc. (“Barer”), a wholly-owned preclinical cancer metabolism research operation, and Rafael Medical Devices, Inc. (“Rafael Medical Devices” and together with the Pharmaceutical Companies, the “Healthcare Companies”), a wholly-owned orthopedic-focused medical device company developing instruments to advance minimally invasive surgeries. The Company’s primary focus to date, has been to invest in and fund, discover and develop novel cancer therapies, and we further seek to expand our portfolio through opportunistic investments in therapeutics which address high unmet medical needs including through acquisitions, strategic investments, or in-licensing assets.
Historically, the Company owned real estate assets. In 2020, the Company sold an office building located in Piscataway, New Jersey and following the end of Fiscal 2022, the Company sold the building at 520 Broad Street in Newark, New Jersey and an associated public garage. Currently, the Company holds a portion of a commercial building in Jerusalem, Israel as its remaining real estate asset.
The Company has debt and equity investments in Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals, that include preferred and common equity interests and a warrant to purchase additional equity. On June 17, 2021, the Company entered into a merger agreement to acquire full ownership of Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals in exchange for issuing Company Class B common stock to the other stockholders of Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals. On October 28, 2021, the Company announced that the AVENGER 500 Phase 3 clinical trial for CPI-613® (devimistat), Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals’ lead product candidate, did not meet its primary endpoint of significant improvement in overall survival in patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, and following a pre-specified interim analysis, the independent data monitoring committee for the ARMADA 2000 Phase 3 study for devimistat recommended the trial to be stopped due to a determination that it was unlikely to achieve the primary endpoint (the “Data Events”). In light of the Data Events, the Company concluded that the prospects for CPI-613 were uncertain and has fully impaired in its financial statements for the year ended July 31, 2022, the value of its loans, receivables, and investment in Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals based upon its valuation of Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals.
On September 24, 2021, the Company entered into a Line of Credit Loan Agreement (the “Line of Credit Agreement”) with Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals under which Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals borrowed $25 million from the Company. Due to the Data Events, the Company recorded a full reserve on the $25 million due the Company from Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals.
On February 2, 2022, the Company terminated the Merger Agreement with Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals, effective immediately, in accordance with its terms. Subsequently, on February 2, 2022, the Company withdrew its Registration Statement on Form S-4 related to the proposed Merger.
In 2019, the Company established the Barer Institute (“Barer”), an early-stage small molecule research operation focused on developing a pipeline of novel therapeutic compounds, including compounds to regulate cancer metabolism with potentially broader application in other indications beyond cancer. Barer is led by a team of scientists and academic advisors considered to be among the leading experts in cancer metabolism, chemistry, and drug development. In addition to its own internal discovery efforts, Barer is pursuing collaborative research agreements and in-licensing opportunities with leading scientists from top academic institutions. Farber Partners, LLC (“Farber”) was formed to support agreements with Princeton University’s Office of Technology Licensing for technology from the laboratory of Professor Joshua Rabinowitz, in the Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, including an exclusive worldwide license to its SHMT (serine hydroxymethyltransferase) inhibitor program. The Company also holds a majority equity interest in LipoMedix Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (“LipoMedix”), a clinical stage oncological pharmaceutical company based in Israel. In addition, the Company has invested in other early-stage pharmaceutical ventures.
As of July 31, 2022, the Company’s commercial real estate holdings consisted of a building at 520 Broad Street in Newark, New Jersey (“520 Property”) that serves as headquarters for the Company and certain other entities and tenants and an associated 800-car public garage, and a portion of a commercial building in Israel. On August 22, 2022, the Company completed the sale of the 520 Property for a purchase price of approximately $49.4 million and realized net proceeds of approximately $33 million.
On July 1, 2022, the Company determined that the 520 Property met the held-for-sale criteria and the Company has therefore classified the 520 Property as held-for-sale in the consolidated balance sheets at July 31, 2022 and 2021. The sale of the 520 Property also represents a significant strategic shift that will have a major effect on the Company’s operations and financial results. Therefore, the Company has classified the results of operations related to the 520 Property as discontinued operations in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Depreciation on the 520 Property has ceased on July 1, 2022, as a result of the 520 Property being classified as held-for-sale. See Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information regarding discontinued operations.
Business Update - COVID-19, War in Ukraine
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV, which causes COVID-19, was identified and has proved to be highly contagious. It has since spread extensively throughout the world, including the United States, and was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The Company actively monitors the outbreak, including the spread of new variants of interest, and its potential impact on the Company’s operations and those of the Company’s holdings.
Even with growing availability of testing and vaccines and the relaxation of public health measures that were implemented to limit the spread of the pandemic, there continues to be uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact.
The Company had implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of the Company’s workforce including a voluntary work-from-home policy for the Company’s workforce who can perform their jobs from home as well as restrictions on discretionary business travel. Most of our employees have returned to working from the office on a part-time basis.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company will depend on factors such as the length of time of the pandemic; the responses of federal, state and local governments; the impact of future variants that may emerge; vaccination rates among the population; the efficacy of the COVID-19 vaccines; the longer-term impact of the pandemic on the economy and consumer behavior; and the effect on our employees, vendors, and other partners.
The short and long-term implications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are difficult to predict at this time. The imposition of sanctions and counter sanctions may have an adverse effect on the economic markets generally and could impact our business and the companies in which we have investments, financial condition, and results of operations. Because of the highly uncertain and dynamic nature of these events, it is not currently possible to estimate the impact of the Russian - Ukraine war on our business and the companies in which we have investments.
Results of Operations
Our business consists of two reportable segments - Healthcare and Real Estate. We evaluate the performance of our Healthcare segment based primarily on research and development efforts and results of clinical trials, and our Real Estate segment based primarily on results of operations. Accordingly, the income and expense line items below loss from operations are only included in the discussion of consolidated results of operations.
Healthcare Segment
Our consolidated expenses for our Healthcare segment were as follows:
To date, the Healthcare segment has not generated any revenues. The entirety of the expenses in the Healthcare segment relate to the activities of LipoMedix, Barer, Farber, and Rafael Medical Devices. As of July 31, 2022, we held a 100% interest in Barer, an 84% interest in LipoMedix, a 93% interest in Farber, and a 100% interest in Rafael Medical Devices.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses consist mainly of payroll, severance, stock compensation expense, benefits, facilities, consulting and professional fees. The slight decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended July 31, 2022 compared to the year ended July 31, 2021 is primarily due to severance expense of approximately $5.9 million, an increase in salary expenses of approximately $2.2 million, an increase in professional fees of approximately $1.0 million, offset by a net decrease in stock-based compensation expense of approximately $7.9 million (inclusive of a forfeiture of restricted stock units of approximately $19.0 million) and a decrease in bonus pay of approximately $1.4 million. The majority of these increases were related to pre-launch activities for CPI-613® which are not expected to be recurring in light of the Data Events.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses increased for the year ended July 31, 2022 as compared to the year ended July 31, 2021 due primarily to increased activity at Barer, LipoMedix, Farber, and Rafael Medical Devices during the periods. Barer also has additional management this period which also attributed to the increase.
Loss on line of credit. Due to the Data Events, in the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company recorded a full reserve on the $25 million due to the Company from Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals related to the Line of Credit Agreement.
Loss on related party receivables. Due to the Data Events, in the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company recorded a loss of approximately $10.1 million related to the full reserve recorded on the RP Finance receivable of $9.375 million, and a full reserve recorded on the Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals receivable of $0.720 million.
Impairment expense - Altira. The Company recorded an impairment loss of $7 million related to the Company’s investment in 33.333% of Altira during year ended July 31, 2021. The Company’s initial investment in Altira was impaired in fiscal year 2020.
Real Estate Segment
The revenue and expenses of the 520 Property have been excluded from the real estate segment in the figures below due to its classification of held-for-sale and discontinued operations as of July 31, 2022. The Real Estate segment consists of a portion of a commercial building in Israel. Our consolidated income and expenses for our Real Estate segment were as follows:
Revenues. Rental revenues decreased by approximately $32 thousand in the year ended July 31, 2022, compared to the prior year, primarily attributable to one month’s worth of rental revenue from the building in Piscataway, New Jersey that was earned in fiscal 2021 prior to its August 2021 sale compared to no corresponding revenue in fiscal 2022.
Other - Related Party. Other - Related Party revenues decreased by approximately $360 thousand during the year ended July 31, 2022, compared to the prior year ended July 31, 2021. During the year ended July 31, 2022, the Company only billed Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals $120 thousand for the first quarter of 2022 for administrative, finance, accounting, tax, and legal services. As of July 31, 2022, Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals owed the Company $720 thousand, for which a full allowance for uncollectibility has been recorded and included in Due from Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals.
Selling, general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist mainly of payroll, benefits, facilities, consulting and professional fees. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses of approximately $38 thousand during the year ended July 31, 2022 compared to the year ended July 31, 2021 is primarily due to an increase in professional fees and building operating expenses, coupled with other increases in administrative expenses on IDT R.E. Holdings Ltd.
Consolidated Operations
Our consolidated income and expense line items below income from operations were as follows:
Interest income. Interest income was $201 thousand and $2 thousand for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase is primarily due to the interest income earned on our investments in available-for-sale securities.
Gain on sale of building. In August 2020, we sold a building located in Piscataway, New Jersey, and recognized a gain on the sale of approximately $749 thousand for the year ended July 31, 2021.
Impairment of investments - Other Pharmaceuticals. We recorded an impairment loss of $724 thousand related to our investment in Nanovibronix using the measurement alternative for the year ended July 31, 2021.
Impairment of cost method investment - Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals. In connection with the Data Events, during the year ended July 31, 2022, we recorded a full impairment charge to our cost method investment in Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals in the amount of approximately $79 million.
Realized loss on available-for-sale securities. We recorded a realized loss of approximately $45 thousand related to maturities of available-for-sale securities for the year ended July 31, 2022.
Unrealized (loss) gain on investments - Hedge Funds. We recorded unrealized losses of approximately $504 thousand and gains of approximately $4.8 million for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Equity in (loss) earnings of RP Finance. We recognized a loss of $575 thousand and earnings of $383 thousand from our ownership interest in RP Finance for the years ended July 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Loss from discontinued operations related to 520 Property, net of tax. Discontinued operations includes (i) rental and parking revenues, (ii) payroll, benefits, facility costs, real estate taxes, consulting and professional fees dedicated to the 520 Property, and (iii) depreciation and amortization expenses on July 31, 2022 and (iv) interest (including amortization of debt issuance costs) on the note payable on the Property. The operating results of these items are presented in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as discontinued operations for all periods presented. The increase in the net loss attributable to discontinued operations was due to an approximate $330 thousand increase in rental revenue, a $157 thousand increase in other income, a $709 thousand decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses and $73 thousand decrease in depreciation and amortization expense due to only 11 months of depreciation expense during 2022 as depreciation stopped as of July 1, 2022 when the 520 Property was classified as held-for-sale. This is offset by an approximate $1.39 million increase in interest expense.
See Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information regarding discontinued operations.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests. The change in the net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was due to an approximate $17.3 million loss related to the Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals impairment loss (the total impairment loss was approximately $79 million) which was applicable to noncontrolling interests in certain of the Company’s subsidiaries and was allocated to the minority holders of interests in CS Pharma and Pharma Holdings in the approximate amounts of $10.4 million and $6.9 million, respectively, for the year ended July 31, 2022. The additional change is related to the losses from LipoMedix and Farber for the year ended July 31, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
As of July 31, 2022, we held cash and cash equivalents of approximately $26.5 million and available-for-sale securities valued at approximately $36.7 million, and investment in hedge funds valued at approximately $4.8 million. We expect the balance of cash and cash equivalents, investment in corporate bonds, and investment in hedge funds to be sufficient to at least meet our obligations for the period through October 31, 2023.
Operating Activities
The increase in cash used in operating activities for the year ended July 31, 2022 as compared to the year ended July 31, 2021 was primarily related to the net loss from continuing operations of $141 million and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $3.5 million, partially offset by the impact from noncash items, principally the impairment of the Company’s cost method investment in Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals of $79 million, the reserve on the amounts due the Company from Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals related to the Line of Credit Agreement of $25 million, the reserve on receivables due from Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals totaling $10.1 million, changes in other current liabilities of $3.6 million, as well as other changes in assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended July 31, 2022 was primarily related to purchases of available-for-sale securities of approximately $65 million, amounts loaned to Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals of approximately $25 million pursuant to the Line of Credit Agreement and the payments to fund our portion of advances under the line of credit between RP Finance and Cornerstone Pharmaceuticals in the amount of approximately $1.9 million, partially offset by proceeds of $28.5 million from the maturities of available-for-sale securities.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended July 31, 2021 was primarily related to the purchase of 7.3 million shares of Rafael Pharmaceuticals’ Series D Preferred Stock for $9.1 million, the payments to fund our portion of advances under the line of credit between RP Finance and Rafael Pharmaceuticals for $7.5 million, the payments of an aggregate of $2 million towards the acquisition of a second 33.333% membership interest in Altira, offset by the proceeds of $7 million from the liquidation of hedge funds and $3.7 million from the sale of the building in Piscataway, New Jersey in August 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended July 31, 2022 was primarily related to proceeds of approximately $110 million related to the sale of our common stock to investors and a related party, partially offset by payment of transaction costs of $6.2 million.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended July 31, 2021 was primarily related to proceeds of $13.0 million for the sale of 567,437 shares of our Class B common stock and warrants to purchase an additional 113,487 shares of Class B common stock. Additionally, there were approximately $2.0 million in proceeds provided by the exercise of 87,298 warrants to purchase Class B common stock.
We do not anticipate paying dividends on our common stock until we achieve sustainable profitability and retain certain minimum cash reserves. The payment of dividends in any specific period will be at the sole discretion of our Board of Directors.
Operating and investing activities from discontinued operations
The cash flows from discontinued operations - 520 Property represents the net loss excluding non-cash depreciation and amortization. We don’t anticipate a material impact on future liquidity and capital resources due to discontinued operations. For further information see Note 2.
Trends and Uncertainties - COVID-19, War in Ukraine
In late 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV, which causes COVID-19, was identified and has proved to be highly contagious. It has since spread extensively throughout the world, including the United States, and was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization in March 2020. The Company actively monitors the outbreak, including the spread of new variants of interest, and its potential impact on the Company’s operations and those of the Company’s holdings.
Even with growing availability of testing and vaccines and the relaxation of public health measures that were implemented to limit the spread of the pandemic, there continues to be uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact.
The Company had implemented a number of measures to protect the health and safety of the Company’s workforce including a voluntary work-from-home policy for the Company’s workforce who can perform their jobs from home as well as restrictions on discretionary business travel. Most of our employees have returned to working from the office on a part-time basis.
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company will depend on factors such as the length of time of the pandemic; the responses of federal, state and local governments; the impact of future variants that may emerge; vaccination rates among the population; the efficacy of the COVID-19 vaccines; the longer-term impact of the pandemic on the economy and consumer behavior; and the effect on our employees, vendors, and other partners.
The short and long-term implications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are difficult to predict at this time. The imposition of sanctions and counter sanctions may have an adverse effect on the economic markets generally and could impact our business and the companies in which we have investments, financial condition, and results of operations. Because of the highly uncertain and dynamic nature of these events, it is not currently possible to estimate the impact of the Russian - Ukraine war on our business and the companies in which we have investments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We have chosen accounting policies that we believe are appropriate to accurately and fairly report our operating results and financial condition in conformity with U.S. GAAP. We apply these accounting policies in a consistent manner. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in our accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The application of critical accounting policies requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures. These estimates and assumptions are based on historical and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate these estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis and may retain outside consultants to assist in our evaluation. If actual results ultimately differ from previous estimates, the revisions are included in results of operations in the period in which the actual amounts become known. The critical accounting policies that involve the most significant management judgments and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements, or are the most sensitive to change from outside factors, are discussed below.
Stock-based Compensation
We record stock-based compensation for options granted and restricted stock units awarded to employees, non-employees, and to members of the board of directors for their services on the board of directors based on the grant date fair value of awards issued, and the expense is recorded on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are recognized when they occur.
The fair value of restricted stock units is determined by the grant date market price of our common shares. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The use of the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected life of the option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yields of the common stock. We have concluded that its historical share option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term. Therefore, the expected term was determined according to the simplified method, which is the average of the vesting tranche dates and the contractual term. Due to the lack of Company-specific historical and implied volatility data, the estimate of expected volatility is primarily based on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. For these analyses, companies with comparable characteristics are selected, including enterprise value and position within the industry, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of its stock-based awards. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining maturities similar to the expected term of the options. We have not paid, and do not anticipate paying, cash dividends on shares of our common stock.
Investments - Hedge Funds
We account for our investments in hedge funds in accordance with ASC 321, Investments - Equity Securities. Unrealized gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in unrealized (loss) gain on investments - Hedge Funds in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. Hedge funds classified as Level 3 include investments and securities which may not be based on readily observable data inputs. The availability of observable inputs can vary from security to security and is affected by a wide variety of factors, including, for example, the type of security, whether the security is new and not yet established in the marketplace, the liquidity of markets, and other characteristics particular to the security. The fair value of these assets is estimated based on information provided by the fund managers or the general partners. Therefore, these assets are classified as Level 3.
Investments - Cost Method
We periodically evaluate our investments for impairment due to declines considered to be other than temporary. If we determine that a decline in fair value is other than temporary, then a charge to earnings is recorded in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, and a new basis in the investment is established.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any “off-balance sheet arrangements,” as defined in relevant SEC regulations that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Discontinued Operations
In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board, ASC 205-20, Presentation of Financial Statements - Discontinued Operations, the results of operations of a component of an entity or a group or component of an entity that represents a strategic shift that has, or will have, a major effect on the reporting company’s operations that has either been disposed of or is classified as held-for-sale are required to be reported as discontinued operations in a company’s consolidated financial statements. In order to be considered a discontinued operation, both the operations and cash flows of the discontinued component must have been (or will be) eliminated from the ongoing operations of the company and the company will not have any significant continuing involvement in the operations of the discontinued component after the disposal transaction. As a result of the agreement to sell the 520 Property, the accompanying consolidated financial statements reflect the activity related to the sale of the 520 Property as discontinued operations. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the results, major classes of assets and liabilities, significant noncash operating items, and capital expenditures of discontinued operations.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information on recent accounting standards, see Note 1, “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in our consolidated financial statements.