Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
Resources is an energy services company primarily engaged in the regulated sale and distribution of natural gas to approximately 62,000 residential, commercial and industrial customers in Roanoke, Virginia, and the surrounding localities, through its Roanoke Gas subsidiary. As a wholly-owned subsidiary of Resources, Midstream is a more than 1% investor in the MVP and a less than 1% investor in Southgate. More information regarding the investment in MVP is provided below and under the Equity Investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline section.
Primarily due to decisions in January and February 2022 by the Fourth Circuit vacating and remanding certain permits necessary for the completion of MVP construction and its commercial operation, and the greater uncertainty that exists given the Fourth Circuit's more recent hearing involving an MVP permit, as well as the consequent actions by project partners to impair their respective investments and revocation of the previously disclosed summer 2022 in-service target date, Midstream determined that in April 2022 its investment in the LLC experienced an other-than-temporary decline in value. Accordingly, management recorded a $39.8 million impairment to the value of its investments in the second quarter of fiscal 2022. In November 2022, Resources re-assessed the valuation of its investment in MVP in response to the Fourth Circuit's comments regarding a challenge to a water permit certification from the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection, ongoing delays in the permitting process as well as the additional impairment recognized by the LLC's managing partner. As a result, management recorded an additional $15.3 million impairment in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2022 to reflect an additional other-than-temporary decline in value. In determining the current valuation, the Company, with the assistance of a third party valuation specialist, conducted an evaluation of Midstream's investment to incorporate the recent legal and governmental responses and the expected impact to future cash flows. As of September 30, 2022, the impairment of the investment in the LLC totaled $55.1 million.
The utility operations of Roanoke Gas are regulated by the SCC, which oversees the terms, conditions and rates charged to customers for natural gas service, safety standards, extension of service and depreciation. Nearly all of the Company’s revenues, excluding equity in earnings of MVP, are derived from the sale and delivery of natural gas to Roanoke Gas customers based on rates authorized by the SCC. These rates are designed to provide the Company with the opportunity to recover its gas and non-gas expenses and to earn a reasonable rate of return for shareholders based on normal weather. These rates are determined based on the filing of a formal non-gas rate application with the SCC. Generally, investments related to extending service to new customers are recovered through the additional revenues generated by the non-gas base rates in place at that time. The investment in replacing and upgrading existing infrastructure, as well as recovering increases in non-gas expenses due to inflationary pressures, regulatory requirements or operation needs are generally not recoverable until a formal rate application is filed to include additional investment and higher costs, and new non-gas base rates are approved. The gas portion of rates are adjusted at least quarterly by administrative approval based on filings submitted by the Company.
The Company is also subject to federal regulation from the Department of Transportation in regard to the construction, operation, maintenance, safety and integrity of its transmission and distribution pipelines. FERC regulates the prices for the transportation and delivery of natural gas to the Company's distribution system and underground storage services. In addition, Roanoke Gas is subject to other regulations which are not necessarily industry specific.
As the Company’s business is seasonal in nature, volatility in winter weather and the commodity price of natural gas, can impact the effectiveness of the Company’s rates in recovering its costs and providing a reasonable return for its shareholders. In order to mitigate the effect of weather variations and other factors not provided for in the Company's base rates, Roanoke Gas has certain approved rate mechanisms in place that help provide stability in earnings, adjust for volatility in the price of natural gas and provide a return on qualified infrastructure investment. These mechanisms include the SAVE Rider, WNA, ICC and PGA.
The SAVE Rider provides the Company with a mechanism through which it recovers costs related to SAVE qualified infrastructure investments on a prospective basis, until a formal rate application is filed to incorporate these investments in non-gas base rates. The SAVE Plan and Rider were last reset effective January 1, 2019, when the recovery of all prior SAVE Plan investment was incorporated into the current non-gas rates. Accordingly, SAVE Plan revenues continue to increase year over year with fiscal 2022 levels reaching $3,286,000 compared to $2,487,000 in fiscal 2021, reflecting the Company's cumulative investment in qualified SAVE Plan infrastructure since 2019. The current SAVE Plan is focused on replacing first generation, pre-1973 plastic pipe and other qualifying infrastructures projects. Additional information regarding the SAVE Plan and Rider is provided under the Regulatory section below.
The WNA mechanism reduces the volatility in earnings due to the variability in temperatures during the heating season. The WNA is based on the most recent 30-year temperature average and provides the Company with a level of earnings protection when weather is warmer than normal and provides its customers with a level of price protection when the weather is colder than normal. The WNA allows the Company to recover from its customers the lost margin, excluding gas costs, from the impact of weather that is warmer than normal and correspondingly requires the Company to refund to its customers the excess margin earned for weather that is colder than normal. The WNA mechanism used by the Company is based on a linear regression model that determines the value of a single heating degree day and thereby estimates the revenue adjustment based on weather variance from normal. Any billings or refunds related to the WNA are completed following each WNA year, which extends for the 12-month period from April to March. The Company recorded approximately $1,973,000 and $1,196,000 in additional revenue from the WNA for weather that was approximately 13% and 8% warmer than normal for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The number of heating degree days used to determine normal will change annually as a new year is added to the 30-year period and the oldest year is removed. As a result of adding recent warmer than normal years to replace historical colder years, the number of heating degree days that defines normal has trended downward over the last several years.
The Company also has an approved rate structure in place that mitigates the impact of financing costs of its natural gas inventory. Under this rate structure, Roanoke Gas recognizes revenue by applying the ICC factor, based on the Company’s weighted-average cost of capital, including interest rates on short-term and long-term debt, and the Company’s authorized return on equity, to the average cost of natural gas inventory during the period. Total ICC revenues increased from $396,000 in fiscal 2021 to $657,000 in fiscal 2022 in response to the impact of rising natural gas commodity prices on average natural gas storage balances. Monthly average inventory balances, used to calculate ICC revenues, increased by 69% and ending storage balances increased by 115% year over year.
The cost of natural gas is a pass-through cost and is independent of the non-gas rates of the Company. Accordingly, the Company's approved billing rates include a component designed to allow for the recovery of the cost of natural gas used by its customers. This rate component, referred to as the PGA, allows the Company to pass along to its customers increases and decreases in natural gas costs based on a quarterly filing, or more frequent if necessary, with the SCC. Once administrative approval is received, the Company adjusts the gas cost component of its rates to reflect the approved amount. As actual costs will differ from the projections used in establishing the PGA rate, the Company will either over-recover or under-recover its actual gas costs during the period. The difference between actual costs incurred and costs recovered through the application of the PGA is recorded as a regulatory asset or liability. At the end of the annual deferral period, the balance is amortized over an ensuing 12-month period as amounts are reflected in customer billings.
Roanoke Gas is required to submit an AIF each year to the SCC. Included as part of this filing is an earnings test, which is required when the Company has certain regulatory assets. If the results of the earnings test indicate that the Company's regulatory earnings exceed the mid-point of its authorized return on equity range, then certain regulatory assets are written-down and recovery is accelerated to the point where the actual return for the period adjusts to the mid-point of the range. In years when Roanoke Gas files an application for an increase in non-gas base rates, an AIF is not required; however an earnings test must be completed as part of the application filing. As a result of the preliminary earnings tests conducted in 2022 and 2021, Roanoke Gas expensed $232,000 in regulatory assets related to the R&D tax credit study, a portion of which were incurred during fiscal 2022, and $57,000 in deferred COVID costs in September 2022; and in September 2021, Roanoke gas expensed $217,000 in deferred COVID costs incurred during that period.
COVID-19
As was discussed under Item 1A "Risk Factors" above, COVID-19 and the resulting pandemic continues to impact the local, state, national and global economies. Supply chain disruptions, labor shortages and inflation have supplanted quarantines and government restrictions as the primary examples of matters impacting economic conditions. Significant progress was made in distributing and administering vaccines to the public through September 30, 2022, which has allowed a return to mostly normal operating conditions. Most restrictions implemented as a result of the pandemic have been eased, including Virginia’s state of emergency, allowing for increased business, recreational and travel activities. Natural gas consumption by the Company’s commercial customers has largely returned to pre-pandemic levels. However, the easing of restrictions and the existence of variant strains of COVID-19 may lead to a rise in infections, which could result in the reinstatement of some or all of the restrictions previously in place. Management continues to monitor current conditions to ensure the continuation of safe and reliable service to customers and to maintain the safety of the Company's employees.
See the Regulatory section below for information regarding the service disconnection moratorium, CARES Act and ARPA funds.
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact the Company depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be reasonably predicted, including the increase or reduction in governmental restrictions to businesses and individuals, the potential resurgence of the virus, including variants, as well as efficacy of the vaccines.
Cyber Risk
Cyber attacks are a constant threat to businesses and individuals. The Company remains focused on these threats and is committed to safeguarding its information technology systems. These systems contain confidential customer, vendor and employee information as well as important operational and financial data. There is risk associated with unauthorized access of this information with a malicious intent to corrupt data, cause operational disruptions or compromise information. Management continuously monitors access to these systems and believes it has security measures in place to protect these systems from cyber attacks and similar incidents; however, there can be no guarantee that an incident will not occur. In the event of a cyber incident, the Company will execute its Security Incident Response Plan. The Company maintains cyber insurance to mitigate financial costs that may result from a cyber incident.
Inflation and Rising Prices
Natural gas commodity, delivery and storage capacity costs constitute the single largest expense of the Company representing 61% of fiscal 2022 total operating expenses. Natural gas commodity prices have increased through fiscal 2022 with a sharp rise during the fiscal third and fourth quarters. Several factors have contributed to rising natural gas prices including lack of interstate pipeline development, demand rebounding as activity returns to pre-pandemic levels, lower inventory storage levels, increased demand for cleaner energy and global energy conditions, including the Russia/Ukraine conflict. Roanoke Gas can recover rising natural gas costs through the PGA mechanism as noted above; however, in times of rapidly increasing costs, the timing of recovery may lag. Increasing natural gas prices, especially in relation to other energy options, may lead to reductions in energy consumption through customer conservation or fuel switching in addition to the potential for higher bad debts related to customers inability to pay higher natural gas bills.
Inflation, due to supply chain delays, labor shortages and limited availability of critical supplies among other factors, affects the Company through increases in non-gas expenses such as labor, employee benefits, materials and supplies, contracted services, corporate insurance and other areas. The Company recovers non-gas related costs through the non-gas portion of its tariff rates, which are adjusted through a non-gas rate application. Unlike the rate adjustments for the gas portion of rates which are done administratively, the non-gas rate application results in an inherent lag in non-gas expense recovery. Therefore, authorized non-gas rates may not keep pace with the rising costs during inflationary periods. Management regularly evaluates the Company's operations, economic conditions and other factors to assess the need to apply for a non-gas rate adjustment. Accordingly, management plans to file a non-gas rate application in early December 2022 to incorporate the increased expense levels and additional rate base, including both SAVE and Non SAVE related plant, since the last non-gas base rate application. See the Regulatory section for more information.
Results of Operations
The analysis on the results of operations is based on the consolidated operations of the Company, which is primarily associated with the utility segment. Additional segment analysis is provided in areas where Midstream's investment in affiliates represents a significant component of the comparison. Net income decreased by $41,834,664 to a net loss of $31,732,602 for the year ended September 30, 2022 primarily due to the impairment of the LLC investment and lower equity in earnings.
The Company's operating revenues are affected by the cost of natural gas, as reflected in the consolidated income statement under the line item cost of gas - utility. The cost of natural gas, which includes commodity price, transportation, storage, injection and withdrawal fees with any increase or decrease offset by a correlating change in revenue through the PGA, is passed through to customers at the Company's cost. Accordingly, management believes that gross utility margin, a non-GAAP financial measure defined as utility revenues less cost of gas, is a more useful and relevant measure to analyze financial performance. The term gross utility margin is not intended to represent or replace operating income, the most comparable GAAP financial measure, as an indicator of operating performance and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies. The following results of operations analyses will reference gross utility margin.
Fiscal Year 2022 Compared with Fiscal Year 2021
The table below reflects operating revenues, volume activity and heating degree days.
Total gas utility operating revenues for the year ended September 30, 2022 increased by 12% from the year ended September 30, 2021 primarily due to higher natural gas commodity prices, increases in SAVE and ICC revenues and higher transportation and interruptible volumes. Rising natural gas commodity prices resulted in a 40% per DTH increase in the commodity component of revenue and a 16% per DTH increase in total revenue. The total demand component of revenue remained relatively unchanged as the corresponding transportation and storage fees declined slightly from the prior year. Corresponding to the increase in natural gas commodity prices, ICC revenues rose 66% as the average storage injection price per DTH increased from $3.19 last year to $7.98 for the current year. Transportation and interruptible volumes, primarily driven by business activity rather than weather, increased by 20% due to a single multi-fuel customer that switched its primary fuel to natural gas from an alternate energy source. Over the last few years, this customer has alternated its primary energy source between natural gas and alternative fuels. Accordingly, Roanoke Gas expects volatility in the this customer's usage patterns to continue. Excluding the multi-fuel customer's usage from both periods, total transportation and interruptible volumes would have increased by approximately 2% on a comparative basis. The weather sensitive residential and commercial natural gas deliveries decreased by 3% corresponding to the decline in heating degree days.
Gross utility margin increased over the prior fiscal year primarily as a result of the aforementioned higher SAVE and ICC revenues, increase in transportation and interruptible deliveries and higher WNA adjusted residential and commercial margins. Even though residential and commercial volumes decreased by 3%, after adjusting for the impact of warmer weather, the WNA mechanism provided for additional margins equivalent to nearly 100,000 DTH more than the corresponding WNA adjusted margin for the prior year. Other revenues increased due to reinstatement of late payment fees and charges that were suspended during the moratorium prohibiting the disconnection of customers for late or non-payment. When the moratorium was lifted on August 30, 2021, the Company resumed the assessment of these fees.
The changes in the components of the gross utility margin are summarized below:
Operations and Maintenance Expense - Operations and maintenance expense increased by $1,012,885, or 7%, over the prior year primarily due to increases in bad debt expense, corporate insurance premiums, professional and contracted services and the accelerated amortization of certain regulatory assets, net of higher capitalized overheads. Bad debt expense increased by $900,000 as the prior year included more than $400,000 in CARES Act funds and $859,000 in ARPA funds applied to delinquent customer account balances. Bad debt expense was also impacted in the current fiscal year due to higher customer bills related to rising natural gas commodity prices and delinquencies attributed to the prior year moratorium that prevented service disconnections for non-payment until after August 30, 2021. Corporate insurance premiums increased by $194,000 due to insurance market conditions. Contracted services increased by $225,000 due to facility maintenance projects, higher costs for the customer call center and cyber security enhancements. Roanoke gas expensed an additional $289,000 in deferred regulatory assets related to COVID and the R&D tax credit study, compared to $217,000 in the prior year related to COVID expenses as a result of the earnings test conducted for each of the respective years. The accelerated expensing of deferred costs was required as Roanoke Gas' actual returns exceeded the top of the authorized return range as defined in the last non-gas rate award. Total capitalized overheads increased by $391,000 on a $5.5 million increase in capital expenditures primarily related to the RNG and capital project timing.
General Taxes - General taxes decreased by $4,893, or less than 1%. Property tax expense was nearly unchanged as a 7% increase in gross utility property was offset by a corresponding reduction in the assessed values reported by the SCC to the Company.
Depreciation - Depreciation expense increased by $524,303, or 6%, corresponding to a similar increase in depreciable utility property.
Equity in Earnings of Unconsolidated Affiliate - The equity in earnings of the MVP investment decreased by $1,594,227 as the limited growth construction activities and the related accrual of AFUDC ceased in October 2021. The prior fiscal year reflected higher activity levels early in the year, followed by a halt in growth activities and AFUDC during the second fiscal quarter with limited construction resuming in April 2021 and a much lower level of AFUDC recognized for the remainder of fiscal 2021. See the Equity Investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline section for additional information.
Impairment of Unconsolidated Affiliates - The $55,092,303 impairment is due to two other-than-temporary write-downs of the Company's investment in the LLC that were made during the second and fourth quarters of fiscal 2022. See Equity Investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline and Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates sections for more information.
Other Income, net - Other income increased by $544,837, or 60%, primarily due to a $345,000 decrease in the non-service cost components of net periodic benefit costs and $219,000 in income related to gas distribution property donated by a local housing authority. After receiving approval from the SCC, Roanoke Gas acquired the natural gas facilities from two apartment complexes in exchange for assuming the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of these assets. The fair value of these assets were reflected in utility property with an offsetting credit to income. See the Regulatory section for more information.
Interest Expense - Total interest expense increased by $446,044, or 11%, due to a combination of higher total debt levels and increasing interest rates on the Company's variable rate debt. Total average debt outstanding increased by 8% to meet the funding needs of Roanoke Gas' capital projects and Midstream's continuing investment in the LLC. The average interest rate increased by 10 basis points as the higher rates on the Company's variable rate debt offset lower rates on the Company's new fixed rate debt issuances. Total borrowing levels were mitigated by the infusion of $22 million of the $27 million proceeds from the March equity offering into Roanoke Gas and Midstream.
Roanoke Gas' interest expense increased by $189,819, or 7%, as total average debt outstanding increased by $7,300,000 associated with two new debt issues totaling $25,000,000, of which the proceeds were used to pay down the capital bridge financing provided by the line-of-credit and contribute additional financing for the capital budget. The average interest rate decreased slightly from 3.48% in fiscal 2021 to 3.38% in fiscal 2022. The lower average interest rate was attributable to the two new debt issues that have interest rate swap rates of 2.00% and 2.49%, respectively.
Midstream's interest expense increased by $256,225, or 21%, as the average interest rate on Midstream's total debt increased from 2.23% to 2.59% related to rising interest rates on the variable rate credit facility combined with a $2,600,000 increase in total average debt outstanding during the period.
Income Taxes - Income tax expense decreased by $14,614,707, moving from a tax expense of $3,204,062 in fiscal 2021 to a net tax benefit of $11,410,645 due to a net deferred tax benefit of $14,180,759 in fiscal 2022 corresponding to the recognition of the impairment of the Company's investment in the LLC. The effective tax rate was 26.5% for fiscal 2022 compared to 24.1% for fiscal 2021. The effective tax rate for the current fiscal year exceeded the combined federal and state statutory rate of 25.74% due to the combination of moving to a taxable loss position combined with additional deductions related to the amortization of the R&D tax credits. Excluding the impairment, the effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 would have been 23.2% representing a decline from 24.1% in the prior year.
Earnings Per Share and Dividends - Basic and diluted loss per share were $3.48 in fiscal 2022 compared to $1.22 earnings per share in fiscal 2021. Dividends declared per share of common stock were $0.78 in fiscal 2022 compared to $0.74 in fiscal 2021.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Due to the capital intensive nature of the utility business, as well as the impact of weather variability, the Company’s primary capital needs are the funding of its capital projects, investment in the LLC, the seasonal funding of its natural gas inventories and accounts receivables and payment of dividends to shareholders. The Company anticipates funding these items through its operating cash flows, credit availability under short-term and long-term debt agreements and proceeds from the sale of its common stock.
Cash and cash equivalents increased by approximately $3.4 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $1.2 million in fiscal 2021. The following table summarizes the categories of sources and uses of cash:
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities:
The seasonal nature of the natural gas business causes operating cash flows to fluctuate significantly during the year, as well as from year to year. Factors, including weather, energy prices, natural gas storage levels and customer collections, all contribute to working capital levels and related cash flows. Generally, operating cash flows are positive during the second and third fiscal quarters as a combination of earnings, declining storage gas levels and collections on customer accounts all contribute to higher cash levels. During the first and fourth fiscal quarters, operating cash flows generally decrease due to the combination of increasing natural gas storage levels and rising customer receivable balances.
Cash flows from operating activities increased by nearly $4 million from the prior year. The table below summarizes the significant components operating cash flow:
Recovery of the prior year under-collection of gas costs and receipt of supplier refunds, net of the impact of the continuing rise in natural gas commodity prices, accounted for much of the nearly $4 million increase in operating cash flows. At September 30, 2021, Roanoke Gas was in a net under-collected gas cost position of more than $5 million due to timing in adjusting the PGA factor for rising gas costs. During fiscal 2022, Roanoke Gas collected, through customer billings, nearly $3.6 million of the prior year under-collection. Roanoke Gas also received supplier refunds totaling nearly $2.7 million from the pipelines that serve the Company. These refunds are required to be returned to customers over a 12 month period, which began in July 2022. As noted above, natural gas prices have risen steadily over the last two years; however, commodity prices took a sharp increase during the summer of fiscal 2022, which resulted in an increase in gas in storage of more than $9 million over the same period last year. The prior fiscal year also reflected an increase of $2.1 million as natural gas prices increased at a slower pace. As a result, the change in under-collection of gas costs and the receipt of the supplier refunds provided $7.0 million and $2.5 million in additional operating cash flow over last year, while the much higher cost of gas in storage resulted in a reduction of $6.9 million in operating cash flow from last year. The impairments on the Company's investment in the LLC resulted in significant swings in net income, deferred taxes and the recognition of impairment charges; however, they did not have an operating cash flow impact.
Other significant fluctuations in cash flows from operations include $2.4 million in the prior year primarily related to the establishment of a regulatory liability for the R&D tax credits and the corresponding $2.9 million increase in prepaid income taxes primarily attributable to the pending refunds for the R&D tax credits.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities:
Investing activities primarily consist of expenditures related to investment in Roanoke Gas' utility property, which includes replacing aging natural gas pipe with new plastic or coated steel pipe, improvements to the LNG plant and gas distribution system facilities and expansion of its natural gas system to meet the demands of customer growth, as well as Midstream's continued investment in the LLC. Roanoke Gas' expenditures were approximately $25.5 million and $20.0 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. Roanoke Gas renewed 8.3 miles of main and 605 service lines and 7.8 miles of main and 620 service lines in fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively. The current SAVE Plan is focused on the replacement of pre-1973 first generation plastic pipe in addition to other SAVE related infrastructure. Furthermore, Roanoke Gas’ capital expenditures included costs to extend natural gas distribution mains and services to 544 customers in fiscal 2022, compared to 480 customers in fiscal 2021. Depreciation covered approximately 36% and 43% of the current and prior year's capital expenditures, respectively, with the balance provided from other operating cash flows and financing activities.
Capital expenditures are expected to be around $20 million annually over the next few years as Roanoke Gas continues to focus on its SAVE Plan, completion of the RNG project, as well as system improvements and customer growth. The Company expects to utilize its credit facilities, as well as consider additional equity capital, to meet the funding requirements of these planned expenditures.
Investing cash flows also reflect the fiscal 2022 funding of $5.3 million for Midstream's participation in the LLC. Based on the LLC's managing partner's most recent projections, Midstream's total expected funding requirement is expected to increase to between $68 and $70 million as discussed below, with anticipated cash investment to be approximately $13 million over the next 12 to 24 months. Funding for the investment in the LLC is provided through Midstream's credit facility and three unsecured notes in the combined amount of $32 million. More information regarding the credit facility is provided in Note 7 and under the Equity Investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline section below.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities:
Financing activities generally consist of borrowings and repayments under credit agreements, issuance of stock and the payment of dividends. Net cash flows provided by financing activities were $18.4 million and $15.5 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. The increase in financing cash flows was primarily attributable to Resources' $27 million equity offering in March 2022 of which $12 million was invested in Roanoke Gas and $10 million in Midstream. Due to these cash infusions from the equity issue and the issuance of Roanoke Gas' $15 million and $10 million unsecured notes and Midstreams' $8 million note, Roanoke Gas was able to pay down its line-of-credit balance and maturing $7 million note and Midstream applied $18 million against its non-revolving credit facility and $125,000 related to an amortizing note. The Company also realized another $2.0 million from the issuance of stock through DRIP activity, the ATM program and the exercise of options. Cash out-flows for dividend payments exceeded $7.0 million as the annualized dividend rate increased from $0.74 to $0.78 per share and total outstanding shares increased significantly as a result of the equity offering. The Company’s consolidated capitalization was 40.4% equity and 59.6% long-term debt at September 30, 2022, exclusive of unamortized debt expense. This compares to 41.5% equity and 58.5% long-term debt at September 30, 2021.
Based on the LLC's projected cash requirements for MVP, which includes MVP construction resuming in 2023, Midstream will need between $15 million and $17 million in additional capital over the next 12 to 24 months to meet its funding commitments to the LLC and cover Midstream's operating and financing expenses. Additionally, the $21.9 million credit facility is scheduled to mature on December 31, 2023 as well as debt service related to monthly and quarterly scheduled installment payments on two of Midstream's unsecured notes in fiscal 2023 and 2024. Various options are being evaluated, including seeking additional borrowing capacity from its lending partners and/or equity infusion from Resources.
As of September 30, 2022, Roanoke Gas had $28 million available under its line-of-credit agreement. In addition, Roanoke Gas also has private shelf agreements with two different financial institutions. The first agreement provides for the issuance of up to $40 million in unsecured notes in addition to the $28 million previously issued. This shelf agreement is scheduled to expire on December 6, 2022; however, management expects to reach an agreement to extend the term of the agreement. The second agreement provides for the issuance of up to $70 million in unsecured notes during its current term, which expires September 30, 2025. These debt facilities along with potential equity issuances should provide the Company with sufficient funding to meet its liquidity needs over the next 12 months.
Notes 6 and 7 provide details on the Company's line-of-credit and three debt issuances mentioned above.
ATM Program
Resources issued 4,872 shares of common stock for $112,500, net of $2,813 in fees, under the ATM program for the year ended September 30, 2022. For the year ended September 30, 2021, Resources issued 142,726 shares of common stock for $3,400,443, net of $85,221 in fees, under the ATM program.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Regulation S-K, Item 303(a)(4)(ii).
Equity Investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline
Recent construction activity has been limited based on legal and regulatory challenges. Although certain permits and authorizations were received, the MVP project has been subject to repeated, significant delays and cost increases because of legal and regulatory setbacks, particularly in respect of litigation in the Fourth Circuit in January and February 2022 as discussed below.
Following a comprehensive review of all outstanding stream and wetland crossings across the approximately 300-mile MVP project route, on February 19, 2021, the LLC submitted (i) a joint application package to each of the Huntington, Pittsburgh and Norfolk Districts of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Army Corps) that requests an individual permit from the Army Corps to cross certain streams and wetlands utilizing open cut techniques (the Army Corps Individual Permit) and (ii) an application to amend the MVP project’s CPCN that seeks FERC authority to cross certain streams and wetlands utilizing alternative trenchless construction methods. On April 8, 2022, the FERC authorized the amended CPCN.
Related to seeking the Army Corps Individual Permit, on March 4, 2021, the LLC submitted applications to each of the West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection (WVDEP) and the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (VADEQ) seeking Section 401 water quality certification approvals or waivers (such approvals or waivers, the State 401 Approvals). The State 401 Approvals were both issued in December 2021 and are the subject of ongoing litigation.
On January 25, 2022, the LLC’s authorizations related to the Jefferson National Forest (JNF) received from the Bureau of Land Management and the U.S. Forest Service were vacated and remanded on specific issues by the Fourth Circuit. On February 3, 2022, the Fourth Circuit vacated and remanded on specific issues the Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement issued by the United States Department of the Interior’s Fish and Wildlife Service for MVP. On May 3, 2022, the operator for MVP announced that after evaluating legal options and consulting with the relevant federal agencies, the LLC planned to pursue new authorizations relating to the JNF and a new Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement. Related to pursuing a new Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement, on July 29, 2022, the LLC submitted to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service an updated supplement to the Biological Assessment (and notified the FERC of such submission), which updated supplement is intended to address aspects of the Fourth Circuit's February 2022 ruling and points raised by project opponents.
Given ongoing litigation and regulatory matters, on June 24, 2022, the LLC filed a request with the FERC for an extension of time to complete the project for an additional four years (relative to a prior obtained extension) through October 13, 2026, which request was granted on August 23, 2022.
On October 25, 2022, oral argument was held in the Fourth Circuit relating to the WVDEP State 401 approval, which oral argument was conducted by the same panel of Fourth Circuit judges as have appeared, and overruled permitting agencies, in numerous prior matters relating to the MVP. Based upon the oral argument, the project operator perceives continued hostility to and risk posed by the Fourth Circuit panel to the LLC’s State 401 Approvals and those potential future authorizations and permits within the Fourth Circuit’s jurisdiction, including any new authorizations for the JNF and new Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement. Further, as of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, there remains uncertainty with respect to the relevant federal agencies' final permitting issuance timelines.
Notwithstanding prior setbacks and ongoing risks, the MVP Joint Venture continues to engage in pursuing the requisite authorizations necessary under applicable law from the relevant agencies to complete the MVP project. However, in light of the continuing and likely future litigation and regulatory challenges posed to the MVP project (including the need for existing or future authorizations to remain in effect notwithstanding any pending or future challenge thereto) and timing uncertainties within the permitting process, the Company believes that the best path to complete the MVP in accordance with the Company’s previously-communicated targeted full in-service date for the project during the second half of 2023 and at a targeted total project cost of approximately $6.6 billion (excluding AFUDC) is for the United States Congress to expeditiously pass, and there to be enacted, federal energy infrastructure permitting reform legislation that specifically requires the completion of the MVP project, similar to MVP-specific aspects of legislation proposed in September 2022 by each of United States Senators Joseph Manchin and Shelley Moore Capito.
As noted above, the LLC has sought new authorizations relating to the JNF, a new Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement, and the Army Corps Individual Permit. In order to complete the project, in addition to the authorizations with respect to water crossings and other relevant regulatory matters, the LLC needs to continue to have available the orders previously issued by the FERC that are necessary to complete the MVP project and receive authorization from the FERC to complete construction work in the portion of the project route currently remaining subject to the FERC’s previous stop work order and in the JNF. The LLC also is participating in the defense of the State 401 Approvals, which are the subject of ongoing litigation in the Fourth Circuit.
Resources' earnings from MVP are primarily attributable to AFUDC income generated by the LLC. The LLC temporarily suspended the accrual of AFUDC on the project from January 1, 2021 (due to a temporary reduction in growth construction activities) through March 31, 2021. Limited growth construction activities resumed in April 2021, and the LLC began accruing AFUDC associated with those activities. In November 2021, the LLC suspended the accrual of AFUDC for the winter curtailment period and until such time as growth construction activities may resume. Additionally, Roanoke Gas continues the suspension of AFUDC accruals on its two gate stations that will interconnect with MVP until such time as construction activities resume on the respective gate stations.
In April 2018, the LLC announced the Southgate project and submitted Southgate's certificate application to the FERC in November 2018. In June 2020, the FERC issued the CPCN for Southgate; however, the FERC, while authorizing the project, directed the Office of Energy Projects not to issue a notice to proceed with construction until necessary federal permits are received for MVP and the Director of the Office of Energy Projects lifts the stop work order and authorizes the LLC to continue constructing MVP. In addition, there have been certain other litigation and regulatory-related delays affecting completion of the MVP Southgate project, including on August 11, 2020, the North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality denied Southgate's application for a Clean Water Act Section 401 Individual Water Quality Certification and Jordan Lake Riparian Buffer Authorization due to uncertainty surrounding MVP's completion, which denial was reissued in April 2021 following an appellate proceeding. On December 3, 2021, the Virginia State Air Pollution Control Board denied the permit for Southgate's Lambert compressor station, which decision the LLC initially appealed before withdrawing its request to review the denial.
Given the continually evolving regulatory and legal environment for greenfield pipeline construction projects, as well as factors specific to MVP and Southgate, the LLC continues to evaluate Southgate including engaging in discussions with Dominion Energy North Carolina regarding options with respect to Southgate, including likely refining the project's design, scope and timing. Dominion Energy North Carolina's obligations under the precedent agreement in support of the original project are subject to certain conditions, including that the LLC would have completed construction of the project facilities by June 1, 2022, which deadline is subject to extension by virtue of previously declared events of force majeure. The project operator has announced that it is unable to predict the results of the discussions between the LLC and Dominion Energy North Carolina, including any potential modifications to the project, or ultimate undertaking or completion of the project.
Management conducted an assessment of its investment in the LLC in accordance with the provisions of ASC 323, Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures. This assessment included a third-party valuation. As a result of its evaluation, management concluded that the investment in the LLC sustained an other-than-temporary decline in fair value as of February 22, 2022 and recorded a pre-tax impairment loss of approximately $39.8 million in its second quarter operating results to the consolidated financial statements. Management re-evaluated its investment as of September 30, 2022 and recognized an additional $15.3 million impairment in the fourth quarter. Management will continue monitoring the status of MVP and Southgate for circumstances that may lead to future impairments, including further delays or denials of necessary permits and approvals. If necessary, the amount and timing of any further impairment would be dependent on the specific circumstances, including changes to probabilities of completion, and changes in the assumed future cash flows, and discount rate at the time of evaluation.
Midstream had borrowing capacity of $23 million under its non-revolving credit facility, which matures in December 2023. As of September 30, 2022, $21.9 million had been utilized. Effective November 1, 2021, the borrowing capacity under this credit facility was reduced to $33 million as $8 million of the outstanding balance was re-financed through a separate unsecured promissory note. Effective March 31, 2022, the borrowing capacity under the credit facility was further reduced to its current $23 million level as $10 million of the outstanding balance was paid. See Note 7 for more information. This credit facility will provide limited financing capacity for MVP funding; however, due to ongoing delays, additional financing will be required. Management is evaluating various options to secure the necessary capital including discussions with Midstream's current lenders and the potential for additional equity capital. If the legal and regulatory challenges, including any future challenges, are not resolved in a timely manner and/or restrictions are imposed that impact future construction, the cost of the MVP and Midstream's capital contributions may increase above current projections.
Regulatory
In April 2020, the SCC issued an order allowing regulated utilities in Virginia to defer certain incremental, prudently incurred costs associated with the COVID-19 pandemic and to apply for recovery at a future date. Roanoke Gas deferred certain COVID-19 related costs during fiscal 2022 and 2021. However, based on the Company’s preliminary earnings test for those years, Roanoke Gas' earnings exceeded the authorized return on equity on which the Company’s rates were established in its last rate proceeding. Accordingly, Roanoke Gas expensed $57,000 and $217,000 in COVID-19 related deferred costs during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Roanoke Gas continues to recover the costs of its infrastructure replacement program through its SAVE Rider. In May 2022, Roanoke Gas filed its most recent SAVE application with the SCC to update the SAVE Plan and Rider for the period October 2022 through September 2023. The updated SAVE Rider is designed to collect approximately $4.1 million in annual revenues representing approximately a $650,000 increase over the current SAVE Rider. The Company received a final order from the SCC on the SAVE Rider application on August 23, 2022 approving the application with the new rates placed into effect in October 2022.
On May 16, 2022, Roanoke Gas announced a cooperative agreement under which Roanoke Gas and the Western Virginia Water Authority will produce commercial quality renewable natural gas, or RNG, from biogas produced at the regional water pollution control plant. In August 2022, Roanoke Gas filed an application with the SCC seeking approval of a rate adjustment clause under which the Company will recover the costs associated with constructing, owning, operating and maintaining the renewable natural gas facility. The application was filed under Chapter 30 of Title 56 of the Code of Virginia. The Company expects a final order from the Commission in January 2023.
On June 2, 2022, Roanoke Gas filed an application with the SCC to acquire certain natural gas distribution assets from a local housing authority. Under this application, the Company requested the approval to acquire such facilities at five separate apartment complexes, located in the Company’s service territory, that were under housing authority management. Under the proposed plan, the housing authority would renew existing natural gas distribution facilities to include mains, services and meter installations and then transfer ownership of these facilities to Roanoke Gas. In turn, Roanoke Gas would assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of these assets and recognize a gain related to the asset acquisition equal to the cost associated with the renewal.
On July 19, 2022, the SCC approved the application and on August 4, 2022, the housing authority transferred the assets from two apartment complexes to Roanoke Gas. Roanoke Gas recorded these assets and recognized a pre-tax gain of approximately $219,000 during the Company’s fiscal fourth quarter. The housing authority expects to complete the upgrade and subsequent asset transfer at one more apartment complex in fiscal 2023. The authority is awaiting future funding to complete two additional apartment complexes. The timing of funding and the completion of the asset renewals for these two complexes is unknown at this time.
On September 30, 2022, the Company filed notice with the SCC that it intended to file a non-gas base rate case. The Company plans to file in early December with the rates expected to become effective on January 1, 2023 on an interim basis subject to refund.
The final order from the last non-gas base rate increase excluded from current rates a return on the investment in two gate stations that would interconnect with the MVP; however, the SCC allowed Roanoke Gas to defer the related financing costs of those investments for possible future recovery. As a result, the Company began recognizing AFUDC during the second quarter of fiscal 2020 to capitalize both the equity and debt financing costs incurred during the construction phases. Beginning January 2021, Roanoke Gas temporarily ceased recording AFUDC on its related MVP interconnect construction projects until such time as construction activities resume. For the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company recognized a total of $55,981 in AFUDC related to the two gates stations, $41,978 of equity and $14,003 of debt carrying costs. In connection with the RNG project, Roanoke Gas began accruing AFUDC in fiscal 2022 associated with construction of the facility. For the year ended September 30, 2022, Roanoke Gas recognized a total of $75,154 in AFUDC, $59,243 of equity and $15,911 of debt carrying costs.
The service disconnection moratorium under which the Company had been operating since March 16, 2020, expired August 30, 2021. During the moratorium, utilities were prohibited from disconnecting residential customers for non-payment of their natural gas service and from assessing late payment fees; therefore, residential customers that ordinarily would have been disconnected for non-payment continued incurring charges for gas service. As a result, the Company’s arrearage balances were at historically high levels, which has resulted in a higher potential for bad debt write-offs.
In December 2020, Roanoke Gas received $403,000 in CARES Act funds to assist customers with growing past due balances. Based on guidance provided by the SCC, the Company was able to apply the full amount to eligible customer accounts during the second and third fiscal quarters of fiscal 2021. On October 28, 2021, Roanoke Gas received notification from the SCC that its application for ARPA funds had been approved. The Company received $859,000 based on arrearage balances as of August 31, 2021. These funds were considered in the valuation of the estimated allowance for credit losses as of September 30, 2021 and applied to customer accounts in early part of fiscal 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements of Resources are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses reported in the Company’s financial statements are affected by accounting policies, estimates and assumptions that are necessary to comply with generally accepted accounting principles. Estimates used in the financial statements are derived from prior experience, statistical analysis and professional judgments. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates and assumptions.
The Company considers an estimate to be critical if it is material to the financial statements and requires assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made and changes in the estimate are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. The Company considers the following accounting policies and estimates to be critical.
Investments - Under the provisions of ASC 323, Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures, the Company is required to evaluate its investment in the LLC to determine if the fair value of the investments are below the carrying amount and if this decline in fair value is considered other-than-temporary. If the results of the evaluation indicate that the decline in fair value is other-than-temporary, then the recognition of an impairment is required. The following events or circumstances would indicate the potential of an other-than-temporary decline in the fair value of the investment in the LLC:
• a prolonged period of time that the fair value is below the investor’s carrying value;
• the current expected financial performance is significantly worse than anticipated when the investor originally invested in the investee;
• adverse regulatory action is expected to substantially reduce the investee’s product demand or profitability;
• the investee has lost significant customers or suppliers with no immediate prospects for replacement;
• the investee’s discounted or undiscounted cash flows are below the investor’s carrying amount; and
• the investee’s industry is declining and significantly lags the performance of the economy as a whole.
The determination of fair value of the Company's investment in the LLC is a significant estimate. Management has conducted quarterly evaluations of its investment in the LLC, with the assistance of a valuation specialist, to determine the fair value utilizing an income approach and probability scenarios of discounted cash flows. In conducting these evaluations, management made a variety of assumptions that it believes to be reasonable. Variations in many of these assumptions could have a significant impact on the calculation of the fair value and the resulting level of impairment recorded. Furthermore, these assumptions are based on the facts and circumstances at the date of the evaluations and are subject to change. See the Equity Investment in Mountain Valley Pipeline section for additional information regarding the LLC valuation and impairment.
Regulatory accounting - The Company’s regulated operations follow the accounting and reporting requirements of ASC 980, Regulated Operations. The economic effects of regulation can result in a regulated company deferring costs that have been or are expected to be recovered from customers in a period different from the period in which the costs would be charged to expense by an unregulated enterprise. When this occurs, costs are deferred as regulatory assets on the consolidated balance sheet and recorded as expenses in the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income when such amounts are reflected in rates. Additionally, regulators can impose regulatory liabilities upon a regulated company for amounts previously collected from customers and for current collection in rates of costs that are expected to be incurred in the future.
If, for any reason, the Company ceases to meet the criteria for application of regulatory accounting treatment for all or part of its operations, the Company would remove the applicable regulatory assets or liabilities from the consolidated balance sheet and include them in the consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income for the period in which the discontinuance occurred. The write-down of the COVID asset and deferred R&D tax credit study costs are consistent with the provisions of ASC 980.
Revenue recognition - Regulated utility sales and transportation revenues are based upon rates approved by the SCC. The non-gas cost component of rates may not be changed without a formal rate application and corresponding authorization by the SCC in the form of a Commission order; however, the gas cost component of rates is adjusted quarterly, or more frequently if necessary, through the PGA mechanism. When the Company files a request for a non-gas rate increase, the SCC may allow the Company to place such rates into effect subject to refund pending a final order. Under these circumstances, the Company estimates the amount of increase it anticipates will be approved based on the best available information.
The Company also bills customers through a SAVE Rider that provides a mechanism to recover on a prospective basis the costs associated with the Company’s expected investment related to the replacement of natural gas distribution pipe and other qualifying projects. As authorized by the SCC, the Company adjusts billed revenues monthly through the application of the WNA model. As the Company's non-gas rates are established based on the 30-year temperature average, monthly fluctuations in temperature from the 30-year average could result in the recognition of more or less revenue than for what the non-gas rates were designed. The WNA authorizes the Company to adjust monthly revenues for the effects of variation in weather from the 30-year average with a corresponding entry to a WNA receivable or payable. At the end of each WNA year, the Company refunds excess revenue collected for weather that was colder than the 30-year average or bills customers for revenue short-fall resulting from weather that was warmer than normal. As required under the provisions of ASC 980, the Company recognizes billed revenue related to SAVE projects and from the WNA to the extent such revenues have been earned under the provisions approved by the SCC.
The Company bills its regulated natural gas customers on a monthly cycle. The billing cycle for most customers does not coincide with the accounting periods used for financial reporting. The Company accrues revenue for estimated natural gas delivered to customers but not yet billed during the accounting period. The following month, the unbilled estimate is reversed, the actual usage is billed and a new unbilled estimate is calculated. The consolidated financial statements include unbilled revenue of $1,585,062 and $1,191,227 as of September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Under the provisions of ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the Company recognizes revenues when natural gas is delivered to customers (the performance obligation) based on SCC approved tariff rates (the transaction price). The Company recognizes revenue through both billed and unbilled customer usage. The Company also recognizes revenue through ARPs, including the WNA.
Allowance for Credit Losses - The Company evaluates the collectability of its accounts receivable balances based upon a variety of factors including loss history, level of delinquent account balances, collections on previously written off accounts and general economic conditions. The historical model used in valuing reserve for bad debts has been consistently applied prior to COVID-19 and has produced reasonable estimates for valuing the potential credit losses on customer accounts receivable. With the arrival of COVID-19 and the unprecedented widespread impact deriving from the pandemic, including the 17 month disconnection moratorium which ended August 30, 2021, the estimation of the Company's allowance for credit losses has become more subjective with greater reliance on qualitative assessments and judgment rather than historical patterns. This greater focus on qualitative assessments continued into fiscal 2022 as the residual impact of COVID and the availability of federal financial assistance through the CARES Act and ARPA that were incorporated into fiscal 2021 credit loss estimates continue to have an effect on customer payment patterns as well as the effect of higher natural gas prices reflected on current customer bills. Accordingly, based on management's evaluation and assessments, the total allowance for credit losses were estimated at $371,271 and $242,010 as of September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Pension and Postretirement Benefits - The Company offers a pension plan and a postretirement plan to eligible employees. The expenses and liabilities associated with these plans, as disclosed in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements, are based on numerous assumptions and factors, including provisions of the plans, employee demographics, contributions made to the plan, return on plan assets and various actuarial calculations, assumptions and accounting requirements. In regard to the pension plan, specific factors include assumptions regarding the discount rate used in determining future benefit obligations, expected long-term rate of return on plan assets, compensation increases and life expectancies. Similarly, the postretirement medical plan also requires the estimation of many of the same factors as the pension plan in addition to assumptions regarding the rate of medical inflation and Medicare availability. Actual results may differ materially from the results expected from the actuarial assumptions due to changing economic conditions, differences in actual returns on plan assets, different rates of medical inflation, volatility in interest rates and changes in life expectancy. Such differences may result in a material impact on the amount of expense recorded in future periods or the value of the obligations on the consolidated balance sheet.
In selecting the discount rate to be used in determining the benefit liability, the Company utilized the FTSE Pension Discount Curve, which incorporates the rates of return on high-quality, fixed-income investments that corresponded to the length and timing of benefit streams expected under both the pension plan and postretirement plan. The Company used a discount rate of 5.15% and 5.16%, respectively, for valuing its pension plan liability and postretirement plan liability at September 30, 2022. These discount rates represent an increase from the 2.73% and 2.70% rates used for valuing the corresponding liabilities at September 30, 2021. The increase in discount rates corresponds to the market reactions to the inflationary pressures on the current financial environment resulting from labor shortages and supply chain issues, among other factors. The yield on the 30-year Treasury increased from 2.08% last year to 3.79% at September 30, 2022. Corporate bond rates experienced a larger increase as credit spreads appear to have widened. The rise in the discount rates was the primary factor in the reduction of the benefit obligations for both the pension and the postretirement plan. Mortality assumptions were based on the PRI-2012 Mortality Table with generational mortality improvements using Projection Scale MP-2021 for the current year valuation.
Management has continued to focus on reducing risk in the Company's defined benefit plans with a greater emphasis on pension plan risk. In 2016, the Company offered a one-time, lump-sum payout of the pension benefit to vested former employees who were not receiving payments under the plan. In 2017, the Company implemented a "soft freeze" to the pension plan whereby employees hired on or after January 1, 2017 would not be eligible to participate. Employees hired prior to that date continue to accrue benefits based on compensation and years of service. This "soft freeze" mirrored the strategy in 2000 when the Company implemented a similar freeze in its postretirement plan. In October 2020, the Company again offered a one-time lump-sum payout option of deferred pension benefits to those vested terminated employees not currently receiving pension benefits. Lump sum payments of $717,197 were made to those participants that elected this option and reduced corresponding pension liabilities by approximately $965,000 in fiscal 2021. Each of these strategies have served to limit liability growth and reduce volatility.
The Company also has focused on its asset investment strategy. With the soft freeze of both the pension and postretirement plans, future liability growth associated with participant service and compensation has been limited. Under the pension plan, the portion of the liability attributable to active eligible employees continuing to accrue benefits has declined from 56% of the liability as of the date of the soft freeze to 39% in fiscal 2022. The remaining 61% of the 2022 liability is set subject to variability due to changes in the discount rate and mortality adjustments. Since January 2017 when the pension plan froze access to new employees, the asset allocation has transitioned from a 60% equity and 40% fixed income allocation to a 30% equity and 70% fixed income allocation. During the same period, the fixed income portion of the plan was transitioned to an LDI approach with the fixed income assets invested in securities with a duration that corresponds to the duration of the corresponding liability for benefits to be paid. This synchronization of 70% of the pension assets with the pension liabilities has reduced volatility in the funded status of the plan as well as the corresponding expense. This is evidenced by the September 30, 2022 valuation where the projected benefit obligation declined by $10.4 million primarily due to an actuarial gain of $10.9 million, while total plan assets experienced a decline of $10.9 million, primarily due to rising interest rates reducing the value of the fixed income assets. Although both components used in determining the funded status reflected significant movements, the funded status still maintained a ratio of 103% for both periods. The 30% allocation to equity investments provides asset growth potential to offset increases in the pension liability related to those employees continuing to accrue benefits. Management will continue to evaluate the investment allocation as the liabilities mature and make adjustments as necessary.
The Company has not made a change in investment allocation for the postretirement plan assets as increasing medical and insurance costs warrant the need for a continued higher allocation to equities for future plan asset growth potential. During fiscal 2022, the postretirement plan assets decreased by $3.7 million and liabilities decreased by $4.4 million. The funded status for the postretirement plan was 98% and 95% as of September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. As the number of participants in the postretirement plan continue to decline through attrition, management will continue to monitor and evaluate the asset allocation and adjust as warranted.
A summary of the funded status of both the pension and postretirement plans is provided below:
The Company annually evaluates the long-term rate of return on its targeted investment allocation model as well as the overall asset allocation of its benefit plans and reviews both plans' potential long-term rate of return with its investment advisors to determine the rates used in each plan's actuarial assumptions. Management lowered the long-term rate of return assumption from 4.75% in fiscal 2022 to 4.50% in fiscal 2023 based on evaluation by the Company's investment advisor and management's assessment of the current market environment. The long-term rate of return for the postretirement plan declined from 4.25% in fiscal 2022 to 3.95% in fiscal 2023 for the same reasons as the pension plan. Management will continue to re-evaluate the return assumptions and asset allocation and adjust both as market conditions warrant.
Management estimates that the Company will have no minimum funding requirements next year. Furthermore, the Company currently does not expect to make contributions to its pension plan and postretirement plan in fiscal 2023 due to other financing considerations. The Company will continue to evaluate its benefit plan funding levels in light of funding requirements and ongoing investment returns and make adjustments, as necessary, to avoid benefit restrictions and minimize PBGC premiums.
The following schedule reflects the sensitivity of pension costs to changes in certain actuarial assumptions, assuming that the other components of the calculation remain constant.
The following schedule reflects the sensitivity of postretirement benefit costs from changes in certain actuarial assumptions, while the other components of the calculation remain constant.
Derivatives - The Company may hedge certain risks incurred in its operation through the use of derivative instruments. The Company applies the requirements of ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, which requires the recognition of derivative instruments as assets or liabilities in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet at fair value. In most instances, fair value is based upon quoted futures prices for natural gas commodities and interest rate futures for interest rate swaps. Changes in the commodity and futures markets will impact the estimates of fair value in the future. Furthermore, the actual market value at the point of realization of the derivative may be significantly different from the values used in determining fair value in prior financial statements. The Company had five interest-rate swaps outstanding at September 30, 2022 related to its variable rate notes. See Notes 1 and 7 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the swaps.