ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, you should read the “Risk Factors” and “Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
For a full discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, including a year-over-year comparison to the year ended December 31, 2019, please read the “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which we filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Overview
We are a leading clinical-stage biotechnology company seeking to improve lives through the curative potential of gene therapy. Our investigational gene therapies are designed to deliver functional genes to address genetic defects in cells, enabling the production of therapeutic proteins or antibodies that are intended to impact disease. Through a single administration, gene therapy could potentially alter the course of disease significantly and deliver improved patient outcomes with long-lasting effects.
Overview of Product Candidates
We have developed a broad pipeline of gene therapy programs using our proprietary adeno-associated virus (AAV) gene therapy delivery platform (NAV Technology Platform) to address genetic diseases. Our programs and product candidates are described below:
•
RGX-314: We are developing RGX-314 in collaboration with AbbVie as a potential one-time treatment for wet age-related macular degeneration (wet AMD), diabetic retinopathy (DR) and other additional chronic retinal conditions which cause total or partial vision loss. We are evaluating two separate routes of administration of RGX-314 to the eye: a subretinal delivery procedure as well as a targeted, in-office administration to the suprachoroidal space. We have licensed certain exclusive rights to the SCS Microinjector® from Clearside Biomedical, Inc. (Clearside) to deliver gene therapy treatments to the suprachoroidal space of the eye.
We have initiated two pivotal trials, ATMOSPHERE™ and ASCENT™, for the treatment of wet AMD using RGX-314 delivered subretinally, and we expect these pivotal trials to support a Biologics Licensing Application (BLA) submission in 2024. ATMOSPHERE and ASCENT are multi-center, randomized, active-controlled trials to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a single-administration of RGX-314 versus standard of care in patients with wet AMD. Both trials are active and enrolling patients. We initiated the pivotal program using cGMP material produced from our existing manufacturing process and plan to incorporate our scalable suspension cell culture manufacturing process to support future commercialization, upon completion of a bridging study.
We are also evaluating the efficacy, safety and tolerability of suprachoroidal delivery of RGX-314 through AAVIATE®, a multi-center, open label, randomized, controlled, dose-escalation Phase II trial of RGX-314 for the treatment of wet AMD.
RGX-314 is also being evaluated in ALTITUDETM, a multi-center, open label, randomized, controlled, dose-escalation Phase II trial to evaluate the efficacy, safety and tolerability of RGX-314 for the treatment of DR.
•
RGX-202: We are developing RGX-202 for the treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Duchenne), a rare disease caused by mutations in the gene responsible for making dystrophin, a protein of central importance for muscle cell structure and function. Without dystrophin, muscles throughout the body degenerate and become weak, eventually leading to loss of movement and independence, required support for breathing, cardiomyopathy and premature death.
We have received clearance of our Investigational New Drug (IND) application by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the FDA) to evaluate RGX-202 in a first-in-human, Phase I/II clinical trial named AFFINITY DUCHENNETM, which is expected to initiate in the first half of 2022. This will be a multicenter, open-label dose escalation and dose expansion clinical study to evaluate the safety, tolerability and clinical efficacy of RGX-202 in patients with Duchenne.
•
RGX-121: We are developing RGX-121 for the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II (MPS II), a rare disease caused by a deficiency of the IDS gene which encodes I2S, an enzyme that is responsible for the breakdown of structures that dispose of waste products inside cells.
We are conducting a Phase I/II trial of RGX-121 in patients with MPS II under the age of 5 years old to evaluate the safety and tolerability of RGX-121, as well as the effects of RGX-121 on biomarkers of I2S enzyme activity, neurocognitive development and other clinical measures.
In addition, we are evaluating RGX-121 in a second Phase I/II trial for the treatment of pediatric patients with MPS II ages 5-18 years old to evaluate the safety of a single administration of RGX-121, the effects of RGX-121 on biomarkers of I2S enzyme activity, and changes in cognitive function, adaptive behavior, daily function and quality of life.
•
RGX-111: We are developing RGX-111 for the treatment of Mucopolysaccharidosis Type I (MPS I), a rare disease caused by a deficiency of IDUA, an enzyme required for the breakdown of structures that dispose of waste products inside cells.
We are conducting a Phase I/II clinical trial in patients with MPS I to evaluate the safety, tolerability and pharmacodynamics of RGX-111, as well as the effects of RGX-111 on biomarkers of IDUA activity, neurocognitive development and other outcome measures.
•
RGX-181: We are developing RGX-181 for the treatment of late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2) disease, a form of Batten disease, caused by mutations in the tripeptidyl peptidase 1 (TPP1) gene.
•
RGX-381: We are developing RGX-381 for the treatment of the ocular manifestations of CLN2 disease.
Overview of Our NAV Technology Platform
In addition to our internal product development efforts, we also selectively license the NAV Technology Platform to other leading biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, which we refer to as NAV Technology Licensees. As of December 31, 2021, our NAV Technology Platform was being applied in one FDA approved product (Zolgensma®), and the preclinical and clinical development of a number of partnered programs. Licensing the NAV Technology Platform allows us to maintain our internal product development focus on our core disease indications and therapeutic areas while still expanding the NAV gene therapy pipeline, developing a greater breadth of treatments for patients, providing additional technological and potential clinical proof-of-concept for our NAV Technology Platform and creating potential additional revenue.
Impact of COVID-19
We are continuing to actively monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of variant strains, on our business, results of operations and financial condition. Our offices, laboratories, clinical trial sites, prospective clinical trial sites, contract research organizations (CROs), contract manufacturing organizations (CMOs) and other collaborators and partners are located in jurisdictions where quarantines, executive orders, shelter-in-place orders, guidelines, and other similar orders and restrictions intended to control the spread of the disease have been put in place by governmental authorities. At certain times during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented a work-from-home policy for all employees who are not essential to be onsite, and we may take additional actions that alter our operations, as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or which we determine are in the best interests of our employees.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused delays to our clinical trials and may further delay or prevent us from proceeding with our clinical trials. Our other business initiatives, such as preclinical development and manufacturing operations, may also be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, the construction of our current good manufacturing practice production facility has been delayed from our original estimates, and may be delayed further, due to various government orders and restrictions relating to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, if the business and operations of our licensees are adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, our revenues could in turn be adversely affected. We are proactively taking measures to mitigate or reduce any adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the progress of our clinical trials and other business initiatives.
Our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were not significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition in the future is unknown at this time and will depend on future developments that are highly unpredictable. Please refer to the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the risks we face as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financial Overview
Revenues
Our revenues to date consist primarily of license and royalty revenue resulting from the licensing of our NAV Technology Platform and other intellectual property rights. We have not generated any revenues from commercial sales of our own products. If we fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval and adequate labeling, our ability to generate future revenues will be materially compromised.
We license our NAV Technology Platform and other intellectual property rights to other biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, including collaborators for the joint development and commercialization of our product candidates. The terms of the licenses vary, and licenses may be exclusive or non-exclusive and may be sublicensable by the licensee. Licenses may grant intellectual property rights for purposes of internal and preclinical research and development only, or may include the rights, or options to obtain future rights, to commercialize drug therapies for specific diseases using the NAV Technology Platform and other licensed rights. License agreements generally have a term at least equal to the life of the underlying patents, but are terminable at the option of the licensee. Consideration from licensees under our license agreements may include: (i) up-front and annual fees, (ii) milestone payments based on the achievement of certain development and sales-based milestones, (iii) sublicense fees, (iv) royalties on sales of licensed products and (v) other consideration payable upon optional goods and services purchased by licensees.
Future license and royalty revenues are dependent on the successful development and commercialization of licensed products, which is uncertain, and revenues may fluctuate significantly from period to period. Additionally, we may never receive consideration in our license agreements that is contemplated on option fees, development and sales-based milestone payments, royalties on sales of licensed products or sublicense fees, given the contingent nature of these payments. Our revenues are concentrated among a low number of licensees and licenses are terminable at the option of the licensee. The termination of our licenses by licensees may materially impact the amount of revenue we recognize in future periods. Please refer to Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of segment and geographical information regarding our revenues.
Zolgensma Royalties
Royalty revenue to date consists primarily of royalties on net sales of Zolgensma, which is marketed by Novartis Gene Therapies, Inc. (formerly AveXis, Inc.) (Novartis Gene Therapies), a wholly owned subsidiary of Novartis AG (Novartis), for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA). Zolgensma is a licensed product under our license agreement with Novartis Gene Therapies for the development and commercialization of treatments for SMA.
Collaboration and License Agreement with AbbVie
In September 2021, we entered into a collaboration and license agreement with AbbVie Global Enterprises Ltd. (AbbVie), a subsidiary of AbbVie Inc., to jointly develop and commercialize RGX-314 (the AbbVie Collaboration Agreement). The AbbVie Collaboration Agreement became effective in November 2021. We recognized license and royalty revenue of $370.0 million under the collaboration during the year ended December 31, 2021, and the collaboration may materially impact our future revenues, research and development expenses, other operating expenses and operating cash flows associated with the development and commercialization of RGX-314. For additional information regarding the AbbVie Collaboration Agreement, please refer to Note 10, “License and Collaboration Agreements-AbbVie Global Enterprises Ltd.” to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist primarily of cost of revenues, research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses. Personnel costs including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation expense, comprise a significant component of research and development and general and administrative expenses. We allocate indirect expenses associated with our facilities, information technology costs, depreciation and other overhead costs between research and development and general and administrative categories based on employee headcount and the nature of work performed by each employee.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues consists primarily of upstream fees due to our licensors as a result of revenue generated from the licensing of our NAV Technology Platform and other intellectual property rights, including sublicense fees, milestone payments and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Sublicense fees are based on a percentage of license fees received by us from licensees and are recognized in the period that the underlying license revenue is recognized. Milestone payments are payable to licensors upon the achievement of specified milestones by licensees and are recognized in the period the milestone is achieved or deemed probable of achievement. Royalties are based on a percentage of net sales of licensed products by licensees and are recognized in the period that the underlying sales occur. Future costs of revenues are uncertain due to the nature of our license agreements and significant fluctuations in cost of revenues may occur from period to period.
Research and Development Expense
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
Salaries, wages and personnel-related costs, including benefits, travel and stock-based compensation, for our scientific personnel performing research and development activities;
•
costs related to executing preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
costs related to acquiring, developing and manufacturing materials for preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
fees paid to consultants and other third-parties who support our product candidate development;
•
other costs in seeking regulatory approval of our product candidates; and
•
direct costs and allocated costs related to laboratories and facilities, depreciation expense, information technology and other overhead.
Up-front fees incurred in obtaining technology licenses for research and development activities, as well as associated milestone payments, are charged to research and development expense as incurred if the technology licensed has no alternative future use.
We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue development of our product candidates. Our current and planned research and development activities include the following:
•
Continued development of RGX-314 products under our collaboration with AbbVie, including:
o
a Phase I/II clinical trial and associated long-term follow-up study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the subretinal delivery of RGX-314 for the treatment of wet AMD;
o
pivotal trials (ATMOSPHERE and ASCENT) to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the subretinal delivery of RGX-314 for the treatment of wet AMD;
o
Phase II clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the suprachoroidal delivery of RGX-314 using the SCS Microinjector for the treatment of wet AMD (AAVIATE) and DR (ALTITUDE);
•
a Phase I/II clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of RGX-202 for the treatment of Duchenne (AFFINITY DUCHENNE);
•
Phase I/II clinical trials to evaluate the safety and efficacy of RGX-121 for the treatment of MPS II;
•
a Phase I/II clinical trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of RGX-111 for the treatment of MPS I;
•
preclinical research and development for RGX-181 for the treatment of CLN2 disease, and RGX-381 for the treatment of the ocular manifestations of CLN2 disease;
•
preclinical research and development for potential product candidates addressing other diseases across a range of therapeutics areas and other new technologies;
•
continued investment in advanced manufacturing analytics and process development activities; and
•
continued acquisition and manufacture of clinical trial materials in support of our anticipated clinical trials.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Direct expenses related to RGX-202 and RGX-381 were included in platform and new technologies for all periods through December 31, 2019. Platform and new technologies include direct costs not identifiable with a specific lead product candidate, including costs associated with our research and development platform used across programs, process development, manufacturing analytics and early research and development for prospective product candidates and new technologies. We typically utilize our employee and infrastructure resources across our development programs. We do not allocate personnel and other internal costs, such as facilities and other overhead costs, to specific product candidates or development programs.
General and Administrative Expense
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, wages and personnel-related costs, including benefits, travel and stock-based compensation, for employees performing functions other than research and development. This includes certain personnel in executive, commercial, corporate development, finance, legal, human resources, information technology, facilities and administrative support functions. Additionally, general and administrative expenses include facility-related and overhead costs not otherwise allocated to research and development expense, professional fees for accounting, legal, commercial and other advisory services, expenses associated with obtaining and maintaining patents, insurance costs, costs of our information systems and other general corporate activities. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase as we continue to develop, and potentially commercialize, our product candidates.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest Income from Licensing
In accordance with our revenue recognition policy, interest income from licensing consists of imputed interest recognized from significant financing components identified in our license agreements with NAV Technology Licensees as well as interest income accrued on unpaid balances due from licensees.
Investment Income
Investment income consists of interest income earned and gains and losses realized from our cash equivalents, marketable securities and non-marketable equity securities, as well as unrealized gains and losses on marketable equity securities. Cash equivalents are comprised of money market mutual funds and highly liquid debt securities with original maturities of 90 days or less at acquisition. Marketable securities are comprised of available-for-sale debt securities and equity securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest imputed on the liability related to the sale of future Zolgensma royalties to entities managed by Healthcare Royalty Management, LLC (collectively, HCR). Interest expense is recognized using the effective interest method, based on our estimate of total royalty payments expected to be received by HCR under the royalty purchase agreement. For further information regarding the royalty purchase agreement with HCR, please refer to Note 7, “Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties” to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities for the periods presented. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities, and other reported amounts, that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are fully described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606). Topic 606 requires entities to recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are performed to determine the appropriate revenue recognition for arrangements within the scope of Topic 606: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies the performance obligations.
We apply the five-step model to contracts that are within the scope of Topic 606 only when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, for contracts within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to respective performance obligations when (or as) the respective performance obligations are satisfied.
We evaluate our contracts with customers for the presence of significant financing components. If a significant financing component is identified in a contract and provides a financing benefit to the customer, the transaction price for the contract is adjusted to account for the financing portion of the arrangement, which is recognized as interest income over the financing term using the effective interest method. In determining the appropriate interest rates for significant financing components, we evaluate the credit profile of the customer and prevailing market interest rates and select an interest rate in which we believe would be charged to the customer in a separate financing arrangement over a similar financing term.
License and royalty revenue
We license our NAV Technology Platform and other intellectual property rights to other biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies. The terms of the licenses vary, and licenses may be exclusive or non-exclusive and may be sublicensable by the licensee. Licenses may grant intellectual property rights for purposes of internal and preclinical research and development only, or may include the rights, or options to obtain future rights, to commercialize drug therapies for specific diseases using our NAV Technology Platform and other licensed rights. License agreements generally have a term at least equal to the life of the underlying patents, but are terminable at the option of the licensee. Consideration payable to us under our license agreements may include: (i) up-front and annual fees, (ii) milestone payments based on the achievement of certain development and sales-based milestones, (iii) sublicense fees, (iv) royalties on sales of licensed products and (v) other consideration payable upon optional goods and services purchased by licensees.
Our license agreements are accounted for as contracts with customers within the scope of Topic 606, with the exception of transactions for which the counterparty is determined not to be a customer. At the inception of each license agreement, we determine the contract term for purposes of applying the requirements of Topic 606. Licenses are generally terminable at the option of the licensee with advance notice to us. For each license granted, including licenses granted upon the exercise of license options, we evaluate these termination rights to determine whether a substantive termination penalty would be incurred by the licensee upon termination. If the licensee incurs a substantive termination penalty upon termination, the contract term for revenue recognition purposes is generally equal to the stated term of the license, which is the life of the underlying licensed patents. Alternatively, if the licensee does not incur a substantive termination penalty upon termination, the contract term for revenue recognition purposes may be shorter than the stated term of the license, in which case the termination rights may be accounted for as contract renewal options. The determination of whether a substantive termination penalty is associated with the termination rights requires significant judgment. In making this determination, we consider, among other things, the nature of the intellectual property rights that would be returned to us upon termination, including the exclusivity of the licensed rights and the stage of development of the licensed products, the payment terms, including the amount and timing of non-refundable or guaranteed payments, and the business purpose of the termination rights granted to the licensee. Generally, the most significant judgment in determining whether a substantive termination penalty exists relates to the amount of any up-front or guaranteed non-refundable payments relative to the amount of annual payments that may be avoided by the licensee upon termination of the license. We consider all of the facts and circumstances relevant to each license when making this determination.
Performance obligations under our license agreements may include (i) the delivery of intellectual property licenses, (ii) options granted to licensees to acquire additional licenses, to the extent the options represent material rights to the licensee, and (iii) research and development services to be performed by us related to licensed products. License agreements may provide licensees with contract renewal options or options to acquire additional licenses, goods or other services. Options are evaluated at the inception of the license agreement to determine whether they provide material rights to the licensee. In making this determination, we consider whether the options are priced at an incremental discount to the standalone selling price for the underlying licenses, goods or services, in which case the option is considered to be a material right to the licensee and is accounted for as a separate performance obligation under the current license agreement. At the inception of each license agreement which contains performance obligations for research and development services, we evaluate whether the license is distinct from the research and development services, which requires judgment. In making this determination, we consider, among other things, the stage of development of the licensed products and whether the research and development services will significantly impact further development of the licensed products. If it is determined that the license is not distinct from the research and development services, the license is combined with the research and development services into a single performance obligation.
We evaluate the transaction price of our license agreements at the inception of each agreement and at each reporting date. The transaction price includes the fixed consideration payable to us during the contract term, as well as any variable consideration to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur in the future. Fixed consideration under the license agreements includes up-front and annual fees payable during the contract term. Variable consideration under the license agreements includes development and sales-based milestone payments, sublicense fees and royalties on sales of licensed products. Consideration contingent upon the exercise of options by a licensee is excluded from the transaction price and not accounted for as part of the license agreement until the option is exercised.
The transaction price for each license agreement is allocated to the underlying performance obligations based on their relative standalone selling prices and recognized as revenue when (or as) the performance obligations are satisfied. Consideration allocated to performance obligations for the delivery of an intellectual property license is recognized as revenue in full upon the delivery of the license to the licensee. Consideration allocated to performance obligations for license options is recognized as revenue in full upon the earlier of the option exercise or expiration. The exercise of a license option by a licensee is accounted for as a new license for revenue recognition purposes. Consideration allocated to performance obligations for research and development services is recognized as revenue as the services are performed by us.
Up-front and annual licenses fees payable to us over the contract term of each license are included in the transaction price, and the portion of this consideration allocated to the performance obligation for the delivery of the intellectual property license is recognized as revenue in full upon the delivery of the license to the licensee. If annual license fees are payable to us in periods beyond 12 months from the delivery of the license, a significant financing component is deemed to exist which provides a financing benefit to the licensee. If a significant financing component is identified, we adjust the transaction price for the license to include only the present value of the annual license fees payable to us over the contract term. The discounted portion of the license fees is recognized as interest income from licensing over the financing period of the license.
Development milestone payments are payable to us upon the achievement of specified development milestones. At the inception of each license agreement that contains development milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable
of achievement and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in the future, milestone payments are included in the transaction price and recognized as revenue upon the delivery of the license. Milestone payments contingent on the achievement of development milestones that are not within our control or the control of the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved and are excluded from the transaction price until the milestone is achieved. At each reporting date, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of each outstanding development milestone and, if necessary, adjust the transaction price for any milestones for which the probability of achievement has changed due to current facts and circumstances. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis and recognized as revenue in the period of the adjustment.
Royalties on sales of licensed products, sales-based milestone payments, including milestones payable upon first commercial sales of licensed products, and sublicense fees based on the receipt of certain fees by licensees from any sublicensees are excluded from the transaction price of each license and recognized as revenue in the period that the related sales or sublicenses occur, provided that the associated license has been delivered to the licensee.
Royalty revenue to date consists primarily of royalties on net sales of Zolgensma, which is a licensed product under our license agreement with Novartis Gene Therapies for the development and commercialization of treatments for SMA. We recognize royalty revenue from net sales of Zolgensma in the period in which the underlying products are sold by Novartis Gene Therapies, which in certain cases may require us to estimate royalty revenue for periods of net sales which have not yet been reported to us. Estimated royalties are reconciled to actual amounts reported in subsequent periods, and any differences are recognized as an adjustment to royalty revenue in the period the royalties are reported. Sales-based milestone payments related to net sales of Zolgensma are recognized as royalty revenue in the period in which the milestone is achieved.
We receive payments from licensees based on the billing schedules established in each license agreement. Amounts recognized as revenue which have not yet been received from licensees, including unbilled royalties, are recorded as accounts receivable when our rights to the consideration are conditional solely upon the passage of time. Amounts recognized as revenue which have not yet been received from licensees are recorded as contract assets when our rights to the consideration are not unconditional. Contract assets are recorded as other current assets on the consolidated balance sheets. If a licensee elects to terminate a license prior to the end of the license term, the licensed intellectual property is returned to us and any consideration recorded as accounts receivable or contract assets which is not contractually payable by the licensee is charged off as a reduction of license revenue in the period of the termination. Amounts received by us prior to the delivery of underlying performance obligations are deferred and recognized as revenue upon the satisfaction of the performance obligations. Deferred revenue which is not expected to be recognized within 12 months from the reporting date is recorded as non-current on the consolidated balance sheets.
Collaborative Arrangements
We evaluate our agreements with collaboration partners to determine whether they are within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808). Such arrangements are within the scope of Topic 808 if they involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards dependent on the commercial success of such activities. This evaluation is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on any changes in the roles and responsibilities of the parties under the arrangement. For collaboration arrangements within the scope of Topic 808 that contain multiple elements, we identify the various transactions with the counterparty and determine if any unit of account is more reflective of a transaction with a customer and therefore should be accounted for within the scope of Topic 606. For transactions that are accounted for pursuant to Topic 808, an appropriate method of recognition and presentation is determined and consistently applied. For transactions that are accounted for pursuant to Topic 606, we apply the five-step model as described in our revenue recognition policies.
For additional information regarding our collaborative arrangements, including our RGX-314 collaboration with AbbVie which became effective in November 2021, please refer to Note 10, “License and Collaboration Agreements” to the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We estimate our accrued research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing contracts and purchase orders with service providers, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed, the expected remaining period of performance and the associated expenses incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. Depending on the timing of payments to the service providers and the estimated expenses incurred, we may record net prepaid or accrued research and development expenses relating to these costs.
Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•
CROs and other vendors in connection with preclinical development and clinical studies;
•
CMOs and other vendors related to process development and manufacturing of materials for use in preclinical development and clinical studies; and
•
service providers for professional service fees such as consulting and other research and development related services.
Our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing may vary and may result in us reporting changes in estimates in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amount actually incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires all stock-based awards to employees and nonemployees to be recognized as expense based on the grant date fair value of the awards. Our stock-based awards include stock options granted to employees and nonemployees, restricted stock units granted to employees and shares issued to employees under our employee stock purchase plan.
Our stock-based awards may be subject to either service or performance-based vesting conditions. Compensation expense related to awards with service-based vesting conditions is recognized on a straight-line basis based on the estimated grant date fair value over the requisite service period of the award, which is generally the vesting term. Compensation expense related to awards with performance-based vesting conditions is recognized based on the estimated grant date fair value over the requisite service period using the accelerated attribution method to the extent achievement of the performance condition is probable.
We have elected to not estimate forfeitures of stock-based awards and account for forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including (i) the fair value of the underlying common stock, (ii) the expected stock price volatility, (iii) the expected term of the award, (iv) the risk-free interest rate and (v) expected dividends. The fair value of our common stock, as used as an input to determine the fair value of our stock option awards, is based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of the grant. For reporting periods through December 31, 2020, we did not have sufficient historical or implied volatility data for our common stock necessary to estimate expected volatility over a period of time commensurate with the expected term of our stock option awards. For such reporting periods, we estimated expected volatility based on a weighted-average of the historical volatility of our common stock and the common stock of a selected peer group of similar publicly traded companies for which sufficient historical volatility data was available. As more historical trading data became available over time, we gradually increased the weight placed on the historical volatility of our common stock versus the historical peer group volatility data. Effective January 1, 2021, we eliminated the use of historical peer group volatility data and now estimate expected volatility based solely on the historical volatility of our common stock given that sufficient historical volatility data has become available. We estimate the expected term of our employee stock options using the “simplified” method, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option, due to our lack of sufficient historical data. For stock options granted to nonemployees, we use the contractual term of the award rather than expected term to estimate the fair value of the award. We estimate the risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected term of its options based on the rates of U.S. Treasury securities with maturity dates commensurate with the expected term of the associated awards. We assume a dividend yield of zero for our common stock as we have never paid dividends and do not expect to pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
We estimate the fair value of our restricted stock units based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of the grant.
Interest Expense on Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties
We recorded a liability for the net proceeds received from the sale of our Zolgensma royalty payments to HCR. The liability is amortized over the estimated life of the arrangement using the effective interest method. The total amount of royalty payments received by HCR under the agreement, less the net proceeds we received from the sale, is recorded as interest expense over the life of the arrangement. We estimate the effective interest rate based on our estimate of total future royalty payments to be received by HCR under the agreement. We reassess these estimates at each reporting date and adjust the effective interest rate and amortization of the liability on a prospective basis as necessary.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided if based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. state net operating loss (NOL) carryforwards of $59.9 million and federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $45.6 million (net of unrecognized tax benefits of $0.1 million) which may be available to offset future income tax liabilities. A portion of our NOL and credit carryforwards as of December 31, 2021 may be carried forward indefinitely, with the remaining portion expiring at various dates between 2034 and 2041. We had no federal NOL carryforwards as of December 31, 2021.
We have evaluated the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets, including our NOL and credit carryforwards. Based on our history of operating losses, and other relevant facts and circumstances, we concluded that it is more likely than not that the benefit of our deferred tax assets will not be realized. Accordingly, we provided a full valuation allowance for our net deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in the notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a full description of accounting pronouncements which we have recently adopted and the impact to our financial statements upon adoption.
Results of Operations
Our consolidated results of operations were as follows (in thousands):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
License and Royalty Revenue. License and royalty revenue increased by $315.8 million, from $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $470.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to the following:
•
Revenue of $370.0 million recognized in 2021 under our collaboration and license agreement with AbbVie for the development and commercialization of RGX-314, which became effective in November 2021;
•
an increase of $33.3 million in Zolgensma royalty revenues, from $61.6 million in 2020 to $95.0 million in 2021. As reported by Novartis, sales of Zolgensma increased by 47% in 2021 as compared to 2020, driven by geographic expansion of product access.
The increase in license and royalty revenue was partially offset by an $80.0 million milestone payment recognized as revenue in the third quarter of 2020 upon the achievement of $1.0 billion in cumulative net sales of Zolgensma. Upon the achievement of this milestone, there are no further development or sales-based milestones remaining under the associated license agreement with Novartis Gene Therapies for the development and commercialization of treatments for SMA. The increase in cost of revenues in 2021 was primarily driven by royalties payable to licensors on net sales of Zolgensma and sublicense fees payable to licensors on revenues generated under the collaboration and license agreement with AbbVie.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expenses increased by $15.1 million, from $166.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $181.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to the following:
•
an increase of $13.4 million in personnel-related costs as a result of increased headcount of research and development personnel, including a $3.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense;
•
an increase of $8.2 million in costs of laboratories and facilities used by research and development personnel, including a $1.1 million increase in depreciation expense allocated to research and development functions, largely driven by the occupation of our new corporate, research and manufacturing headquarters in 2021;
•
an increase of $8.1 million in costs associated with clinical trial and regulatory activities for our lead product candidates, largely driven by RGX-314 and RGX-121 clinical trials; and
•
an increase of $2.0 million in costs associated with preclinical activities and other early stage research and development.
The increase in research and development expenses was partially offset by a decrease of $13.6 million in costs associated with manufacturing-related activities, largely driven by manufacturing campaigns for RGX-201 and RGX-121 clinical supply performed in 2020, and $5.9 million of development cost reimbursement from AbbVie recorded in 2021 under our RGX-314 collaboration which was recorded as a reduction of research and development expenses.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expenses increased by $15.5 million, from $63.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $79.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to the following:
•
an increase of $8.4 million in personnel-related costs as a result of increased headcount of general and administrative personnel, including a $3.5 million increase in stock-based compensation expense;
•
an increase of $3.4 million for professional services, primarily related to legal and other advisory services; and
•
an increase of $1.2 million in costs of facilities used by general and administrative personnel, including depreciation expense allocated to general and administrative functions, largely driven by the occupation of our new corporate, research and manufacturing headquarters in 2021.
Credit Losses (Recoveries) and Other. Credit losses (recoveries) and other decreased by $10.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to changes in the allowance for credit losses associated with our accounts receivable from Abeona Therapeutics Inc. (Abeona) for license fees due under a license agreement which was terminated in 2020. We recorded credit losses of $7.7 million in 2020 related to the accounts receivable from Abeona. In November 2021, we entered into a settlement agreement with Abeona related to the amounts due to us under the terminated license agreement. As a result of the settlement, we recorded credit recoveries of $2.6 million in 2021 related to the accounts receivable from Abeona. For further information regarding the provision for credit losses, refer to Note 10, “License and Collaboration Agreements-Abeona Therapeutics Inc.” to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Investment Income. Investment income decreased by $2.9 million, from $9.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to net gains of $4.8 million recognized in 2020 related to our marketable equity securities of Prevail Therapeutics Inc., all of which had been sold as of December 31, 2020, and a decrease of $3.2 million in interest income in 2021 primarily attributable to lower yields on investments in cash equivalents and marketable debt securities. The decrease in investment income was partially offset by a realized gain of $5.2 million recognized in 2021 upon the acquisition of our non-marketable equity securities of Corlieve Therapeutics SAS (Corleive) by uniQure N.V. (uniQure) in July 2021.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased by $25.5 million, from $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $26.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Interest expense consists solely of imputed interest under our royalty purchase agreement with HCR for the sale of future Zolgensma royalties, which occurred in December 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $849.3 million, which were primarily derived from the sale of our common stock, license and royalty revenue and the monetization of our Zolgensma royalty stream. We expect that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements, and are sufficient to meet our financial commitments and obligations, for at least the next 12 months from the date of this report, based on our current business plan. Our recent sources of liquidity include the following events and transactions:
•
In September 2021, we entered into the AbbVie Collaboration Agreement for the development and commercialization of RGX-314, which became effective in November 2021. Pursuant to the AbbVie Collaboration Agreement, we received an up-front fee of $370.0 million from AbbVie upon the effective date of the agreement in November 2021, and we are eligible to receive up to $1.38 billion from AbbVie upon the achievement of specified development and sales-based milestones. Additionally, the parties will share equally in the net profits and net losses associated with the commercialization of RGX-314 in the United States, and we are eligible to receive tiered royalties on net sales by AbbVie of RGX-314 outside the United States.
•
In January 2021, we completed a public offering of 4,899,000 shares of our common stock (inclusive of 639,000 shares pursuant to the full exercise by the underwriters of their option to purchase additional shares) at a price of $47.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds from the offering, inclusive of the underwriters’ option exercise, were $216.1 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
•
In December 2020, we entered into a royalty purchase agreement with HCR to monetize a portion of our Zolgensma royalty stream. Under the agreement, we received a gross up-front payment of $200.0 million from HCR in December 2020. In exchange, HCR received the rights to a capped amount of Zolgensma royalty payments under our license agreement with Novartis Gene Therapies, including a portion of the royalty payments we received in the fourth quarter of 2020. The aggregate net proceeds received from the sale were $192.5 million, net of a $4.0 million deduction from the purchase price as payment for the pledged royalties we received in the fourth quarter of 2020 and other transaction costs payable by us.
•
Novartis Gene Therapies launched commercial sales of Zolgensma in the second quarter of 2019, upon which we began recognizing royalty revenue on net sales of the licensed product. In accordance with the license agreement, Novartis Gene Therapies was obligated to pay a sales-based milestone fee of $80.0 million to us upon the achievement of $1.0 billion in cumulative net sales of licensed products. Novartis Gene Therapies achieved cumulative net sales of Zolgensma of $1.0 billion in third quarter of 2020 and we received payment of the $80.0 million milestone fee in October 2020. Upon the achievement of this milestone, there are no further development or sales-based milestones remaining under the associated license agreement with Novartis Gene Therapies for the development and commercialization of treatments for SMA.
We intend to devote the majority of our current capital to clinical development, seeking regulatory approval of our product candidates and capital expenditures to build out additional office, laboratory and manufacturing capacity, including the ongoing buildout of our corporate, manufacturing and research headquarters in Rockville, Maryland. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of gene therapy product candidates, we are unable to estimate the total amount of operating expenditures and capital outlays necessary to complete the development of our product candidates. Additionally, our estimates are based on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Furthermore, given the continuing uncertainty and volatile market and economic conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the potential for further effects due to a resurgence in COVID-19 infections, we will continue to monitor the nature and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity and capital resources.
Cash Flows
Our consolidated cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $272.9 million from the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was largely driven by the up-front payment of $370.0 million received under the AbbVie Collaboration Agreement in November 2021 and an increase in Zolgensma royalties received during the period. The increase was partially offset by the $80 million sales-based milestone payment received in 2020 related to net sales of Zolgensma, and increases in operating expenses in 2021. We expect to incur regular net cash outflows from operations for the foreseeable future as we continue the development and advancement of our product candidates and other research programs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash provided by operating activities of $218.9 million consisted of net income of $127.8 million, adjustments for non-cash items of $50.8 million and favorable changes in working capital of $40.2 million. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $38.8 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $9.6 million, net amortization of premiums on marketable debt securities of $5.8 million and non-cash interest expense recognized under our royalty purchase agreement with HCR of $4.6 million, and were partially offset by a realized gain of $5.2 million recognized upon the acquisition of our Corlieve equity securities by uniQure in July 2021. The changes in working capital include an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $29.9 million which was largely driven by increases in sublicense fees and royalties payable to licensors, income taxes payable and accrued personnel costs. The changes in working capital also included a decrease in accounts receivable of $14.1 million, which was largely driven by amounts collected under our settlement agreement with Abeona, and an increase in operating lease liabilities of $12.1 million, which was largely driven by funds received under our tenant improvement allowance for the ongoing buildout of our new headquarters facility in Rockville, Maryland. The changes in working capital were partially offset by an increase in prepaid expenses of $8.2 million, which was largely driven by advances paid to service providers for clinical trial and manufacturing-related services to be performed in future periods, and an increase in other current assets of $7.3 million, which was largely driven by amounts due from AbbVie for reimbursement of development costs under our RGX-314 collaboration. Other changes in working capital were incurred in the normal course of business.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in operating activities of $54.1 million consisted of a net loss of $111.3 million, offset by adjustments for non-cash items of $43.0 million and favorable changes in working capital of $14.2 million. Adjustments for non-cash items primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $31.9 million, depreciation and amortization expense of $8.4 million and credit losses of $7.7 million related to our accounts receivable from Abeona. The changes in working capital include an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $17.4 million which was largely driven by increases in sublicense fees payable to licensors, accrued external research and development expenses, income taxes payable and accrued personnel costs. The changes in working capital were partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $9.9 million which was largely driven by an increase in Zolgensma royalties receivable at the end of the period. Other changes in working capital were incurred in the normal course of business.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash used in investing activities consisted of $498.1 million to purchase marketable debt securities and $84.2 million to purchase property and equipment, offset by $170.1 million in maturities of marketable debt securities and $5.6 million of proceeds received from the acquisition of our Corlieve equity securities by uniQure in July 2021. The substantial majority of our capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 were related to the build out of our corporate, manufacturing and research headquarters at 9804 Medical Center Drive in Rockville, Maryland. We expect capital expenditures related to this project to continue into 2022 as we complete the build out of this facility, however, amounts in future periods are expected to decrease as compared to 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash provided by investing activities consisted of $272.7 million in sales and maturities of marketable debt and equity securities, offset by $123.0 million to purchase marketable debt securities and $26.9 million to purchase property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of $216.1 million in net proceeds received from a public offering of our common stock completed in January 2021, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses paid during the period, and $6.0 million in proceeds received from the exercise of stock options and issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan, and was partially offset by $26.6 million of Zolgensma royalties paid to HCR, net of imputed interest, under our royalty purchase agreement.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $192.8 million in net proceeds received from the sale of future Zolgensma royalties to HCR, net of transaction costs paid during the period, and $7.4 million in proceeds received from the exercise of stock options and issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Additional Capital Requirements
Our financial obligations primarily consist of vendor contracts to provide research services and other purchase commitments with suppliers. In the normal course of business, we enter into services agreements with contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations and other third parties. Generally, these agreements provide for termination upon notice, with specified amounts due upon termination based on the timing of termination and the terms of the agreement. The amounts and timing of payments under these agreements are uncertain and contingent upon the initiation and completion of the services to be provided.
Our commitments also include obligations to our licensors under our in-license agreements, which may include sublicense fees, milestones fees, royalties and reimbursement of patent maintenance costs. Sublicense fees are payable to licensors when we sublicense underlying intellectual property to third parties; the fees are based on a percentage of the license fees we receive from sublicensees. Milestone fees are payable to licensors upon our future achievement of certain development and regulatory milestones. Royalties are payable to licensors based on a percentage of net sales of licensed products. Patent maintenance costs are payable to licensors as reimbursement for the cost of maintaining of license patents. Due to the contingent nature of the payments, the amounts and timing of payments to licensors under our in-license agreements are uncertain and may fluctuate significantly from period to period.
We have entered into a number of long-term operating leases for office, laboratory and manufacturing space in Rockville, Maryland and New York, New York, as well as a number of laboratory and other equipment leases. Please refer to Note 6 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our lease commitments.
Under the terms of our royalty purchase agreement with HCR, our future Zolgensma royalties, less amounts payable by us to certain licensors, will be payable to HCR up to a specified capped amount. As of December 31, 2021, the total amount of future Zolgensma royalties to be paid to HCR under the agreement was $207.8 million if paid by November 7, 2024, or $247.8 million if paid after that date. We have no obligation to repay any amounts to HCR if total future Zolgensma royalty payments are not sufficient to repay these amounts.
Future Funding Requirements
We have incurred cumulative losses since our inception and had an accumulated deficit of $161.2 million as of December 31, 2021. Our transition to recurring profitability is dependent upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support our cost structure, which depends heavily on the successful development, approval and commercialization of our product candidates. We do not expect to achieve such revenues, and expect to continue to incur losses, for at least the next several years. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Subject to obtaining regulatory approval for our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. Additionally, we expect our capital expenditures will continue to increase due to costs associated with building out additional office, laboratory and manufacturing capacity to further support the development of our product candidates and potential commercialization efforts, particularly with respect to the build out of our corporate, manufacturing and research headquarters as discussed above. As a result, we will need significant additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain through one or more equity offerings, debt financings or other third-party funding, including potential strategic alliances and licensing or collaboration arrangements.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the timing of enrollment, commencement and completion of our clinical trials;
•
the results of our clinical trials;
•
the results of our preclinical studies for our product candidates and any subsequent clinical trials;
•
the scope, progress, results and costs of drug discovery, laboratory testing, preclinical development and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•
the costs associated with building out additional laboratory and manufacturing capacity;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the costs of future product sales, medical affairs, marketing, manufacturing and distribution activities for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•
revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our products, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
•
revenue received from commercial sales of Zolgensma and other revenue, if any, received in connection with commercial sales of our licensees’ and collaborators’ products, should any of their product candidates receive marketing approval;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•
our current licensing agreements or collaborations remaining in effect, including the AbbVie Collaboration Agreement;
•
our ability to establish and maintain additional licensing agreements or collaborations on favorable terms, if at all; and
•
the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies.
Many of these factors are outside of our control. Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain regulatory and marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our product revenues, if any, and any commercial milestones or royalty payments under our licensing agreements, will be derived from or based on sales of products that may not be commercially available for many years, if at all. In addition, revenue from our NAV Technology Platform licensing is dependent in part on the clinical and commercial success of our licensing partners, including the commercialization of Zolgensma. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives.
The issuance of additional securities, whether equity or debt, by us, or the possibility of such issuance, may cause the market price of our common stock to decline. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We also could be required to seek funds through arrangements with partners or otherwise that may require us to relinquish rights to our intellectual property, our product candidates or otherwise agree to terms unfavorable to us.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.