Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
The Company is a self-managed real estate investment company that invests primarily in real estate purposed for long-term care and senior living. Our business primarily consists of leasing and subleasing healthcare facilities to third-party tenants. As of December 31, 2021, the Company owned, leased, or managed for third parties 24 facilities primarily in the Southeastern United States of America. As of January 1, 2021, pursuant to the Wellington Lease Termination, the Company commenced operating the Tara Facility as a portfolio stabilization measure and entered into a new sublease agreement with an affiliate of Empire for the Powder Springs Facility. On December 14, 2021, the Company reported the Meadowood Involuntary Lease Termination, leading to the Meadowood Facility Uncertainty, where the Company must either find a replacement tenant, operate the Meadowood Facility, or discharge all the residents on or before June 1, 2022. Operating Facilities as opposed to leasing and subleasing, exposes the Company to the risks and volatility of earnings and cash flows our tenants face.
The operators of the Company’s facilities provide a range of health care and related services to patients and residents, including skilled nursing and assisted living services, social services, various therapy services, and other rehabilitative and healthcare services for both long-term and short-stay patients and residents.
The following table provides summary information regarding the number of facilities and related licensed beds/units as of December 31, 2021:
(1)
On December 14, 2021, the State Board of Health for the State of Alabama issued final administrative Consent Orders prohibiting CRM from operating or managing the Meadowood Facility after April 1, 2022. The Company must either lease or take over management of the Meadowood Facility by April 1, 2022, or discharge the residents of the Meadowood Facility and close and cease all operation of the Meadowood Facility, on or before June 1, 2022. The Company has hired specialists to assist with maintaining the certification of the Meadowood Facility and is taking steps to identify approved operators or managers licensed by the ADPH.
(2)
As of January 1, 2021, pursuant to sublease terminations for two facilities located in Georgia with affiliates of Wellington the Company as a portfolio stabilization measure is now operating the Tara Facility and entered into a sublease agreement for the Powder Springs Facility with an affiliate of Empire. On January 1, 2021, the Company entered into the Vero Management Agreement, which was terminated effective October 1 ,2021, with Vero Health under which Vero Health provided management consulting services for the Tara Facility. On October 1, 2021, the Company transferred the Tara Facility management consulting
services to Peach Health under the Peach Management Agreement dated as of September 22, 2021. Affiliates of Peach Health also lease from Regional three facilities located in Georgia.
The following table provides summary information regarding the number of facilities and licensed beds/units by operator affiliation as of December 31, 2021:
(1)
Represents the number of facilities leased or subleased to separate tenants, of which each tenant is an affiliate of the entity named in the table above. For a more detailed discussion, see Note 6 - Leases located in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and “Portfolio of Healthcare Investments” included in Part I, Item 1, “Business”, each included in this Annual Report.
(2)
On December 14, 2021, the State Board of Health for the State of Alabama issued final administrative Consent Orders prohibiting CRM from operating or managing the Meadowood Facility after April 1, 2022. The Company must either lease or take over management of the Meadowood Facility by April 1, 2022 or discharge the residents of the Meadowood Facility and close and cease all operation of the Meadowood Facility, on or before June 1, 2022. The Company has hired specialists to assist with maintaining the certification of the Meadowood Facility and is taking steps to identify approved operators or managers licensed by the ADPH.
(3)
Effective January 1, 2021, the Company entered into the PS Sublease with an affiliate of Empire for the Powder Springs Facility. see Note 6 - Leases located in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and “Portfolio of Healthcare Investments” included in Part I, Item 1, “Business”, each included in this Annual Report.
(4)
On January 1, 2021, the Company entered into the Vero Management Agreement, which was terminated effective October 1 ,2021, with Vero Health under which Vero Health provided management consulting services for the Tara Facility. On October 1, 2021, the Company transferred the Tara Facility management consulting services to Peach Health under the Peach Management Agreement dated as of September 22, 2021. Affiliates of Peach Health also lease from Regional three facilities located in Georgia.
Current Significant Events:
COVID-19
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the respiratory illness caused by a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, also known as COVID-19, a global pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has led governments and other authorities in the United States to impose measures intended to control its spread, including restrictions on freedom of movement and business operations such as travel bans, border closings, business closures, quarantines, and shelter-in-place orders. The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures to protect its spread have adversely affected our business in the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, and we expect will continue to adversely affect our business in the quarter ending March 31, 2022 and beyond, for a variety of reasons, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
As of February 18, 2021, the Company is aware that each of our facilities has reported one or more positive cases of COVID-19 among the residents and/or operator employee populations. Many of our operators have reported incurring significant cost increases as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, with dramatic increases for facilities with positive cases. We believe these increases primarily stem from elevated labor costs, including increased use of overtime and bonus pay, as well as a significant increase in both the cost and usage of personal protective equipment, testing equipment, processes and supplies. In terms of occupancy levels, many of our operators have reported experiencing declines, in part due to the elimination or suspension of elective hospital procedures, fewer discharges from hospitals to SNFs, and higher hospital readmittances from SNFs.
The COVID-19 pandemic may also lead to temporary closures of nursing facilities, operated by our tenants, which also may affect our tenants’ ability to make their rental payments to us pursuant to their respective lease agreements. In addition, our tenants’ operations could be further disrupted if any of their employees, or the employees of their vendors, have, or are suspected of having, COVID-19. This could cause, and in some cases has already caused, our tenants or their vendors to experience staffing shortages, and this could potentially require our tenants and their vendors to close parts of or entire facilities, distribution centers, or other buildings to disinfect any affected areas.
We could also be adversely affected if government authorities impose upon our tenants, or their vendors, certain restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic. These restrictions may be in the form of mandatory closures, requested voluntary closures, bans on new admissions, restricted operations, or restrictions on the importation of necessary equipment or supplies which may adversely affect our tenants’ operations and their ability to make rental payments to us moving forward. In addition, family members may elect to keep nursing facility residents at home during the COVID-19 pandemic, thus reducing our tenants’ revenue. Currently, a number of our tenants have stopped admitting new patients due to rising COVID-19 infections resulting in decreased revenues.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, our tenants may face lawsuits for alleged negligence associated with their responses to the emergency. The costs associated with defending, settling, or paying damages from such claims could negatively impact our tenants’ operating budgets and affect their ability to meet their obligations under our leases. Further, we may be subject to increased lawsuits arising out of our alleged actions or the alleged actions of our tenants for which they have agreed to indemnify, defend and hold us harmless. An unfavorable resolution of any such pending or future litigation could materially adversely affect us. The Company is not aware of any such lawsuits against our tenants.
If our tenants are unable to make rental payments to us pursuant to their lease obligations, whether due to the tenants’ decrease in revenues or otherwise, then, in some cases, we may be forced to either attempt to replace tenants or restructure tenants’ long-term rent obligations and may not be able to do so on terms that are as favorable to us as those currently in place.
While the Company has received approximately 94% of its expected monthly rental receipts from tenants for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, there are a number of uncertainties the Company faces as it considers the potential impact of COVID-19 on its business, including the length of census disruption, elevated COVID-19 operating costs related to personal protection equipment, cleaning supplies, virus testing and increased overtime due to staff illness and the extent to which federal and state funding support will offset these incremental costs for our tenants. To the extent government support is not sufficient or timely to offset these impacts, or to the extent these trends continue or accelerate and are not offset by additional government relief that is sufficient or timely, the operating results of our operators are likely to be adversely affected, some may be unwilling or unable to pay their contractual obligations to us in full or on a timely basis, as has occurred with more than one of our operators.
We also do not know the number of facilities that will ultimately experience widespread, high-cost outbreaks of COVID-19, and while we have requested reporting of case numbers from our operators and CMS has required additional reporting by operators, we may not receive accurate information on the number of cases, which could result in a delay in reporting. We expect to see continued increased clinical protocols for infection control within facilities and increased monitoring of employees, guests and other individuals entering facilities; however, we do not yet know if future reimbursement rates will be sufficient to cover the increased costs of enhanced infection control and monitoring. The extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on our and our operators’ operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the ultimate duration, spread and intensity of the outbreak, which may depend on factors such as the development and implementation of an effective vaccine and
treatments for COVID-19, government funds and other support for the senior care sector and the efficacy of other policies and measures that may mitigate the impact of the pandemic, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict. Due to these uncertainties, we are unable at this time to estimate the effect of these factors on our business, but the adverse impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows could be material.
Notes Receivable:
In connection with a master sublease agreement as amended on March 30, 2018, originally dated June 18, 2016, that the Company entered into with affiliates of Peach Health, the Company extended a line of credit to Peach Health (the “Peach Line”), which was subordinated to a line of credit extended to Peach Health by a third-party lender (the “Peach Working Capital Facility”). On August 27, 2020, subsequent to Peach Health repaying their Peach Working Capital Facility, the Company and Peach Health modified the Peach Line to: (i) reduce the then $1.3 million outstanding balance under the Peach Line to approximately $0.5 million, in connection with which Peach Health paid to the Company $0.45 million in cash and the Company accepted $0.35 million non-cash payment in exchange for Peach Health assuming from the Company certain bed tax liabilities related to facilities their affiliates operate; (ii) extend the maturity date of the Peach Line to August 1, 2025; (iii) decrease the interest rate from 16.5% to 8% per annum; and (iv) Peach Health agreed not to pledge, hypothecate or grant any security interest in their collateral to any other party, other than their current arrangement with the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”), without the Company’s prior written consent. The remaining balance under the Peach Line shall be paid by Peach Health to the Company in 60 equal monthly installments. As of December 31, 2021, in accordance with the Peach Line terms, 44 such installments remain.
The Company made no acquisitions or dispositions during the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
For further information, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, and Note 8 - Notes Payable and Other Debt, to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Divestitures
For information regarding the Company’s divestitures, please refer to Note 10 - Discontinued Operations, to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
The following table summarizes the activity of discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020:
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) for interim financial information and with the instructions to Form 10-K and Rule 8-03 of Article 8 of Regulation S-X. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we review our judgments and estimates, including, but not limited to, those related to revenue recognition, doubtful accounts, income taxes, stock compensation, intangible assets, extinguishment of debt, self-insurance reserve and loss contingencies. We base our estimates on historical experience, business knowledge and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances at the time. Actual results may vary from our estimates. These estimates are evaluated by management and revised as circumstances change.
For a discussion of our critical accounting policies, see Note 1 - Organization and Significant Accounting Policies to the Company's Notes to our consolidated financial statements located in Part I, Item 1, “Financial Statements”, of this Annual Report.
Revenue Recognition and Allowances
Patient Care Revenue. The Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) requires a company to recognize revenue when the company transfers control of promised goods and services to a customer. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration to which a company expects to receive in exchange for such goods and services. Revenue from our new Healthcare Services business segment is derived from services rendered to patients in the Tara Facility. The Company receives payments from the following sources for services rendered in our facilities: (i) the federal government under the Medicare program administered by CMS; (ii) state governments under their respective Medicaid and similar programs; (iii) commercial insurers; and (iv) individual patients and clients. The vast majority (greater than 90%) of the revenue the Company has recognized is from government sources. The Company determines the transaction price based on established billing rates reduced by contractual adjustments provided to third-party payors, discounts provided to uninsured patients and other price concessions. Contractual adjustments and discounts are based on contractual agreements, discount policies and historical experience. The Company recognizes revenue at the amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for the services provided. These amounts are due from residents or third-party payors and include variable consideration for retroactive adjustments from estimated reimbursements, if any, under reimbursement programs. Performance obligations, such as providing room and board, wound care, intravenous drug therapy, physical therapy, and quality of life activities amongst others, are determined based on the nature of the services provided. Revenue is recognized as performance obligations are satisfied. Estimated uncollectable amounts due from patients are generally considered implicit price concessions that are a direct reduction to net patient care revenues.
Triple-Net Leased Properties. Triple-Net Leased Properties. The Company’s triple-net leases provide for periodic and determinable increases in rent. The Company recognizes rental revenues under these leases on a straight-line basis over the applicable lease term when collectability is probable. FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as codified in ASC 606, does not apply to rental revenues, which are the Company’s primary source of revenue. Recognizing rental income on a straight-line basis generally results in recognized revenues during the first half of a lease term exceeding the cash amounts contractually due from our tenants, creating a straight-line rent receivable that is included in straight-line rent receivable on our consolidated balance sheets. In the event the Company cannot reasonably estimate the future collection of rent from one or more tenant(s) of the Company’s facilities, rental income for the affected facilities is recognized only upon cash collection, and any accumulated straight-line rent receivable is expensed in the period in which the Company deems rent collection to no longer be probable. Accordingly, rental revenues were recorded on a cash basis for one facility in Alabama for the month of December 2021 and two facilities in Georgia for the fourth quarter of 2020, (until operator or Company management transition on January 1, 2021, for both properties. For additional information with respect to such facilities, see Note 6 - Leases to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report)
Management Fee Revenues and Other Revenues. On January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as codified in ASC 606, which requires a company to recognize revenue when the company transfers control of promised goods and services to a customer. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration to which a company expects to receive in exchange for such goods and services. The Company recognizes management fee revenues as services are provided. The Company has one contract to manage three facilities (the “Management Contract”), with payment for each month of service generally received in full on a monthly basis. The maximum penalty for service contract nonperformance under the Management Contract is $50,000 per year, payable after the end of the year. Further, the Company recognizes interest income from loans and investments, using the effective interest method when collectability is probable. The Company applies the effective interest method on a loan-by-loan basis.
Allowances. The Company assesses the collectability of its rent receivables, including straight-line rent receivables and working capital loans to tenants. The Company bases its assessment of the collectability of rent receivables and working capital loans to tenants on several factors, including payment history, the financial strength of the tenant
and any guarantors, the value of the underlying collateral, and current economic conditions. If the Company’s evaluation of these factors indicates it is probable that the Company will be unable to receive the rent payments or payments on a working capital loan, then the Company provides a reserve against the recognized straight-line rent receivable asset or working capital loan for the portion that we estimate may not be recovered. Payments received on impaired loans are applied against the allowance. If the Company changes its assumptions or estimates regarding the collectability of future rent payments required by a lease or required from a working capital loan to a tenant, then the Company may adjust its reserve to increase or reduce the rental revenue or interest revenue from working capital loans to tenants recognized in the period the Company makes such change in its assumptions or estimates. The Company has reserved for approximately 1.5% of our patient care receivables based on the history provided by Vero Health for private payors and continues to assess the adequacy of such reserve.
As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company reserved for approximately $0.2 million and $1.4 million, respectively, of uncollected receivables. Accounts receivable, net totaled $2.1 million at December 31, 2021 compared with $2.1 million at December 31, 2020.
Leasing. On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) ASU 2016-02, Leases, as codified in ASC 842, using the non-comparative transition option pursuant to ASU 2018-11. The Company recognized both right of use assets and lease liabilities for leases in which we lease land, real property or other equipment, electing the practical expedient to maintain the prior operating lease classification. Effective January 1, 2019, the Company assesses any new contracts or modification of contracts in accordance with ASC 842 to determine the existence of a lease and its classification. We are reporting revenues and expenses for real estate taxes and insurance where the lessee has not made those payments directly to a third party in accordance with their respective leases with us. Additionally, we now expense certain leasing costs, other than leasing commissions, as they are incurred. Current GAAP provides for the deferral and amortization of such costs over the applicable lease term. Adoption of ASU 2016-02 has not had a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements, other than the initial balance sheet impact of recognizing the right-of-use assets and the right-of-use lease liabilities. Upon adoption, we recognized operating lease assets of $39.8 million on our consolidated balance sheet for the period ended March 31, 2019, which represents the present value of minimum lease payments associated with such leases. Also, upon adoption, we recognized operating lease liabilities of $41.5 million on our consolidated balance sheet for the period ended March 31, 2019. The present value of minimum lease payments was calculated on each lease using a discount rate that approximated our incremental borrowing rate and the current lease term and upon adoption we utilized a discount rate of 7.98% for the Company’s leases. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 6 - Leases to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report)
Asset Impairment
We review the carrying value of long-lived assets that are held and used in our operations for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is determined based upon expected undiscounted future net cash flows from the operations to which the assets relate, utilizing management’s best estimate, assumptions, and projections at the time. If the carrying value is determined to be unrecoverable from future operating cash flows, the asset is deemed impaired and an impairment loss would be recognized to the extent the carrying value exceeded the estimated fair value of the asset. We estimate the fair value of assets based on the estimated future discounted cash flows of the asset. Management has evaluated its long-lived assets and identified no material asset impairment during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We test indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the intangible asset may not be recoverable.
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired in business combinations. Goodwill is subject to annual testing for impairment. In addition, goodwill is tested for impairment if events occur or circumstances change that would reduce the fair value of a facility below its carrying amount. We perform annual testing for impairment during the fourth quarter of each year (see Note 5 - Intangible Assets and Goodwill to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report).
Stock Based Compensation
The Company follows the provisions of ASC Topic 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation”, which requires the use of the fair-value based method to determine compensation for all arrangements under which employees, non-employees, and others receive shares of stock or equity instruments (options, warrants or restricted shares). All awards are amortized on a straight-line basis over their vesting terms.
Self-Insurance Reserve
The Company maintains insurance for professional and general liability claims for its Healthcare Services segment, which includes the Tara Facility or any other facility, such as the Meadowood Facility which the Company is likely to operate, however for claims prior to January 1, 2020, the Company is self-insured against professional and general liability claims since it discontinued its healthcare operations in connection with the Transition. The Company evaluates quarterly the adequacy of its self-insurance reserve based on a number of factors, including: (i) the number of actions pending and the relief sought; (ii) analyses provided by defense counsel, medical experts or other information which comes to light during discovery; (iii) the legal fees and other expenses anticipated to be incurred in defending the actions; (iv) the status and likely success of any mediation or settlement discussions, including estimated settlement amounts and legal fees and other expenses anticipated to be incurred in such settlement, as applicable; and (v) the venues in which the actions have been filed or will be adjudicated. The Company believes that most of the professional and general liability actions are defensible and intends to defend them through final judgment unless settlement is more advantageous to the Company. Accordingly, the self-insurance reserve reflects the Company’s estimate of settlement amounts for the pending actions, if applicable, and legal costs of settling or litigating the pending actions, as applicable. Because the self-insurance reserve is based on estimates, the amount of the self-insurance reserve may not be sufficient to cover the settlement amounts actually incurred in settling the pending actions, or the legal costs actually incurred in settling or litigating the pending actions. See Note 7 - Accrued Expenses and Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report).
Income Taxes
As required by ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes”, we established deferred tax assets and liabilities for temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities at tax rates in effect when such temporary differences are expected to reverse. When necessary, we record a valuation allowance to reduce our net deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. At December 31, 2021, the Company has a valuation allowance of approximately $18.5 million. In future periods, we will continue to assess the need for and adequacy of the remaining valuation allowance. ASC 740 provides information and procedures for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken, or expected to be taken, in tax returns.
Among other changes, the Tax Reform Act reduced the US federal corporate tax rate from 35% to 21% beginning in 2018. As a result of the Tax Reform Act, net operating loss (“NOL”) carry forwards generated in tax years 2018 and forward have an indefinite life. For this reason, the Company has taken the position that the deferred tax liability related to the indefinite lived intangibles can be used to support an equal amount of the deferred tax asset related to the 2018 NOL carry forward generated.
In determining the need for a valuation allowance, the annual income tax rate, or the need for and magnitude of liabilities for uncertain tax positions, we make certain estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are based on, among other things, knowledge of operations, markets, historical trends and likely future changes and, when appropriate, the opinions of advisors with knowledge and expertise in certain fields. Due to certain risks associated with our estimates and assumptions, actual results could differ. Judgment is required in evaluating uncertain tax positions. The Company determines whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination. If a tax position meets the “more-likely-than-not recognition threshold” it is measured to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The Company classifies unrecognized tax benefits that are not expected to result in payment or receipt of cash within one year as liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a full valuation allowance on all deferred tax balances.
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous state and local jurisdictions. In general, the Company’s tax returns filed for the 2018 through 2021 tax years are still subject to potential examination by taxing authorities. To the Company’s knowledge, the Company is not currently under examination by any major income tax jurisdiction.
Further information required by this Item is provided in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, statement of operations items and the amount and percentage of change of these items. The results of operations for any particular period are not necessarily indicative of results for any future period. The following data should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, which are included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
*Not meaningful (“NM”).
Year Ended December 31, 2021, Compared with Year Ended December 31, 2020:
Patient care revenues- Patient care revenues for our new Healthcare Services segment, as a result of the Company operating the Tara Facility, were $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Due to lower occupancy in the current year for the Tara Facility, patient care revenues were approximately 19.1% less than reported from the prior Wellington affiliated operator.
Rental revenues- Total rental revenue decreased by $0.2 million, or 1.4%, to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $16.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects approximately $2.8 million decrease in straight-line rent due to the Wellington Lease Termination ($1.5 million and $1.3 million) recognized for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, for the Powder Springs Facility and the Tara Facility respectively, partially offset by $1.2 million straight-line rent and approximately $1.4 million variable rent recognized for the Powder Springs Facility under a new sublease with an affiliate of Empire in the current period. For further information see Note 6 - Leases, to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Other revenues-Other revenues decreased by $0.2 million, or 64.0%, to $0.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared with approximately $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to the previously deferred interest earned on the Peach Line pursuant to the Peach Line modification in the prior year.
Patient care expense-Patient care expense was $9.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. The current period expense, which required an increased utilization of agency staffing, is due to the costs of operating the Tara Facility in our new Healthcare Services reporting segment and is approximately 8.0 % less than the prior year financials we received from the prior Wellington affiliated operator.
Facility rent expense-Facility rent decreased by approximately $0.1 million, or 1.4%, to $6.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared with approximately $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to an agreement with Covington Realty, LLC (“Covington”), whereby Covington among other items provided a contingent rent concession, the first of three annual amounts of approximately $0.1 million that the Company realized this for the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 6 - Leases, to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report.
Depreciation and amortization-Depreciation and amortization decreased by approximately $0.3 million or 10.5%, to $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to the reduction in depreciation from fully depreciated equipment and computer related assets in the current year.
General and administrative- General and administrative costs increased by $0.5 million, or 15.7%, to $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is driven by approximately $0.5 million incurred per the Vero Management Agreement and later the Peach Management Agreement, in our Healthcare Services segment, which provides for a management fee, which for the current year is equal to approximately 5.0% of our Patient care revenues (net of contractual allowances) to provide management consulting services for the Tara Facility. For the Real Estate Services segment, the increase of approximately $0.4 million of non-cash stock compensation for the issuance of restricted share awards for employees is offset by lower contract services, legal, and public reporting expenses. For a detailed breakdown of the management fee between Vero and Peach Health, see Note 6 - Leases, to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report.
Provision (recovery) for doubtful accounts-Provision for doubtful accounts expense decreased by approximately $0.6 million, to approximately $0.3 million, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared with $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The current period expense is due to a $0.3 million provision for private payor doubtful accounts in our Healthcare Services segment and approximately $0.2 million write-off of straight-line rent asset related to the Meadowood Involuntary Lease Termination offset by approximately $0.2 million of Wellington rent receivable cash collections in excess of our prior year provision for non-payment of rent in our Real Estate Services segment. The prior period expense is related to approximately $1.4 million provision of outstanding rent arrears and other straight-line adjustments arising from one operator (Wellington) offset by approximately $0.5 million of rent collection from the prior year payment plans.
Other operating expenses - Other operating expenses increased by approximately $0.1 million or 14.2%, to $1.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, compared with $0.9 million for the same period in 2020. The increase is due to the reversal of a provision for bed taxes related to the Peach Line modification in the prior year period, and additional expenses incurred in the current year from our new Healthcare Services segment.
Interest expense, net-Interest expense, net decreased by approximately $0.1 million or 3.9%, to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects the repayment of the City of Springfield, Ohio First Mortgage Revenue Series 2012 B Bonds on May 3, 2021, and the effect of routine debt service amortization. See Note 8 - Notes Payable and Other Debt to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Annual Report
Gain on extinguishment of debt- Gain on extinguishment of debt is due to the PPP Loan debt forgiveness of $0.2 million partially offset by $0.1 million of deferred financing fees from the extinguishment of the Coosa MCB Loan., see Note 2 - Liquidity to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” of this Annual Report.
Other expense, net- Other expense, net increased by approximately $1.1 million, to $1.2 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $0.1 million for the same period in 2020. These expenses in both years are related to professional and legal services to evaluate and assist with possible opportunities to improve the Company’s capital structure, including on-going efforts to investigate alternatives to retire or refinance our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company intends to pursue measures to grow its operations, streamline its cost infrastructure and otherwise increase liquidity, including: (i) refinancing or repaying debt to reduce interest costs and mandatory principal repayments, with such repayment to be funded through potentially expanding borrowing arrangements with certain lenders; (ii) increasing future lease revenue through acquisitions and investments in existing properties; (iii)
modifying the terms of existing leases; (iv) replacing certain tenants who default on their lease payment terms; and (v) reducing other and general and administrative expenses.
Management anticipates access to several sources of liquidity, including cash on hand, cash flows from operations, and debt refinancing during the twelve months from the date of this filing. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $6.8 million in unrestricted cash, including a Medicaid overpayment of $1.5 million received in the third and fourth quarter of 2021, which the Company expects to repay in the near future and is recorded in “Accrued Expenses” in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated positive cash flow from continuing operations of $5.2 million (including the $1.5 million Medicaid overpayment) and anticipates continued positive cash flow from operations in the future, subject to the continued uncertainty of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the Company’s business, financial condition, and results of operations.
The Company is current with all of its debt and other financial obligations. During the twelve months ended December 2020, the Company benefited from various, stimulus measures not made available during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, made available to it through the CARES Act enacted by Congress in response to the COVID-19 pandemic which allowed for, among other things: (i) a deferral of debt service payments on U.S. Department of Agriculture (“USDA”) loans to maturity, (ii) an allowance for debt service payments to be made out of replacement reserve accounts for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”) loans and (iii) debt service payments to be made by the SBA on all SBA loans. For further information see Note 8 - Notes Payable and Other Debt to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
In early 2020, the Company began on-going efforts to investigate alternatives to retire or refinance our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock through privately negotiated transactions, open market repurchases, redemptions, exchange offers, tender offers, or otherwise. Our ability to retire or refinance our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock will depend on the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. There can be no assurance that any such alternative will be pursued or accomplished, and we may not be able to engage in any of these activities or engage in any of these activities on desirable terms. Costs associated with these efforts have been expensed as incurred in “Other expense, net” and were $1.2 million and approximately $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Series A Preferred Dividend Suspension
On June 8, 2018, the Board suspended quarterly dividend payments indefinitely with respect to the Series A Preferred Stock. As of December 31, 2021, as a result of the suspension of the dividend payment on the Series A Preferred Stock commencing with the fourth quarter 2017 dividend period, the Company has approximately $36.9 million of undeclared preferred stock dividends in arrears. The dividend suspension has provided the Company with additional funds to meet its ongoing liquidity needs. As the Company has failed to pay cash dividends on the outstanding Series A Preferred Stock in full for more than four dividends periods, the annual dividend rate on the Series A Preferred Stock for the fifth and future missed dividend periods has increased to 12.875%, which is equivalent to approximately $3.20 per share each year, commencing on the first day after the missed fourth quarterly payment (October 1, 2018) and continuing until the second consecutive dividend payment date following such time as the Company has paid all accumulated and unpaid dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock in full in cash.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $52.9 million in indebtedness, net of $1.3 million deferred financing and unamortized discounts. The Company anticipates net principal repayments of approximately $1.9 million during the next twelve-month period, which include approximately $1.7 million of routine debt service amortization, approximately $0.1 million payments on other non-routine debt and a $0.1 million payment of bond debt.
Debt Refinance. On September 30, 2021, the Company and the Exchange Bank of Alabama executed a $5.1 million Promissory Note with a 3.95% annual fixed interest rate and maturity date of October 10, 2026 (the “Coosa Credit Facility”). The Coosa Credit Facility refinanced $5.1 million prime + 1.5% variable interest rate debt owed to Metro City Bank with a maturity date of January 31, 2036, (the “Coosa MCB Loan”). The Coosa Credit Facility is secured by the assets of the Company’s subsidiary Coosa Nursing ADK, LLC (“Coosa”) which owns the 124-bed SNF located in Glencoe, Alabama (the “Coosa Facility”) and the assets of the Company’s subsidiary Meadowood Property Holdings, LLC (“Meadowood”) which owns the 161-bed assisted living facility located in Glencoe,
Alabama (the “Meadowood Facility”). The Company incurred approximately $0.1 million in new deferred financing fees and expensed approximately $0.1 million deferred financing fees associated with the Coosa MCB Loan.
Consequently, the Company recorded a net gain of approximately $0.1 million on extinguishment of debt during the three months ended September 30, 2021, consisting of the $0.2 million gain on forgiveness of the PPP Loan partially offset by $0.1 million of expensed deferred financing fees associated with the extinguishment of the Coosa MCB Loan.
Debt Modification. In conjunction with the September 30, 2021, Coosa Facility refinance, the Company and the Exchange Bank of Alabama signed an agreement on October 1, 2021, (the “Meadowood Credit Facility”), that extended the maturity date on the $3.5 million Meadowood Credit Facility, as amended, in senior debt other mortgage indebtedness secured by the assets of Coosa and the assets of Meadowood, from May 1, 2022, to October 1, 2026. Additionally on August 17, 2021, the Company extended the maturity date on approximately $0.5 million other debt from August 25, 2021, to August 25, 2023 (known as the “KeyBank Exit Notes”).
For further information see Note - 8 Notes Payable and Other Debt to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Changes in Operational Liquidity
The Company entered into the Wellington Lease Termination, dated December 1, 2020, to terminate the subleases for the Powder Springs Facility and Tara Facility with tenants affiliated with Wellington for two of its previously subleased facilities located in Georgia, due to non-payment of approximately $2.7 million in rent.
Under the Wellington Lease Termination, possession, control and operation of the facilities transitioned from the then-current tenants at 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 2021, to the Company. Effective January 1, 2021, the Company leased the Powder Springs Facility, to a new tenant affiliated with the operator Empire, pursuant to a sublease between the Company and PS Operator LLC (“PS Operator”), executed December 31, 2020 (the “PS Sublease”). The Company is operating the Tara Facility as a portfolio stabilization measure and has entered into the Vero Management Agreement with Vero Health under which Vero Health provided management consulting services for the facility.
For the first six months, the base rent under the PS Sublease equaled the adjusted earnings before interest, depreciation, amortization and rent (“Adjusted EBITDAR) of PS Operator to the extent derived from the subleased facility. For months seven through twenty-four, the base rent will equal 80% of the Adjusted EBITDAR.
For the first three months, if Adjusted EBITDAR (as defined in the PS Sublease) was less than $0, PS Operator would not pay any base rent and the Company would reimburse PS Operator an amount equal to the amount by which each period’s Adjusted EBITDAR was less than $0. Beginning with the fourth month and thereafter, the PS Sublease became a “triple net” lease with PS Operator responsible for payment of all expenses in addition to rent.
If the monthly average Adjusted EBITDAR of PS Operator is less than $100,000 for any consecutive three-month period after the sixth month of the PS Sublease, then the Company may terminate the PS Sublease subject to the conditions set forth in the PS Sublease.
Under the Vero Management Agreement, Regional agreed to pay Vero Health a monthly management fee equal to 5% of the Adjusted Gross Revenues (as defined in the Vero Management Agreement) for the Tara Facility and under the Peach Management Agreement Regional agreed to pay a monthly management fee equal to 4% with additional percentages for meeting specified performance targets. The Company will absorb all net profits or losses from the operation of the Tara Facility.
On September 21, 2021, the Company notified Vero Health of Regional’s intention to terminate the Vero Management Agreement, effective October 1, 2021. Regional will continue to operate the Tara Facility and has entered into the Peach Management Agreement with Peach dated as of September 22, 2021, and effective October 1, 2021, to provide management consulting services for the Tara Facility. Affiliates of Peach also lease from Regional three facilities located in Georgia. The fixed Management fee Regional will pay Peach is 1% less than under the Vero Management Agreement, includes a minimum fee of $35,000, and additional percentages for meeting specified performance targets.
The prior leases had a contracted cash rent of approximately $3.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, which the above variable streams of income are replacing. During the twelve months ended December 31,
2021, the Company recognized and collected $1.4 million of variable rent for the Powder Springs Facility replacing approximately $2.0 million of cash rent previously anticipated from the Wellington Tenant. The Tara Facility operations performance, with a net loss of $1.8 million, subsequent to the Wellington Transition, during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, has been insufficient to cover any of the rent the Company is obligated to pay under its lease. There is no assurance that the Tara Facility operations, under the Peach Management Agreement will generate the cash net receipts we expect which could have a material adverse effect on us. Additionally, the Meadowood Involuntary Lease Termination and hence Meadowood Facility Uncertainty could also have a material adverse effect on us. The Company depends on C.R. Management and tenants who are affiliated with C.R Management, one of whom operates the Meadowood Facility, for approximately 33.0% of our Real Estate Services revenues. We give no assurance that the tenants affiliated with C.R Management will have sufficient assets, income and access to financing to enable them to make rental payments to us or to otherwise satisfy their obligations under the applicable leases and subleases, and any inability or unwillingness by such tenants to do so could have a material adverse effect on us. For additional information with respect to the above changes in our business, see Note 16- Subsequent Events to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report).
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received approximately $0.8 million of non-recurring cash receipts from prior year payment plans, related to rent arrears. The final $0.1 million related to prior year payment plans was received during the three months ended March 31, 2021. For additional information with respect to such payment plans, see Note 6 - Leases to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report).
The following table presents selected data from our consolidated statement of cash flows for the periods presented:
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Net cash provided by operating activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $5.2 million, consisting primarily of our income from operations plus changes in working capital, and noncash charges consisting of our collection of rent arrears from the Wellington Lease Termination and income from operations less noncash charges (primarily, depreciation and amortization and lease revenue in excess of cash rent received). The approximate $2.7 million increase compared to the same period in the prior year includes a $1.5 million Medicaid overpayment that the Company expects to repay shortly and reflects the net collection of $2.5 million from the Wellington Lease Termination, approximately $0.4 million additional interest payments as result of the CARES Act interest deferrals and additional net operating outflows of $0.9 million. The net additional operating outflows include significant outflows in relation to professional and legal services to evaluate and assist with possible opportunities to improve the Company’s capital structure, including on-going efforts to investigate alternatives to retire or refinance our outstanding Series A Preferred Stock.
Net cash used in operating activities-discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $0.3 million, excluding non-cash proceeds and payments. This amount was to fund legal and associated settlement costs related to our legacy professional and general liability claims and expenses related to and payment of legacy accounts payable.
Net cash used in investing activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $0.1 million. This capital expenditure was for computer hardware, software and furniture and fixtures for the Tara Facility.
Net cash used in financing activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, is the result of routine repayments totaling $1.4 million towards our senior debt obligations, $0.1 million repayment of the City of Springfield, Ohio First Mortgage Revenue Series 2012 B Bonds, and approximately $0.9 million toward our current insurance funding of other debt for the Tara Facility and our directors’ and officers’ insurance.
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net cash provided by operating activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting primarily of our income from operations less changes in working capital, and noncash charges (primarily, depreciation and amortization, and lease revenue in excess of cash rent). The Company received an approximately $0.4 million principal payment from Peach Health upon modification of the Peach Line, $0.8 million from rent arrears payment plans, and net operating inflows of approximately $1.3 million.
Net cash used in operating activities-discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $1.2 million, excluding non-cash proceeds and payments. This amount was to fund legal and associated settlement costs related to our legacy professional and general liability claims and payment of legacy accounts payable.
Net cash used in investing activities-continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $0.5 million. This capital expenditure was for a new sprinkler system at one of our leased properties and other improvements to our owned building located in Ohio.
Net cash used in financing activities-continuing operations was for the year ended December 31, 2020, was approximately $1.4 million. Excluding non-cash proceeds and payments, this was the result of routine repayments of approximately $1.6 million of existing debt obligations, including $0.1 million repayment of bonds principal, partially offset by receipt of $0.2 million proceeds from a Paycheck Protection Program loan received by the Company during 2020.
Notes Payable and Other Debt
Notes payable and other debt consists of the following:
(a)
USDA
(b)
SBA
For a detailed description of each of the Company’s debt financings, see Note 8 - Notes Payable and Other Debt to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Scheduled Minimum Debt Principal payments and Maturity payments
The schedule below summarizes the scheduled gross minimum principal payments and maturity payments as of December 31, 2021 for each of the next five years and thereafter.
Debt Covenant Compliance
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately 15 credit related instruments outstanding that include various financial and administrative covenant requirements. Covenant requirements include, but are not limited to, fixed charge coverage ratios, debt service coverage ratios, minimum earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization or earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, and restructuring or rent costs, and current ratios. Certain financial covenant requirements are based on consolidated financial measurements whereas others are based on measurements at the subsidiary level (i.e., facility, multiple facilities, or a combination of subsidiaries). The subsidiary level requirements are as follows: (i) financial covenants measured against subsidiaries of the Company; and (ii) financial covenants measured against third-party operator performance. Some covenants are based on annual financial metric measurements whereas others are based on monthly and quarterly financial metric measurements (the “Financial Covenants”). The Company routinely tracks and monitors its compliance with its covenant requirements.
Included in several of the Company’s loan agreements are administrative covenants requiring that a set of audited financial statements be provided to the guarantor within 90 days of the end of each fiscal year (the “Administrative Covenants”).
At December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with the various Financial Covenants and Administrative Covenants related to all of the Company’s credit facilities.
Evaluation of the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
Under the accounting guidance related to the presentation of financial statements, the Company is required to evaluate, on a quarterly basis, whether or not the entity’s current financial condition, including its sources of liquidity at the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued, will enable the entity to meet its obligations as they come due within one year of the date of the issuance of the Company’s consolidated financial statements and to make a determination as to whether or not it is probable, under the application of this accounting guidance, that the entity will be able to continue as a going concern. The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
In applying applicable accounting guidance, management considered the Company’s current financial condition and liquidity sources, including current funds available, forecasted future cash flows, the Company’s obligations due over the next twelve months as well as the Company’s recurring business operating expenses. The Company is able to conclude that it is probable that the Company will be able to meet its obligations arising within one year of the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements within the parameters set forth in the accounting guidance.
Receivables
Our operations could be adversely affected if we experience significant delays in receipt of rental income from our operators and our patient care revenues. Our future liquidity will continue to be dependent upon the relative amounts of current assets (principally cash and accounts receivable) and current liabilities (principally accounts payable and accrued expenses). In that regard, accounts receivable can have a significant impact on our liquidity.
As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company reserved for approximately $0.2 million and $1.4 million, respectively, of uncollected receivables. We continually evaluate the adequacy of our bad debt reserves based on aging of older balances, payment terms and historical collection trends. Accounts receivable, net totaled $2.1 million at December 31, 2021 compared with $2.1 million at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the Company's Accounts receivable, net of allowance for the periods presented:
(a)
At December 31, 2020, our accounts receivable gross and net primarily related to the Wellington affiliates rent arrears in relation to the Wellington Lease Termination, for which the Company recorded a $1.4 million allowance. During the twelve months for the year ended December 2021, the Company collected approximately $0.2 million more than expected. For a further description of the Company’s operating liquidity, see Note 2 - Liquidity to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Guarantee
On November 30, 2018, the Company subleased five of the Company’s facilities located in Ohio (the “Aspire Facilities”) to affiliates of Aspire, pursuant to those subleases (the “Aspire Subleases”), whereby the Aspire affiliates took possession of, and commenced operating, the Aspire Facilities as subtenant. The Aspire Subleases became effective on December 1, 2018 and are structured as triple net leases. The Aspire Facilities are comprised of: (i) a 94-bed skilled nursing facility located in Covington, Ohio (the “Covington Facility”); (ii) an 80-bed assisted living facility located in Springfield, Ohio (the “Eaglewood ALF Facility”); (iii) a 99-bed skilled nursing facility located in Springfield, Ohio (the “Eaglewood Care Center Facility”); (iv) a 50-bed skilled nursing facility located in Greenfield, Ohio (the “H&C of Greenfield Facility”); and (v) a 50-bed skilled nursing facility located in Sidney, Ohio (the “Pavilion Care Facility”). Pursuant to the Aspire Subleases, the Company agreed to indemnify Aspire against any and all liabilities imposed on them as arising from the former operator, capped at $8.0 million. The Company has assessed the fair value of the indemnity agreements as not material to the consolidated financial statements at December 31, 2021.
Operating Leases
As of December 31, 2021, the Company leased a total of nine SNFs under non-cancelable leases, most of which have rent escalation clauses and provisions for payments of real estate taxes, insurance and maintenance costs; eight of the SNFs that are leased by the Company are subleased to and operated by third-party operators. Effective January 1, 2021, the Company commenced operating the Tara Facility, a previously subleased skilled nursing facility. The Company also leases certain office space located in Suwanee, Georgia.
Future minimum lease payments for each of the next five years and thereafter ending December 31 are as follows:
(1)
Weighted average discount rate 7.98%
For a further description of the Company’s operating leases, see Note 6 - Leases to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Leased and Subleased Facilities to Third-Party Operators
As of December 31, 2020, 21 facilities (12 owned by us and nine leased to us) are leased or subleased on a triple net basis, meaning that the lessee (i.e., the third-party operator of the property, or the Company with respect to the Tara Facility) is obligated under the lease or sublease, as applicable, for all liabilities of the property in respect to insurance, taxes and facility maintenance, as well as the lease or sublease payments, as applicable.
Future minimum lease receivables for each of the next five years and thereafter ending December 31 are as follows:
The following is a summary of the Company’s leases to third-parties and which comprise the future minimum lease receivables of the Company. The terms of each lease are structured as “triple-net” leases. Other than the lease for Powder Springs, each lease contains specific rent escalation amounts ranging from 1.0% to 3.0% annually. Further, each lease has one or more renewal options. For those facilities subleased by the Company, the renewal option in the sublease agreement is dependent on the Company’s renewal of its lease agreement.
(1)
Represents the number of facilities which are leased or subleased to separate tenants, which tenants are affiliates of the entity named in the table above. See “Portfolio of Healthcare Investments” in Part I, Item 1, “Business” in this Annual Report.
(2)
On December 14, 2021, the State Board of Health for the State of Alabama issued final administrative Consent Orders prohibiting CRM from operating or managing the Meadowood Facility after April 1, 2022. The Company must either lease or take over management of the Meadowood Facility by April 1, 2022 or discharge the residents of the Meadowood Facility and close and cease all operation of the Meadowood Facility, on or before June 1, 2022. The Company has hired specialists to assist with maintaining the certification of the Meadowood Facility and is taking steps to identify approved operators or managers licensed by the ADPH. The Meadowood lease previously had a lease expiration date of August 31, 2030.
(3)
Indicates facilities that were leased to affiliates of Wellington until 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 2021. The base rent will equal 80% of the operators Adjusted EBITDAR. See Note -6 Leases to our audited consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report for details regarding the change in Operator.
(4)
On January 1, 2021, the Company entered into the Vero Management Agreement, which was terminated effective October 1 ,2021, with Vero Health under which Vero Health provided management consulting services for the Tara Facility. On October 1, 2021, the Company transferred the Tara Facility
management consulting services to Peach Health under the Peach Management Agreement dated as of September 22, 2021. Affiliates of Peach also lease from Regional three facilities located in Georgia.
(5)
All facilities are SNFs except for Eaglewood ALF and Meadowood, which are ALF’s. All facilities, except for the Tara Facility, which has been under our operation since January 1, 2021, and the Meadowood Facility, have renewal provisions of one term of five years except Mountain Trace, Sumter Valley, Covington Care, Pavilion Care Center, Eaglewood ALF, Eaglewood SNF, Powder Springs and Georgetown, which have two renewal terms with each being five years and H&C of Greenfield, which has three renewal terms with each being five years. Other than the lease for the Powder Springs Facility, the leases also contain standard rent escalations that range from 1.0% to 3.0% annually.
As of January 1, 2021, pursuant to the Wellington Lease Termination the Company as a portfolio stabilization measure commenced operating the Tara Facility and entered into a sublease agreement for the Powder Springs Facility with an affiliate of Empire.
For a detailed description of each of the Company’s leases, see Note 6- Leases and Note 2- Liquidity to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
Professional and General Liability
As of the date of filing this Annual Report, the Company is a defendant in a total of 14 professional and general liability actions. The Company has one legacy action from prior to the Transition, one action related to an overtime claim and is a named party in 11 actions related directly to patient care that our current or prior tenants provided to their patients. For further information, see below and Note 16 - Subsequent Events to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.
As of the date of filing this Annual Report, the Company is a defendant in one professional and general liability action commenced on behalf of one of our former patients who received care at one of our facilities prior to the Transition. The plaintiff in this action alleges negligence due to failure to provide adequate and competent staff resulting in injuries, pain and suffering, mental anguish and malnutrition and seeks unspecified actual and compensatory damages, and unspecified punitive damages. This action is covered by insurance, except that any punitive damages awarded would be excluded from coverage.
As of the date of filing this Annual Report, the Company is also a defendant in 12 professional and general liability actions which set forth claims relating to time periods after the Transition, on behalf of former patients of our current or prior tenants. These actions generally seek unspecified compensatory and punitive damages for former patients who were allegedly injured or died due to professional negligence or understaffing at the applicable facility operated by our tenants. These actions on behalf of former patients of our current or prior tenants all relate to events which occurred after the Company transitioned the operations of the facilities in question to a third-party operator (and of which four such actions relate to events which occurred after the Company sold such facilities) and are subject to such operators’ indemnification obligations in favor of the Company.
The Company maintains insurance for professional and general liability claims for its Healthcare Services segment, which includes the Tara Facility or any other facility, such as the Meadowood Facility which the Company is likely to operate, however for claims prior to January 1, 2020, the Company is self-insured against professional and general liability claims since it discontinued its healthcare operations in connection with the Transition. The Company established a self-insurance reserve for these professional and general liability claims, included within “Accrued expenses” in the Company’s audited consolidated balance sheets of $0.2 million and $0.2 million at December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, respectively. Additionally at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, approximately $0.1 million and $0.1 million was reserved for settlement amounts in “Accounts payable” in the Company’s audited consolidated balance sheets.
Accordingly, the self-insurance reserve accrual primarily reflects the Company’s estimate of settlement amounts for the pending actions, as appropriate and legal costs of settling or litigating the pending actions, as applicable. These amounts are expected to be paid over time as the legal proceedings progress. The duration of such legal proceedings could be greater than one year subsequent to the year ended December 31, 2021; however management cannot reliably estimate the exact timing of payments.
See Note 14 - Commitments and Contingencies to our audited consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8., “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report.