Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain information contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis and in other parts of this report may be deemed forward-looking statements regarding events and financial trends that may affect the future operating results or financial positions of Robert Half International Inc. (the "Company"). These statements may be identified by words such as “estimate,” “forecast,” “project,” “plan,” “intend,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” or variations or negatives thereof or by similar or comparable words or phrases. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in the statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the following: changes to or new interpretations of U.S. or international tax regulations, the global financial and economic situation; the duration and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate its spread; changes in levels of unemployment and other economic conditions in the United States or foreign countries where the Company does business, or in particular regions or industries; reduction in the supply of candidates for contract employment or the Company’s ability to attract candidates; the entry of new competitors into the marketplace or expansion by existing competitors; the ability of the Company to maintain existing client relationships and attract new clients in the context of changing economic or competitive conditions; the impact of competitive pressures, including any change in the demand for the Company’s services, on the Company’s ability to maintain its margins; the possibility of the Company incurring liability for its activities, including the activities of its engagement professionals, or for events impacting its engagement professionals on clients’ premises; the possibility that adverse publicity could impact the Company’s ability to attract and retain clients and candidates; the success of the Company in attracting, training, and retaining qualified management personnel and other staff employees; the Company’s ability to comply with governmental regulations affecting personnel services businesses in particular or employer/employee relationships in general; whether there will be ongoing demand for Sarbanes-Oxley or other regulatory compliance services; the Company’s reliance on short-term contracts for a significant percentage of its business; litigation relating to prior or current transactions or activities, including litigation that may be disclosed from time to time in the Company’s Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) filings; the ability of the Company to manage its international operations and comply with foreign laws and regulations; the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates; the possibility that the additional costs the Company will incur as a result of health care or other reform legislation may adversely affect the Company’s profit margins or the demand for the Company’s services; the possibility that the Company’s computer and communications hardware and software systems could be damaged or their service interrupted or the Company could experience a cybersecurity breach; and the possibility that the Company may fail to maintain adequate financial and management controls and as a result suffer errors in its financial reporting. Additionally, with respect to Protiviti, other risks and uncertainties include the fact that future success will depend on its ability to retain employees and attract clients; there can be no assurance that there will be ongoing demand for broad based consulting, regulatory compliance, technology services, public sector or other high demand advisory services; failure to produce projected revenues could adversely affect financial results; and there is the possibility of involvement in litigation relating to prior or current transactions or activities. Because long-term contracts are not a significant part of the Company’s business, future results cannot be reliably predicted by considering past trends or extrapolating past results.
Executive Overview
The Company achieved record levels of service revenues and net income during 2021 due to a broad-based, global acceleration in demand for its staffing and business consulting services. Annual service revenues reached $6.46 billion in 2021, increasing 26.5% from the prior year. Full-year 2021 net income increased 95.5% to $599 million and diluted net income per share increased 98.5% to $5.36.
The future of work increasingly includes flexible, hybrid and fully remote models and the Company can deliver deeper skills and more price-point choices to its clients by expanding candidate searches beyond local markets while leveraging its global office network and advanced AI-driven technologies. The expanded acceptance of remote work creates significant opportunity for the Company. It brings together the Company's numerous strengths, including its global brand, global office network, global candidate database, and advanced AI-driven technologies and data analytics at the scale needed to excel at out-of-market recruitment and placements. This strengthens the Company's competitive position significantly since its traditionally toughest competitors, local and regional staffing firms, generally do not have these capabilities.
Protiviti continues to be a strong differentiator for the Company, with multiple years of consecutive growth and a highly diversified client base and suite of solution offerings. Growth remains strong across internal audit, technology consulting, risk and compliance consulting, and business performance improvement. Technology consulting is the largest solution group with particular strength in cybersecurity and privacy solutions as well as enterprise applications and data analytics. The Company continues to see positive results in the collaboration between Protiviti and staffing, which pairs Protiviti's world-class consulting talent with staffing's deep operational resources to provide a cost-effective solution to clients' skills and scalability needs. Protiviti has also benefited from project work in the public sector resulting from various governmental stimulus programs.
Demand for the Company’s temporary and consultant staffing, permanent placement staffing, and risk consulting and internal audit services is largely dependent upon general economic and labor trends both domestically and abroad. The United States economic backdrop during 2021 was conducive to growth for the Company as real gross domestic product (“GDP”) increased 5.7% in 2021, compared to a decrease of 3.5% in 2020, while the unemployment rate declined from 6.7% in December 2020 to 3.9% in December 2021. In the United States, the number of job openings exceeded the number of hires at the end of December 2021, creating competition for skilled talent that increases the Company's value to clients. The U.S. labor market remains robust, with significant demand due to talent shortages across professional disciplines.
We monitor various economic indicators and business trends in all of the countries in which we operate to anticipate demand for the Company’s services. We evaluate these trends to determine the appropriate level of investment, including personnel, which will best position the Company for success in the current and future global macroeconomic environment. The Company’s investments in headcount are typically structured to proactively support and align with expected revenue growth trends and productivity metrics. We have limited visibility into future revenues not only due to the dependence on macroeconomic conditions noted above, but also because of the relatively short duration of the Company’s client engagements. Accordingly, we typically assess headcount and other investments on at least a quarterly basis. During 2021, the Company increased headcount across all segments, when compared to prior year-end levels.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
As described below, the Company’s most critical accounting policies and estimates are those that involve subjective decisions or assessments.
Service Revenues. The Company derives its revenues from three segments: temporary and consultant staffing, permanent placement staffing, and risk consulting and internal audit services. Revenues are recognized when promised goods or services are delivered to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. See Note C-"Revenue Recognition" to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II-Item 8 of this report.
Income Taxes. The Company’s operations are subject to U.S. federal, state and local, and foreign income taxes. In establishing its deferred income tax assets and liabilities and its provision for income taxes, the Company makes judgments and interpretations based on the enacted tax laws that are applicable to its operations in various jurisdictions. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured and recorded using current enacted tax rates, which the Company expects will apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are recovered or settled. The likelihood of a material change in the Company’s expected realization of its deferred tax assets is dependent on future taxable income and the effectiveness of its tax planning in the various relevant jurisdictions.
The Company also evaluates the need for valuation allowances to reduce the deferred tax assets to realizable amounts. Management evaluates all positive and negative evidence and uses judgment regarding past and future events, including operating results, to help determine when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets may not be realized. When appropriate, a valuation allowance is recorded against deferred tax assets to offset future tax benefits that may not be realized. Valuation allowances of $24.2 million and $24.1 million were recorded as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The valuation allowances recorded relate primarily to net operating losses in certain foreign operations. If such losses are ultimately utilized to offset future operating income, the Company will recognize a tax benefit up to the full amount of the related valuation reserve.
While management believes that its judgments and interpretations regarding income taxes are appropriate, significant differences in actual experience may materially affect the future financial results of the Company.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note B-"New Accounting Pronouncements" to the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II-Item 8 of this report.
Results of Operations
The Company analyzes its operating results for three reportable segments: temporary and consultant staffing, permanent placement staffing and risk consulting and internal audit services. The temporary and consultant staffing segment provides specialized staffing in the accounting and finance, administrative and office, information technology, legal, advertising, marketing, and web design fields. The permanent placement staffing segment provides full-time personnel in the accounting, finance, administrative and office, and information technology fields. The risk consulting and internal audit services segment provides internal audit, technology consulting, risk and compliance consulting, and business performance improvement services.
Demand for the Company’s temporary and consultant staffing, permanent placement staffing and risk consulting and internal audit services is largely dependent upon general economic and labor market conditions both domestically and abroad. Because of the inherent difficulty in predicting economic trends, future demand for the Company’s services cannot be forecast with certainty. Results for the full year 2021 show that the recovery from the recent economic downturn has surpassed pre-pandemic levels and continues with strong momentum and continued broad-based demand for the Company's staffing and business consulting services. The Company will continue to invest in its people, its technology, its brands and its business model to strengthen the ability to connect people to meaningful and exciting new work and provide clients with the talent and deep subject matter expertise they need to confidently compete and grow.
The Company’s temporary and permanent staffing business conducts placement activities through 321 offices in 42 states, the District of Columbia and 17 foreign countries, while Protiviti has 64 offices in 24 states and 12 foreign countries.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The financial results of the Company are prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and the rules of the SEC. To help readers understand the Company’s financial performance, the Company supplements its GAAP financial results with the following non-GAAP measures: as adjusted revenue growth rates; adjusted gross margin; adjusted selling, general and administrative expense; segment income and combined segment income.
Variations in the Company’s financial results include the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and billing days. The Company provides “as adjusted” revenue growth calculations to remove the impact of these items. These calculations show the year-over-year revenue growth rates for the Company’s lines of business on both a reported basis and also on an as adjusted basis for global, U.S., and international operations. The Company has provided this data because it focuses on the Company’s revenue growth rates attributable to operating activities and aids in evaluating revenue trends over time. The Company expresses year-over-year revenue changes as calculated percentages using the same number of billing days and constant currency exchange rates.
In order to calculate constant currency revenue growth rates, as reported amounts are retranslated using foreign currency exchange rates from the prior year’s comparable period. Management then calculates a global, weighted-average number of billing days for each reporting period based upon input from all countries and all lines of business. In order to remove the fluctuations caused by comparable periods having different billing days, the Company calculates same billing day revenue growth rates by dividing each comparative period’s reported revenues by the calculated number of billing days for that period to arrive at a per billing day amount. Same billing day growth rates are then calculated based upon the per billing day amounts. The term “as adjusted” means that the impact of different billing days and currency fluctuations are removed from the revenue growth rate calculation.
The following measures: adjusted gross margin; adjusted selling, general and administrative expense; and segment income include gains and losses on investments held to fund the Company’s obligations under employee deferred compensation plans. The Company provides these measures because they are used by management to review its operational results.
Combined segment income is income before income taxes adjusted for interest income, net and amortization of intangible assets. The Company provides combined segment income because it is how management evaluates segment performance.
The non-GAAP financial measures provided herein may not provide information that is directly comparable to that provided by other companies in the Company’s industry, as other companies may calculate such financial results differently. The Company’s non-GAAP financial measures are not measurements of financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to amounts presented in accordance with GAAP. The Company does not consider these non-GAAP financial measures to be a substitute for, or superior to, the information provided by GAAP financial results. A reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures is provided on the following pages.
Refer to