ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Results of Operations
Revenues were $31.1 million in 2021, an increase of $4.9 million, or 19%, compared to $26.2 million in 2020. The increase in revenue year-over-year was due to higher revenues from all major business lines, with double-digit sales growth for our SRB derivatives, and our MGI and Golden Ridge milling businesses, offset by a low single-digit decline in revenue from our core-SRB operations. The decline in core-SRB revenue can be attributed to an unanticipated pullback in demand from a large customer in the second quarter of 2021, which continued into the second half of 2021 due to the loss of freight coverage for this customer and other customers serviced by the same production facility as a result of this disruption.
Gross profits were $0.4 million in 2021, compared to gross losses of $2.5 million in 2020. The transition to positive gross margin in 2021 was supported by strong growth in our higher margin SRB derivatives business and a significant year-over-year reduction in gross losses for our Golden Ridge rice mill operations. Gains in these two areas were offset in part by lower volumes and double-digit increases in raw material costs for our core-SRB business and lower profits for our MGI operations in the second half of the year, due to unplanned downtime from delays in the delivery of capital equipment repair parts.
SG&A was $7.1 million in 2021, a decline of $0.9 million, or 11%, compared to $8.0 million in 2020. The decline in SG&A was primarily related to a full year of lower personnel expenses, compared to six month in 2020, as we initiated our corporate restructuring in June of 2020. We were also able to reduce outside services and consultant fees and obtained productivity gains in corporate support functions.
Operating losses were $10.6 million in 2021, compared to $11.3 million in 2020, and net losses were $8.9 million in 2021, compared to $11.7 million in 2020. Operating and net losses in 2021 included a $1.8 million benefit due to the forgiveness of our SBA Payroll Protection Program (PPP) loan, a $3.9 million impairment of goodwill, and a $0.4 million benefit from the change in fair value of a derivative warrant liability (discussed further in Notes 9, 7, and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, respectively). There was $0.1 million of other expense, net, in 2021, compared to other expense, net, of $0.1 million in 2020. In 2021, interest expense increased to $0.5 million from $0.3 million in 2020, as we incurred higher fees and interest expense related to an increase in average borrowings.
COVID-19 Assessment
The COVID-19 pandemic is a worldwide health crisis that is adversely affecting the business and financial markets of many countries, disrupting global supply chains, and creating volatility in the financial markets. The pandemic could adversely affect the demand for our products, and it poses the risk that we, or our customers, suppliers, and other business partners may be disrupted or prevented from conducting business for an uncertain period of time. The extent to which this would impact our financial results is unknown as it is dependent on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. As such, it is difficult to estimate the exact magnitude of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
We have not had, and we do not expect, any of our facilities to be closed subject to government-mandated closures, and we have informed our customers that we anticipate operating throughout the COVID-19 outbreak. Disruption in the supply chain of raw materials used to produce our products, as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak, has not caused us to close any of our facilities, and to date, our employees have been reporting to work, either remotely or in-person without any material change in attendance or productivity. However, we cannot ensure that the COVID-19 outbreak will not cause disruptions to our business in the future.
Liquidity, Going Concern and Capital Resources
We used $4.2 million in operating cash during in 2021, compared to $7.9 million in 2020. The reduction in operating cash uses in 2021 was primarily attributable to lower net operating losses, with depreciation and amortization flat with 2020 levels, and overall working capital modestly negative, as higher non-cash compensation and higher accounts payable and commodities payable were more than offset by higher accounts receivable, and increases in inventories and accruals.
We used $0.8 million in investing cash during in 2021, compared to $0.9 million in 2020. Total capital expenditures were $1.4 million in 2021, compared with $1.2 million in capital expenditures in 2020. This increase in capital expenditures was more than offset by insurance reimbursements for the remediation of damages to our Lake Charles facility from hurricane Laura in 2020. At the end of 2021, the majority of the work to remediate our Lake Charles facility had been completed and reimbursed.
We raised a total of $5.6 million in financing cash in 2021, compared to $5.7 million in 2020. During the second half of 2021, we raised $3.6 million in equity funding, $2.8 million through the issuance of shares in a direct placement, $0.6 million from the sale of common shares through our ATM facility, and $0.2 million in proceeds from warrant exercises. We also received net proceeds of $1.1 million from refinancing the term-loan secured by a mortgage on our Golden Ridge rice mill in Wynne, AR. The remaining was raised from increased debt under our factoring facility.
Management believes that despite the multi-year history of operating losses and negative operating cash flows from continuing operations, there is no substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that these financial statements are issued. Factors alleviating this concern include the reduction in operating losses in 2021, $5.8 million in cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, and our ability to procure additional capital if needed through a variety of sources.
Critical Accounting Policies
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in U.S. Dollars and in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses. These estimates and assumptions are affected by the application of our accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Critical accounting estimates are those that require application of management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. While we apply our judgment based on assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, actual results could vary from these assumptions. It is possible that materially different amounts would be reported using different assumptions. The following is a description of what we consider to be our most significant critical accounting policies.
Inventories - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined by the first-in, first-out method. We employ a full absorption procedure using standard cost techniques for the majority of our operations. The standards are customarily reviewed and adjusted so that they are materially consistent with actual purchase and production costs. Provisions for potentially obsolete or slow-moving inventory are made based upon our analysis of inventory levels, historical obsolescence and future sales forecasts, while inventory determined to be obsolete is written off immediately.
Property and Equipment - Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are expensed as incurred while renewals and betterments are capitalized. Gains or losses on the sale of property and equipment are reflected in net income (loss).
Impairment of Long-lived Assets - We review our long-lived assets, such as property and equipment, operating lease assets, and right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the undiscounted future cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset to be held and used are not sufficient to recover the unamortized balance of the asset. An impairment loss is recognized based on the difference between the carrying values and estimated fair value. The estimated fair value is determined based on either the discounted future cash flows or other appropriate fair value methods with the amount of any such deficiency charged to operations in the current year. Estimates of future cash flows are based on many factors, including current operating results, expected market trends and competitive influences. Assets to be disposed of by sale are reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value, less estimated costs to sell.
Goodwill - Goodwill is recorded when the purchase price paid for an acquisition exceeds the estimated fair value of net identified tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis in the fourth quarter and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the reporting unit below its carrying value. We may first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we conclude that is the case, or chose to not perform the qualitative assessment, we quantify the reporting unit’s fair value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we will record an impairment loss based on the difference. The impairment loss will be limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Multiple valuation techniques may be used to assess the fair value of the reporting unit. All of these techniques include the use of estimates and assumptions that are inherently uncertain. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value or goodwill impairment, or both. After a 2021 impairment charge, discussed further in Note 7 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements, goodwill is zero.
Intangible Assets, exclusive of goodwill - Recognized intangible assets, exclusive of goodwill, are amortized over the useful lives of the assets unless that life is determined to be indefinite. All of our intangible assets, exclusive of goodwill, are finite lived. We evaluate the remaining useful life of an intangible asset each reporting period to determine whether events or circumstances may indicate that a revision to the useful life is warranted to reflect the remaining expected use of the asset. If an intangible asset’s useful life is determined to be finite, but the precise length of that life is not known, the intangible asset is amortized over our best estimate of the asset’s useful life in a manner that reflects the pattern in which the asset’s economic benefits are consumed or expected to be realized. We review our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the undiscounted future cash flows estimated to be generated by the asset to be held and used are not sufficient to recover the unamortized balance of the asset. Our primary intangible asset, exclusive of goodwill, is a customer relationship intangible which was recognized in the acquisition of MGI and derives its value from future cash flows expected from the customers acquired from MGI. Changes in the actual or estimated cash flows of these customers could result in a material adjustment to amortization expense, an impairment loss, or both. Estimates of future cash flows are based on many factors, including current cash flows, expected market trends and competitive influences.
Revenue Recognition - We account for a contract with a customer when the written contract is committed, the rights of the parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection. Substantially all of our revenue is derived by fulfilling customer orders for the purchase of our products under contracts which contain a single performance obligation, to supply continually defined quantities of product at fixed prices. We account for shipping and handling activities that occur after the customer has obtained control of a good as a fulfillment cost rather than as an additional promised service. We recognize revenue at the point in time that control of the ordered product(s) is transferred to the customer, which is upon delivery to the customer, or its designee at our location, a customer location or other customer-designated delivery point. For substantially all of our contracts, control of the ordered product(s) transfers at our location. Amounts invoiced to customers for shipping and handling are reported as revenues and the related costs incurred to deliver product to the customer are reported as cost of goods sold.
Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for fulfilling product orders. Incidental items that are immaterial in the context of the contract are recognized as expense. Our contracts do not include a significant financing component. Our contracts may include terms that could cause variability in the transaction price, including, for example, rebates and volume discounts, or other forms of contingent revenue. The amount of consideration we expect to receive and revenue we recognize includes estimates of variable consideration, including costs for rebates and discounts. If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount to which we expect to be entitled using either the expected value or most likely amount method. Changes in judgments and estimates regarding probability of collection and variable consideration might result in a change in the timing or amount of revenue recognized.