Item 7. Management's Discussion & Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and notes. Forward-looking statements in this MD&A are not guarantees of future performance and may involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. Refer to the "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" and Part I Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of these risks and uncertainties, including without limitation, with respect to our estimated production timeline, need for additional financing and the risks related to our planned transactions with Foxconn.
Our mission is to accelerate electric vehicle adoption and to be a catalyst in the transition of commercial fleets to all-electric vehicles for a more sustainable future. We are an electric vehicle (“EV”) innovator focused on developing high-quality light-duty work vehicles.
Since inception, we have been developing our flagship vehicle, the Endurance™, an electric full-size pickup truck. We are building pre-production vehicles (“PPV”) for testing, validation, certification, and regulatory approvals during the first half of 2022. Subject to raising sufficient capital, completion of the transactions under the Asset Purchase Agreement with Foxconn (See Part I, Item 1. Business - Foxconn Transactions) and satisfactory completion of testing and receipt of regulatory approvals, we currently expect commercial production and sales of the Endurance to begin in the third quarter of 2022.
Our current cost of our bill of materials for the Endurance is well above our anticipated selling price. While we expect to achieve cost improvements over time, we do not anticipate reaching a positive gross margin for the foreseeable future. As a result, we will incur significant losses with each vehicle we sell. The primary factor driving the high material costs are our use of prototype components produced from soft tools that are intended for very low volumes. We anticipate allocating substantial capital investment in hard tools that are designed for long term use and higher production volumes. We have identified significant piece price savings from these investments that we anticipate realizing over time. However, no assurances can be made that we will have sufficient capital to make these investments, or our suppliers will be willing or able to manufacture the tools or achieve the lower piece prices. Until such time as we are able to lower the bill of materials cost, we are likely to limit our expected production in order to minimize our losses, which we anticipate to be through 2023 or potentially longer.
We plan to focus our sales and marketing efforts on direct sales through our subsidiary, Lordstown EV Sales, LLC, to commercial fleet operators and fleet management companies rather than through third-party dealerships. However, we intend to explore other distribution strategies as our business grows. An important aspect of our sales and marketing strategy involves pursuing relationships with specialty upfitting and fleet management companies to incorporate the Endurance into their fleets or sales programs. As their main area of business, fleet management companies act as an intermediary facilitating the acquisition of new vehicles for the ultimate end user fleets. They provide a valuable distribution channel for us because of their extensive end user relationships and ability to offer attractive financing rates. As a result of this strategy, we expect that we will not be required to make significant investments in a large direct sales force or third-party dealership network, thereby avoiding an increase in fixed costs.
We intend to leverage our advanced technologies and highly talented team to develop additional all-electric vehicles targeted for the commercial market. See Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of the risks associated with the capital required to execute our business plan, the Foxconn Transactions and our production timeline.
In the fourth quarter of 2021, we entered into agreements with Foxconn (see Part I, Item 1. Business - Foxconn Transactions), that would result in more than $280 million in funding for the Company, if consummated. We have already received $200 million from Foxconn as of January 28, 2022 in the form of down payments and for the purchase of our Class A common stock. The Foxconn Transactions represent a shift in our business strategy from a fully vertically integrated designer, developer and manufacturer of EVs into a less capital-intensive business focused on developing, engineering, testing and industrializing vehicles in partnership with Foxconn.
In connection with the Foxconn Transactions, Foxconn Ohio would purchase the Lordstown facility for $230 million and a reimbursement payment for certain operating and expansion costs incurred by us from September 1, 2021 through the closing. We would continue to own our hub motor assembly line, as well as our battery module and packing line assets, certain intellectual property rights and other excluded assets. We expect to outsource all of the manufacturing of the Endurance to Foxconn with the sale of our Lordstown facility; Foxconn will also operate the assets we continue to own in the facility after closing. The sale of the Lordstown facility would allow us to meaningfully reduce our operating complexity and fixed cost structure by transferring to Foxconn the current and future manufacturing employees along with fixed overhead costs, such as maintenance, utilities, insurance and more. We believe that outsourcing our manufacturing to a highly qualified partner would enable us to leverage Foxconn’s technology, supply chain network and expertise to accelerate the launch of current and future vehicle programs. Furthermore, we believe we would realize the benefits of scaled manufacturing sooner as Foxconn contracts with other OEMs to produce their vehicles in the Lordstown facility.
In addition to providing the Company near term funding, the Foxconn Transactions should provide the benefits of scaled manufacturing, more cost-effective access to certain raw materials, components and inputs, and reduced overhead costs associated with the Lordstown facility borne by the Company. We are also exploring other potential agreements with Foxconn that would establish a joint product development agreement for future MIH-based vehicles and an appropriate funding structure. See Part I Item 1 - Business - Foxconn Transactions and Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of the risks associated with the Foxconn Transactions and our capital needs, among other risks.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2020
(in thousands)
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) generally consist of personnel and facilities costs related to marketing, sales, executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal organizations, as well as fees for certain professional and contract services.
SG&A increased from $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $105.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to a $21.3 million increase in personnel costs and $43.5 million increase in legal and insurance costs. Our legal costs have risen due to ongoing litigation and government
investigations. Insurance costs have increased due primarily to higher pricing and expanded coverages, including director and officer policies and coverage on new investments made in the Lordstown facility.
Research & Development (R&D) expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for our teams in engineering and research, manufacturing and test organizations, prototype components, as well as contract and outside engineering services to support the development, engineering and testing of beta and PPV vehicles.
R&D increased from $71.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $284.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to increases of $101.9 million and $86.7 million in personnel and consulting costs and prototype component costs, respectively.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we continued to refine the design of the Endurance and consider technologies we would use in future vehicles. Given the lack of Workhorse technology used in the Endurance and the current management’s strategic direction of the Company, inclusive of the transactions contemplated with Foxconn, we deemed it appropriate to change the useful life of the technology we acquired from Workhorse to zero months. As such, we recorded accelerated amortization of $11.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 mainly consisted of changes in fair value of Warrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our business plan contemplates that we will build a limited number of pre-production vehicles in the first half of 2022 for testing, certification and to demonstrate the capabilities of the Endurance to potential customers. We expect commercial production and sales to begin in the third quarter of 2022. While conducting these activities, and for the foreseeable future, we will incur significant operating expenses, capital expenditures and working capital funding that will deplete our cash on hand. Absent any material delays, we anticipate that we have sufficient funds to close the Foxconn Transactions and receive the proceeds as contemplated by the Asset Purchase Agreement. However, we will be required to raise additional capital in order to execute our business plan well in advance of reaching commercial production of the Endurance. The proceeds contemplated in the Asset Purchase Agreement will not be sufficient for these purposes. In addition, the closing of the APA remains subject to certain conditions, and if the transaction does not close, we will be required to repay the down payments made by Foxconn and it is unlikely we will have funding available to do so.
In 2021, our research and development expenses and capital expenditures increased significantly over 2020 levels to build capacity and invest in the development of the Endurance. The costs are significant due to spending needed for prototype components, vehicle validation tests, securing necessary parts/equipment, and utilizing in-house and third-party engineering services. Increased spending was also due in part to the stress that the COVID-19 pandemic put on the global automotive supply chain and a strategic decision to bring development of certain components, such as the frame of the Endurance, in-house. We expect continued supply chain constraints and pricing pressure that may negatively impact our cost structure and production timeline. See Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of the risks associated with disruptions to the supply chain.
In addition, in order to secure adequate supply of battery cells, we have an agreement with a certain supplier that obligates us to purchase a minimum volume estimated to be $16.3 million in 2022, subject to change for fluctuations in raw material pricing.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 205-40, Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern, management must evaluate whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for one
year from the date the consolidated financial statements included in this report are issued. This evaluation does not take into consideration the potential mitigating effect of management’s plans that have not been fully implemented or are not within control of the Company as of the date the financial statements are issued. When substantial doubt exists under this methodology, management evaluates whether the mitigating effect of its plans sufficiently alleviates substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The mitigating effect of management’s plans, however, is only considered if both (1) it is probable that the plans will be effectively implemented within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued, and (2) it is probable that the plans, when implemented, will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued.
We had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $244.0 million as of December 31, 2021, an accumulated deficit of $544.8 million at December 31, 2021 and a net loss of $410.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to raise the necessary capital, complete the development of our electric vehicles, obtain regulatory approval, begin commercial scale production and launch the sale of such vehicles.
We believe that our current level of cash and cash equivalents is not sufficient to fund commercial scale production and the launch of sale of such vehicles. These conditions raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least one year from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this report.
In an effort to alleviate these conditions, management continues to seek and evaluate opportunities to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or debt securities, asset sales, arrangements with strategic partners or through obtaining financing from government or financial institutions. We have engaged a financial advisor to advise the Company on additional financing alternatives.
As part of our funding efforts, on July 23, 2021, the Company entered into the Equity Purchase Agreement with YA, pursuant to which YA has committed to purchase up to $400 million of our Class A common stock, at our direction from time to time, subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued 9.6 million shares to YA and received $49.4 million cash, net of equity issuance costs.
The actual amount that we raise under the Equity Purchase Agreement will depend on market conditions and other financing alternatives that we are exploring, as well as limitations in the agreement. In particular, at current market prices of our shares of Class A common stock, without stockholder approval, the Exchange Cap provision would limit the amount of shares we can issue to 35.1 million shares, and therefore limit funds we are able to raise to significantly less than the $400 million commitment under the Equity Purchase Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the terms and conditions of the Equity Purchase Agreement and the remaining availability under the Equity Purchase Agreement was $350 million which is subject to certain limitations as described above and in Note 7 of the consolidated financial statements.
On November 10, 2021, we entered into the APA with Foxconn, pursuant to which Foxconn would purchase the Lordstown facility for $230 million and a reimbursement payment for certain operating and expansion costs incurred by us from September 1, 2021 through the closing. We would continue to own our hub motor assembly line, as well as our battery module and packing line assets, certain intellectual property rights and other excluded assets. Foxconn has made down payments of the purchase price of $100 million on November 18, 2021 and $50 million on January 28, 2022. Foxconn is required to make an additional down payment of $50 million no later than April 15, 2022, subject to certain conditions. The balance of the purchase price, along with reimbursement of certain operating and expansion costs would be paid at closing. We are required to maintain minimum cash balances of $50 million through March 1, 2022 and $30 million thereafter. In connection with the closing, the Company will issue warrants to Foxconn that are exercisable
until the third anniversary of the closing for 1.7 million shares of Class A common stock at an exercise price of $10.50 per share.
If the APA is terminated or if the transaction does not close prior to the later of (i) April 30, 2022 and (ii) 10 days after the transaction is cleared by CFIUS, we are obligated to repay the down payments to Foxconn. We have granted Foxconn a first priority security interest in substantially all of our assets to secure the repayment obligation. The APA is subject to several conditions and has not been consummated as of the date of the filing of this report. No assurance can be made that it will ultimately be consummated on the terms contemplated, or at all.
In addition to providing the Company near term funding, the Foxconn Transactions should provide the benefits of scaled manufacturing, more cost-effective access to certain raw materials, components and inputs, and reduced overhead costs associated with the Lordstown facility borne by the Company. We are also exploring other potential agreements with Foxconn that would establish a joint product development agreement for future MIH-based vehicles and an appropriate funding structure. No assurance can be made that the joint product development agreement, an appropriate funding structure or other potential agreements would ultimately be entered or consummated on the terms contemplated, or at all.
See Part I Item 1 - Business - Foxconn Transactions and Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of the risks associated with the Foxconn Transactions and other agreements being contemplated, including a joint product development agreement, and our capital needs, among other risks. Even if the Foxconn Transactions are consummated in accordance with the current terms and on the anticipated timeline, we will need additional funding to continue our development efforts and maintain current plans for our production timeline.
We accepted an invitation from the U.S. Department of Energy to start the process toward securing an ATVM loan and are currently in the due diligence phase. If we are successful in completing this stage, we may receive a term sheet, but we cannot guarantee we will reach that stage or be approved for a loan or provide any assurance as to the amount or timing of any loan that we may receive. We have been informed that an ATVM loan would likely be secured by a first priority lien on our assets. In the near term, we do not believe that we would be able to satisfy the conditions to obtain an ATVM loan, including the requirement to demonstrate our viability as a company.
As we seek additional sources of financing, there can be no assurance that such financing would be available to us on favorable terms or at all. Our ability to obtain additional financing in the debt and equity capital markets is subject to several factors, including market and economic conditions, the significant amount of capital required, the fact that our bill of materials cost is currently, and expected to continue to be, substantially higher than our anticipated selling price, uncertainty surrounding regulatory approval and the performance of the vehicle, meaningful exposure to material losses related to ongoing litigation and the SEC investigation, our performance and investor sentiment with respect to us and our business and industry, as well as our pending transaction with Foxconn. As a result of these uncertainties, and notwithstanding management’s plans and efforts to date, there continues to be substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
If we are unable to raise substantial additional capital in the near term, our operations and production plans will be scaled back or curtailed and, if any funds raised are insufficient to provide a bridge to full commercial production, our operations could be severely curtailed or cease entirely. We will be materially adversely affected if the Foxconn Transactions do not close. If the APA does not close, including because we are unable to fulfill our obligations to maintain our minimum cash balance commitments under the APA, we are unlikely to have sufficient available cash to repay Foxconn’s down payments. As a result, Foxconn may exercise its rights under the APA, including, but not limited to foreclosing on its liens on some or substantially all of the Company’s assets. Under such circumstances, we would not likely be able to continue as a going concern or realize any value from our assets.
See Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors for further discussion of the risks associated with our need for additional financing.
Summary of Cash Flows
(in thousands)
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash flows from operating activities are significantly affected by our cash investments to support the continuation and growth of our business in areas such as research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Net cash used in operating activities increased to $388.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $99.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to increases in our net operating loss.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
The net cash used in investing activities increased to $285.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $50.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to purchases of capital assets related to the Lordstown facility re-tooling in preparation for the manufacturing of the Endurance pickup truck, along with other investments in IT hardware and infrastructure to support the long-term needs of the Company.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $287.8 million compared to $777.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of $100 million down payment from Foxconn, $50 million from the Subscription Agreement with Foxconn, $82 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants and $49.4 million from sales under the Equity Purchase Agreement, net of issuance costs. Cash flows from financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $701.5 million from cash received in recapitalization, net of transaction costs, $38.8 million from notes payable and $30.7 million from shares issued for exercise warrants.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis of accounting, which contemplates continuity of operations, realization of assets and liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The accompanying financial statements do not reflect any adjustments that might result if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern. In connection with the preparation of the consolidated financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we conducted an evaluation as to whether there were conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, which raised substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date of the issuance of such financial statements, and concluded that substantial doubt existed as to our ability to continue as a going concern as further discussed in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, our independent auditors, in their report on the audited financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the related assets. Determination of useful lives and depreciation will begin once the assets are ready for their intended use.
Upon retirement or sale, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the balance sheet and the resulting gain or loss is reflected in operations. Maintenance and repair expenditures are expensed as incurred, while major improvements that increase functionality of the asset are capitalized and depreciated ratably to expense over the identified useful life. Further, interest on any debt financing arrangement is capitalized to the purchased property, plant, and equipment if the requirements for capitalization are met.
Long-lived assets, such as property, plant, and equipment are reviewed for potential impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset or asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset or asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset or asset group exceeds its estimated undiscounted future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset or asset group exceeds the fair value of the asset or asset group.
Warrants
The Company accounts for its Public and Private Warrants as described in Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC Topic 815-40-15-7D and 7F under which the Public Warrants and Private Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Public and Private Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the Public and Private Warrants to fair value at each reporting period or at the time of settlement. Any change in fair value is recognized in the statement of operations. The Company accounts for BGL Warrants as equity as these warrants qualify as share-based compensation under ASC Topic 718.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.