ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The Company is engaged in the production, distribution and marketing of feature-length films, television series and mini-series, and television movies, from initial creative development through principal photography, postproduction, distribution, and ancillary sales, as well as the music production and distribution industry. The Company also provides event-based audio and video design, production, and installation services.
The Company’s activities are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including the need for additional capital, as described below at “Going Concern.” The Company does not currently have positive cash flows from operations and is dependent on periodic infusions of capital to fund its operating requirements.
At July 31, 2021, the Company had completed two feature films and one documentary and had one feature film in production. The documentary is about the life of former Arizona Sheriff Joseph M. Arpaio and is entitled “It’s Complicated”. As of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, this film has not been sold or distributed.
The feature film productions that were completed at July 31, 2021 are entitled “Please Baby Please” and “Mistress.” Current discussion are underway to distribute and sell Please Baby Please after it was featured at the Amsterdam Film Festival. The Company had a screening on April 12, 2022, of Mistress with 46 potential buyers invited for distribution of the film. Discussions are currently underway for the distribution and sale of the movie.
In June 2021, the Company commenced the filming of its third feature film production, “Taurus”, which was completed in December 2021. Although the agreement has not been executed, the Company has reached an agreement in principal with AMC Plus to distribute this film in North America for a minimum guarantee of $1.6 million plus royalties and is in discussions to distribute the film to foreign markets through Island Film Group. There is no assurance this agreement will be executed, but management is optimistic.
The Company also began production of a children’s television series called “Storyland.” Pre-production activities on this series are underway.
At July 31, 2021, and 2020, project development costs aggregated $4,915,610 and $134,413, respectively. The Company expects to receive revenues from both domestic and foreign distribution from its productions during the fiscal year ending July 31, 2022, and thereafter, but there is no assurance this will occur.
Going Concern
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has suffered losses from operations and negative operating cash flows since inception. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $1,851,108. The Company financed its working capital requirements during this period primarily through the sale of its equity securities and the issuance of short term notes.
At July 31, 2021, the Company had limited cash resources available to fund its operations and will therefore need to raise additional funds in the short-term. The Company estimates that a significant amount of capital will be necessary over a sustained period of time to advance the development of the Company’s business activities to the point at which it can become commercially viable and self-sustaining. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be successful in this regard.
As a result, management has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. In addition, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, also expressed substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to raise additional funds and successfully implement its business plan, and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The development and expansion of the Company’s business is dependent on many factors, including the capital resources available to the Company. No assurances can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that they will be on terms that are satisfactory to the Company or adequate to fund the development and expansion of the Company’s business operations to a level that is commercially viable and self-sustaining. There is also significant uncertainty as to the effect that the coronavirus pandemic may have on the availability, amount, and type of financing in the future.
If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company may be required to scale back its operations, liquidate its media assets to obtain funds, enter into strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to any media assets, or discontinue its operations entirely.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”). ASU 2016-13 significantly changes how entities measure credit losses for most financial assets, including accounts and notes receivable. ASU 2016-13 will replace the current “incurred loss” approach with an “expected loss” model, under which companies will recognize allowances based on expected rather than incurred losses. Entities will apply the provisions of ASU 2016-13 as a cumulative-effect adjustment to retained earnings as of the beginning of the first reporting period in which ASU 2016-13 is effective. ASU 2016-13 will be effective for the Company for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Management has not yet evaluated the effect that the adoption of ASU 2016-13 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
In March 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-02, Entertainment-Films-Other Assets-Film Costs (Subtopic 926-20) and Entertainment-Broadcasters-Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (Subtopic 920-350): Improvements to Accounting for Costs of Films and License Agreements for Program Materials (“ASU 2019-02”). ASU 2019-02 aligns the accounting for production costs of an episodic television series with the accounting for production costs of films by removing the content distinction for capitalization. Accordingly, the capitalization of production costs for episodic television series is no longer constrained until persuasive evidence of secondary market revenues exists. This new guidance also updates certain presentation and disclosure requirements for capitalized film and television costs and requires impairment testing to be performed at a group level for capitalized film and television costs when the content is predominantly monetized with other owned or licensed content. A film group is defined as the lowest level at which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other films and/or license agreements. In addition, under previous guidance, film and television programs accounted for under the broadcasting accounting standard were carried on the balance sheet at the lower of cost or net realizable value. This new guidance requires that an entity test a film or television program for impairment, when impairment indicators are present, at a film group level when the film or license agreement is predominantly monetized with other films and/or license agreements. The impairment would be measured as the difference between the carrying value of the film group and its fair value rather than its net realizable value. This new guidance requires that an entity provide new disclosures about content that is either produced or licensed and classify cash flows for licensed content as cash flows from operating activities in the statement of cash flows. ASU 2019-02 was effective for the Company’s fiscal year beginning August 1, 2020 and was required to be adopted on a prospective basis. The adoption of ASU 2019-02 did not have any impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures. The Company will continue to present all project development costs, including capitalized costs of acquired programming rights, as non-current assets in its consolidated balance sheet.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”). ASU 2019-12 simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions and enhances and simplifies various aspects of the income tax accounting guidance in ASC 740. ASU 2019-12 is effective for interim and annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2020. Management has not yet evaluated the effect that the adoption of ASU 2019-12 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06). ASU 2020-06 simplifies the accounting for convertible debt by eliminating the beneficial conversion and cash conversion accounting models. Upon adoption of ASU 2020-06, convertible debt proceeds, unless issued with a substantial premium or an embedded conversion feature that is not clearly and closely related to the host contract, will no longer be allocated between debt and equity components. ASU 2020-06 will reduce the issue discount and result in less non-cash interest expense in financial statements. ASU 2020-06 also revises the earnings per share calculation and requires entities to assume share settlement when the convertible debt can be settled in cash or shares. For contracts in an entity’s own equity, the type of contracts primarily affected by ASU 2020-06 are freestanding and embedded features that are accounted for as derivatives under the current guidance due to a failure to meet the settlement conditions of the derivative scope exception. ASU 2020-06 simplifies the related settlement assessment by removing the requirements to (i) consider whether the contract would be settled in registered shares, (ii) consider whether collateral is required to be posted, and (iii) assess shareholder rights. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, and only if adopted as of the beginning of such fiscal year. Management has not yet evaluated the effect that the adoption of ASU 2020-06 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
In May 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-04, Earnings Per Share (Topic 260), Debt - Modifications and Extinguishments (Subtopic 470-50), Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Issuer’s Accounting for Certain Modifications or Exchanges of Freestanding Equity-Classified Written Call Options (“ASU 2021-04”). ASU 2021-04 provides guidance as to how an issuer should account for a modification of the terms or conditions or an exchange of a freestanding equity-classified written call option (i.e., a warrant) that remains classified after modification or exchange as an exchange of the original instrument for a new instrument. An issuer should measure the effect of a modification or exchange as the difference between the fair value of the modified or exchanged warrant and the fair value of that warrant immediately before modification or exchange and then apply a recognition model that comprises four categories of transactions and the corresponding accounting treatment for each category (equity issuance, debt origination, debt modification, and modifications unrelated to equity issuance and debt origination or modification). ASU 2021-04 is effective for all entities for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years. An entity should apply the guidance provided in ASU 2021-04 prospectively to modifications or exchanges occurring on or after the effective date. Early adoption is permitted for all entities, including adoption in an interim period. If an entity elects to early adopt ASU 2021-04 in an interim period, the guidance should be applied as of the beginning of the fiscal year that includes that interim period. Management has not yet evaluated the effect that the adoption of ASU 2021-04 will have on the Company’s consolidated financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, authoritative guidance, if currently adopted, would have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement presentation or disclosures.
Concentration of Risk
The Company may periodically contract with consultants and vendors to provide services related to the Company’s business activities. Agreements for these services may be for a specific time period or for a specific project or task.
Costs and expenses incurred that represented 10% or more of costs for the period from August 1, 2020, through July 31, 2021, consist of legal fees of $224,389 incurred with the Company’s corporate and securities law firm.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations presented below is based on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, and for the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of the Company’s financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of the Company’s control. As a result, these issues are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on the Company’s historical operations, the future business plans and the projected financial results, the terms of existing contracts, trends in the industry, and information available from other outside sources. For a more complete description of the Company’s significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to the condensed consolidated financial statements.
Film, Television Programs, and Music Production Costs
Film, television program, and music production costs are capitalized in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 926, Entertainment - Films. Capitalized amounts are stated at the lower of cost, less accumulated amortization, or fair value. These costs represent capitalized costs for the production of films and other entertainment projects. In addition to the films, television programs and music that the Company may produce, costs of productions in development are capitalized as development costs and are transferred to production costs when the project is set for production. Films, television programs and music in development include costs of acquiring film rights to books, stage plays or original screenplays and costs to adapt such projects, as well as amounts paid to musical artists. Projects in development are written off if they are determined not to be recoverable and are evaluated for impairment at each reporting period.
Once a project is released to consumers, the capitalized costs are amortized on an individual project basis in the proportion that the current revenue for each project bears to the estimated remaining unrecognized revenue to be received from all sources for each project as of the beginning of the current fiscal year. Revenue and cost forecasts are periodically reviewed by management and revised when warranted.
The carrying value of film costs are reviewed for impairment each reporting period on a project-by-project basis. If events or changes in circumstance indicate that the fair value of the capitalized costs on a specific project is less than the carrying value, an impairment charge is recognized in the amount by which the unamortized costs exceed the project’s fair value.
As of July 31, 2021, the Company completed two feature films and one documentary and has one feature film in production. After testing for impairment of each of the projects, management has determined that no impairment charges should be recognized.
Revenue Recognition
Film and Television Program Revenues
The Company’s film and television program business is expected to generate revenues principally from the licensing of content in domestic theatrical exhibition, home entertainment (e.g., digital media and packaged media), television, and international marketplaces.
Revenue will be recognized upon transfer of control of promised services or goods to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for those services or goods. Revenues do not include taxes collected from customers on behalf of taxing authorities, such as sales tax and value-added tax.
Revenues from the licensing of film and television content and the sales and licensing of music will be recognized when the content has been delivered and the license period has begun, as discussed above. Revenues from the licensing of symbolic intellectual property (i.e., licenses of motion pictures or television characters, brands, storylines, themes, or logos) will be recognized over the corresponding license term. Commissions will be recognized as such services are provided.
The Company’s content licensing arrangements are expected to include fixed fee and minimum guarantee arrangements, and sales or usage-based royalties.
Fixed Fee or Minimum Guarantees.
The Company’s fixed fee or minimum guarantee licensing arrangements may, in some cases, include multiple titles, multiple license periods (windows) with a substantive period in between the windows, rights to exploitation in different media, or rights to exploitation in multiple territories, which may be considered distinct performance obligations. When these performance obligations are considered distinct, the fixed fee or minimum guarantee in the arrangement is allocated to the title, window, media right or territory as applicable, based on estimates of relative standalone selling prices. The amounts related to each performance obligation (i.e., title, window, media, or territory) will be recognized when the content has been delivered, and the window for the exploitation right in that territory has begun, which is the point in time at which the customer is able to begin to use and benefit from the content.
Sales or Usage Based Royalties.
Sales or usage-based royalties will represent amounts due to the Company based on the “sale” or “usage” of the Company’s content by the customer, and revenues which will be recognized at the later of when the subsequent sale or usage occurs, or the performance obligation to which some or all the sales or usage-based royalty has been allocated and has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). Generally, when the Company licenses completed content (with standalone functionality, such as a movie, or television show), its performance obligation will be satisfied prior to the sale or usage. When the Company licenses intellectual property that does not have stand-alone functionality (e.g., brands, themes, logos, etc.), its performance obligation will generally be satisfied in the same period as the sale or usage. The actual amounts due to the Company under these arrangements will generally not be reported to the Company until after the close of the reporting period. The Company will record revenue under these arrangements for the amounts due and not yet reported to the Company based on estimates of the sales or usage of these customers and pursuant to the terms of the contracts. Such estimates will be based on information from the Company’s customers, historical experience with similar titles in that market or territory, the performance of the title in other markets, and/or data available in the industry.
Revenues by Market or Product Line.
The following describes the revenues expected to be generated by market or product line.
Theatrical. Theatrical revenues are derived from the domestic theatrical release of motion pictures licensed to theatrical exhibitors on a picture-by-picture basis. Revenue from the theatrical release of feature films are treated as sales or usage- based royalties, are recognized as revenue starting at the exhibition date and are based on the Company’s participation in box office receipts of the theatrical exhibitor.
Home Entertainment. Home entertainment consists of Digital Media and Packaged Media.
Digital Media. Digital media will include digital transaction revenue sharing arrangements (pay-per-view and video-on-demand platforms, electronic sell through (“EST”), and digital rental) and licenses of content to digital platforms for a fixed fee.
Digital Transaction Revenue Sharing Arrangements: Represents primarily revenue sharing arrangements with certain digital media platforms which generally provide that, in exchange for a nominal or no upfront sales price. The Company shares in the rental or sales revenues generated by the platform on a title-by-title basis. These digital media platforms generate revenue from rental and EST arrangements, such as download-to-own, download-to-rent, and video-on-demand. These revenue sharing arrangements are recognized as sales or usage-based royalties based on the performance of these platforms and pursuant to the terms of the contract, as discussed above. The Company has not entered into any of these arrangements as of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K.
Licenses of Content to Digital Platforms: Represents primarily the licensing of content to subscription-video-on-demand (“SVOD”) or other digital platforms for a fixed fee. As discussed above, revenues are recognized when the content has been delivered and the window for the exploitation right in that territory has begun. The Company has not entered into any of these arrangements as of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K
Packaged Media: Packaged media revenues will represent the sale of motion pictures and television shows (produced or acquired) on physical discs (DVD’s, Blu-ray, 4K Ultra HD, referred to as “Packaged Media”) in the retail market. Revenues are recognized, net of an allowance for estimated returns and other allowances, on the later of receipt by the customer or “street date” (when it is available for sale by the customer).
Television: Television revenues will be derived from the licensing to domestic markets (linear pay, basic cable, free television markets, syndication) of motion pictures (including theatrical productions and acquired films) and scripted and unscripted television series, television movies, mini-series, and non-fiction programming. Television revenues will include fixed fee arrangements, as well as arrangements in which the Company will earn advertising revenue from the exploitation of certain content on television networks. Television will also include revenue from licenses to SVOD platforms in which the initial license of a television series is to an SVOD platform. Revenues associated with a title, right, or window from television licensing arrangements will be recognized when the feature film or television program is delivered (on an episodic basis for television product) and the window for the exploitation right has begun
International: International revenues will be derived from (1) licensing of the Company’s productions, acquired films, catalog product and libraries of acquired titles to international distributors, on a territory-by-territory basis; (2) the direct distribution of the Company’s productions, acquired films, and the Company’s catalog product and libraries of acquired titles; and (3) licensing to international markets of scripted and unscripted series, television movies, mini-series and non-fiction programming. License fees and minimum guarantee amounts associated with title, window, media, or territory, will be recognized when access to the feature film or television program has been granted or delivery has occurred, as required under the contract, and the right to exploit the feature film or television program in that window, media or territory has commenced. Revenues will also be generated from sales or usage-based royalties received from international distributors based on their distribution performance pursuant to the terms of the contracts after the recoupment of certain costs in some cases, and the initial minimum guarantee, if any, and are recognized when the sale by the Company’s customer generating a royalty due to the Company has occurred.
Event-Based: Event-based revenues are derived from providing audio and video design, production and installation services and are recognized when the terms and conditions of such services have been formally agreed to and documented, the services have been provided, the amount to be billed is determinable, and the amount billed is reasonably collectible.
Other: Other revenues will be derived from the licensing of the Company’s film and television and related content (games, music, location-based entertainment royalties, etc.) to other ancillary markets and from commissions earned and executive producer fees related to talent management.
Related Parties: Revenues from related parties are expected to reflect pricing comparable to arm’s-length customers.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue relates to customer cash advances or deposits received prior to when the Company satisfies the corresponding performance obligation.
Payment terms are expected to vary by location and type of customer and the nature of the licensing arrangement, however, other than multi-year license arrangements; payments will generally be due within 60 days after revenue is recognized. For certain multi-year licensing arrangements, primarily in the television, digital media, and international markets, payments may be due over a longer period. When the Company expects the period between fulfillment of the Company’s performance obligation and the receipt of payment to be greater than a year, a significant financing component will be present. In these cases, such payments will be discounted to present value based on a discount rate reflective of a separate financing transaction between the customer and the Company, at contract inception. The significant financing component will be recorded as a reduction to revenue and accounts receivable initially, with such accounts receivable discount amortized to interest income over the period to receipt of payment. The Company does not assess contracts with deferred payments for significant financing components if, at contract inception, the Company expects the period between fulfillment of the performance obligation and subsequent payment to be one year or less.
In other cases, customer payments may be made in advance of when the Company fulfills its performance obligation and recognizes revenue. This may primarily occur under television production contracts, in which payments may be received as the production progresses, international motion picture contracts, where a portion of the payments are received prior to the completion of the movie and prior to license rights start dates and pay television contracts with multiple windows with a portion of the revenues deferred until the subsequent exploitation windows commence. These arrangements will not contain significant financing components because the reason for the payment structure is not for the provision of financing to the Company, but rather to mitigate the Company’s risk of customer non-performance and incentivize the customer to exploit the Company’s content.
Results of Operations
At July 31, 2021, the Company had commenced business operations, but did not have positive cash flows from operations and will be dependent on periodic infusions of capital to fund its operating requirements.
Operating Expenses
The Company generally recognizes operating costs and expenses as they are incurred in two general categories, sales and marketing costs and expenses and general and administrative costs and expenses. The Company’s operating costs and expenses also include non-cash components related to depreciation and amortization of property and equipment which are allocated, as appropriate, to sales and marketing costs and expenses and general and administrative costs and expenses.
Sales and marketing costs and expenses consist primarily of press releases, web design and photo shoots and related one-time use equipment.
General and administrative costs and expenses consist of stock-based compensation, payroll to officers and employees, accounting fees, audit fees, legal fees, transfer agent fees, insurance, investor relations and other general corporate expenses. Management expects general and administrative costs and expenses to increase in future periods as the Company adds personnel and incurs additional costs related to its operation, including higher legal, accounting, insurance, compliance, compensation, and other costs.
The Company’s consolidated statements of operations as discussed herein are presented below.
Year Ended July 31, 2021 and the Period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020
Revenues. The Company generated revenues of $64,074, including $16,000 from a related party, during the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, related to an event-based video production. The Company had no revenues from February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020.
General and Administrative:
Officers, Directors, Affiliates and Other Related Parties.
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, general and administrative costs associated with officers, directors, affiliates, and other related parties were $1,032,164, which consisted of stock-based compensation of $88,956, compensation to officers of $865,000, and an area standards agreement incurred with the Company’s IATSE union liaison of $78,208.
For the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, general and administrative costs associated with officers, directors, affiliates, and other related parties were $493,472, which consisted of stock-based compensation of $183,472, and compensation to officers of $310,000.
Other General and Administrative Expenses.
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, other general and administrative costs were $1,210,387, which consisted of compensation and related costs of $455,556, health insurance of $70,348, accounting fees of $98,866, review and audit fees of $146,914, tax preparation fees of $11,723, legal fees of $247,234, office rent of $58,213, transfer agent fees of $11,305, depreciation of $2,615, and other operating costs of $107,613.
For the period from February 11, 2020 (inception) through July 31, 2020, general and administrative cost and expenses were $941,319, which consisted of stock-based compensation of $183,472, payroll to officers of $310,000, other payroll and related costs of $80,984, accounting fees of $40,711, audit fees of $25,295, legal fees of $268,124, transfer agent fees of $20,458 and other operating costs of $12,275.
Event Based Production Costs. Event based production costs are costs incurred in the production of media content for third parties through Eventide Media. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, event-based production costs were $35,349, which consisted of equipment rental of $13,124, labor of $12,372, and other general and administrative expenses of $9,853. The Company did not have any event-based production costs for the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020. All film production costs are capitalized and the bulk of the capital raised, or approximately $4,781,197, was used for these costs in the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021.
Sales and Marketing. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, sales and marketing costs were $13,926, which consisted of press release costs of $7,475, branding guidance and advertising of $5,486, and other sales and marketing costs of $965. For the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, sales and marketing costs were $11,289, which consisted of press release costs of $7,100, domain fees and web design costs of $912, and photo shoots and equipment costs of $3,277.
Write-off of Consideration Paid for Acquisition of Maughan Music Group, LLC. For the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, the Company wrote-off its investment in Maughan Music Group, LLC totaling $115,532 which consisted of the fair value of 925,000 shares of the Company’s common stock that were issued in connection with the investment.
Increase in Fair Value of Marketable Securities. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company recorded an increase in the fair value of its investment in marketable securities of $523,315. For the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, the Company recorded an increase in the fair value of its investment in marketable securities of $1,639.
Convertible Promissory Note Payable Default Obligation Incurred. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company recognized a charge to operations of $64,375 representing the potential loss related to the default on a convertible promissory note.
Interest Expense. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company had interest expense of $34,163 (including interest on short term and convertible notes of $47,955), reversal of $17,146 of interest expense which was related to the write-off of debt discount on convertible promissory note payable and short-term unsecured debt. The Company capitalized $78,751 of interest expense related to the secured multiple advance promissory note as such costs related to production costs of a feature film in process. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2020, the Company had interest expense of $427.
Net Loss. For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $1,851,108, as compared to a net loss of $1,066,928 for the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020. The increase of net loss was primarily a result of higher expenses primarily due to the comparison with a shorter period ended July 31, 2020 as compared to the one-year period ended July 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources - July 31, 2021
The Company’s consolidated statements of cash flows as discussed herein are presented below.
The Company’s consolidated financial statements have been presented on the basis that the Company is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company has suffered losses from operations and negative operating cash flows since inception. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company incurred a net loss of $1,851,108. The Company financed its working capital requirements during this period primarily through the sale of its equity securities and the issuance of short term notes. Accordingly, management has concluded that these matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
In addition, the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm, in their report on the Company’s consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, has expressed substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern (see “Going Concern” above).
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon the Company’s ability to raise additional funds and implement its business plan, and to ultimately achieve sustainable operating revenues and profitability. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
At July 31, 2021, the Company had a cash balance of $32,473 and a working capital deficiency of $3,497,658. During the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company generated cash of $3,265,000 from the sale of 39,250,000 shares of common stock, $67,400 from the collection of common stock subscriptions receivable from both related and unrelated parties for 1,348,000 shares of common stock which had been subscribed for in August and September 2020, $60,000 from a common stock subscription that was subsequently rescinded, $3,479,571 in proceeds from the issuance of various notes payable, offset by the principal repayment of $578,638 in notes payable. At July 31, 2021, the Company had $4,338,101 in current liabilities, with respect to which it will either need to repay or extend the due date. Almost $5 million of capital raised was used for project costs to produce the films.
At July 31, 2021, the Company had limited cash resources available to fund its operations and repay its short-term indebtedness, and will therefore need to raise additional funds to repay debt and finance its short-term working capital requirements. The Company estimates that a significant amount of capital will be necessary over a sustained period of time to advance the development of the Company’s business activities to the point at which it can become commercially viable and self-sustaining. However, there can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in this regard. As of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, the Company has total debt of $5,719,219 and deferred salaries totaling $775,325.
Geneva Roth Remark Holdings, Inc.
On February 8, 2022, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement with Geneva Roth Remark Holdings, Inc, (“Geneva Roth”) to settle and resolve the Company’s obligations with respect to three Convertible Promissory Notes executed by the Company and payable to Geneva Roth dated July 8, 2021, August 2, 2021, and September 7, 2021, respectively (the “Notes”). The Company was in default under these Notes.
Under the terms of the Settlement Agreement, the Company would pay an aggregate amount of $386,533 to Geneva Roth, which would constitute payment in full under the Notes. Payments were to be made in weekly installments, with the first 12 payments in the amount of $30,000 each and a final payment in the amount of $26,533. The first payment was paid on February 11, 2022, and the Company paid $270,000 towards the outstanding balance as of April 24, 2022. On April 19, 2022, the Company and Geneva Roth amended the Settlement Agreement to provide that Geneva Roth would accept $80,000 as full payment of the remaining amount due under the Settlement Agreement. On April 25, 2022, the Company made a one-time payment of $50,000, and on April 27, 2022, the Company and Geneva Roth entered into a Mutual Release and Agreement, whereby the parties agreed that this $50,000 payment constituted full satisfaction of the Notes.
Operating Activities
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, operating activities utilized cash of $1,320,626, as compared to utilizing cash of $462,878 for the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, to fund the Company’s ongoing operating expenses.
Investing Activities
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company’s investing activities utilized cash of $4,958,515 consisting of $33,661 for the purchase of property and equipment, $143,657 for the purchase of intellectual property, and $4,781,197 for the payment of project development costs. For the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, the Company’s investing activities utilized cash of $134,413 for the payment of project development costs. The increase in investing activities is a result of the Company expansion of its production efforts.
Financing Activities
For the fiscal year ended July 31, 2021, the Company’s financing activities provided net cash of $6,293,333, consisting of proceeds of $3,265,000 from the sale of 39,250,000 shares of common stock, $67,400 received from common stock subscriptions receivable for 1,348,000 shares of common stock, proceeds from a rescinded stock subscription receivable of $60,000, proceeds of $225,000 from the issuance of a convertible promissory note payable, $1,000,000 from the issuance of a secured Multiple Advance Promissory Note, proceeds of $185,000 in unsecured promissory notes, reduced by repayments of $10,000, and proceeds of $2,069,571 in unsecured promissory notes from related parties, reduced by repayments of $568,638.
For the period February 11, 2020 (date of inception) through July 31, 2020, the Company’s financing activities generated cash of $615,572 consisting of $590,000 from the sale of 13,823,800 shares of common stock, proceeds of $25,000 from the issuance of a convertible promissory note payable, and cash of $572 acquired in connection with the reverse merger transaction.
Project Funding
The Company expects that its film projects will be funded through a variety of techniques. The films that the Company intends to produce will likely include a well-known cast and a compelling script. The Company plans to use sales agents to pre-sell foreign distribution rights, which would include money guarantees from the distributors. In addition, the Company’s sales agents will attempt to secure domestic right pre-sales through backstop (floor amount) agreements or direct distribution agreements with money guarantees. The Company will continue to give strong consideration to produce films in states that provide significant tax incentive rebates.
The Company’s objective is for these agreements, together with the tax incentives, to provide security for bank financing at 80% to 90% of the aggregate contract and tax incentive amounts, as well as that bank loans, pre-sale agreements and tax incentive assignments will provide sufficient funds to finance the respective project costs. So far this form of financing has not been obtained and the Company has instead relied on temporary financing which has resulted in ongoing renegotiations of due dates as a result of timing differences between obtaining the funds and the time frame needed to complete the projects. While the Company has planned to use this temporary funding from film project lenders until the Company is able to obtain project financing from senior lenders, it instead has been forced to rely on short term financing payment deferrals with some limited repayments of term loans.
Principal Commitments
Employment Agreements
The Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries have entered into employment agreements with their officers with total aggregate monthly salaries of $75,000. As of July 31, 2021, Mr., Klusman has deferred $484,670 of his salary.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company had no off-balance sheet arrangements at July 31, 2021, or 2020.
Impact of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) on the Company’s Business Operations
The global outbreak of COVID-19 and its variants has led to severe disruptions in general economic activities, as businesses and governments have taken broad actions to mitigate this public health crisis. Although the Company has not experienced any significant disruption to its business to date, these conditions could significantly negatively impact the Company’s business in the future.
The extent to which the COVID-19 outbreak and its variants ultimately impacts the Company’s business, future revenues, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including, but not limited to, the duration and spread of the outbreak, the emergence of additional variants, its severity and longevity, the actions to curtail the virus and treat its impact, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume. Although the COVID-19 outbreak appears to be subsiding, the Company may be at risk of experiencing a significant impact to its business as a result of the global economic impact, including any economic downturn or recession that has occurred or may occur in the future if there is a significant resurgence of COVID-19 cases.
There is also significant uncertainty as to the effect that the coronavirus may have on the amount and type of financing available to the Company in the future.
The Company intends to continue to monitor the situation and may adjust its current business plans as more information and guidance become available.
Trends, Events and Uncertainties
The production, distribution and marketing of feature-length films, television series and mini-series, and television movies, from initial creative development through principal photography, postproduction, distribution and ancillary sales, is, by its nature, unpredictable and costly, and occurs over an extended period of time. Although the Company will undertake program development efforts with commercially reasonable diligence, there can be no assurance that the Company’s efforts to raise funds in the future will be sufficient to enable the Company to develop its program content to the extent needed to create future revenues to sustain operations as contemplated herein.
There can be no assurances that the Company will ever achieve sustainable revenues sufficient to support its operations. Even if the Company is able to generate revenues, there can be no assurances that the Company will be able to achieve profitability or positive operating cash flows. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to secure additional financing on acceptable terms or at all. If cash resources are insufficient to satisfy the Company’s ongoing cash requirements, the Company would be required to scale back or discontinue its operations, or obtain funds, if available (although there can be no certainty), through strategic alliances that may require the Company to relinquish rights to certain of its programs, or to curtail or discontinue its operations entirely.
Other than as discussed above and elsewhere in the financial statements, the Company is not currently aware of any trends, events or uncertainties that are likely to have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition in the near term, although it is possible that new trends or events may develop in the future that could have a material effect on the Company’s financial condition.