ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our historical consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. The objective of the following discussion and analysis is to provide material information relevant to your assessment of the financial condition and results of operations of our company, including an evaluation of the amounts and certainty of cash flows from operations and from outside sources, and to better allow you to view our company from management’s perspective. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a recently incorporated blank check company, incorporated as a Delaware corporation for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the Private Placements, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
On December 13, 2021, we completed our IPO of 20,000,000 Units, each Unit comprised of one share of Class A Common Stock and one-half of one warrant to purchase one share of Class A Common Stock (the “Public Warrants”), and the simultaneous Private Placement of an aggregate of 9,560,000 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor. On January 6, 2022, the underwriter partially exercised its option to purchase additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, and purchased an additional 2,250,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $22,500,000. Also on January 6, 2022, in connection with the underwriter’s partial exercise of its over-allotment option, we completed the Additional Private Placement of an additional 787,500 Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $787,500. An aggregate of $225,837,500 in proceeds from the IPO and the Private Placements has been placed in the Trust Account.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,923,321 and working capital of $490,881. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, and the search for a target company for an initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents. Other than the exercise by the underwriter of its overallotment option on January 6, 2022, which generated gross proceeds of $22,500,000, there has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. We have incurred and expect to continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $12,051,436, which consists of a gain in fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities of $16,234,800, a gain in the fair value of the over-allotment option of $94,929 and interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account of $654 offset by operating costs of $383,144, transaction costs related to derivative warrant liabilities of $836,603 and the excess fair value of private warrants over proceeds of $3,059,200.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of our IPO, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B Common Stock by our sponsor and loans from our sponsor, as described in Note 1 to our financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, the Trust Account had a balance of $203,000,654. In connection with the IPO, including the underwriter’s exercise of its overallotment option on January 6, 2022, and Private Placements, an aggregate of $225,837,500 in proceeds was placed in the Trust Account. The funds in the Trust Account have been or will be invested only in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds that meet certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act and that invest only in direct U.S. government obligations. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our initial business combination. Delaware franchise tax is based on our authorized shares or on our assumed par and non-par capital, whichever yields a lower result. Under the authorized shares method, each share is taxed at a graduated rate based on the number of authorized shares with a maximum aggregate tax of $200,000 per year. Under the assumed par value capital method, Delaware taxes each $1,000,000 of assumed par value capital at the rate of $400; where assumed par value would be (1) our total gross assets, divided by (2) our total issued shares of common stock, multiplied by (3) the number of our authorized shares. Our annual franchise tax obligation is expected to be capped at the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation of $200,000. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We expect the only taxes payable by us out of the funds in the Trust Account will be income and franchise taxes. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the Trust Account will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
For the period from March 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $42,318. Net income was $12,051,436 primarily as a result of the gain in fair value of the derivative warrant liabilities of $16,234,800, due to a decrease in the overallotment liability of $94,929 and interest income of $654. These amounts were offset by transaction costs related to derivative warrant liabilities of $836,603, and the excess fair value of private warrants over proceeds of $3,059,200 and changes in operating assets and liabilities used $340,826 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from March 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $203,000,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from our IPO and Private Placements being deposited into the Trust Account.
For the period from March 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $204,965,639 was comprised of $200,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of Units in our IPO, net of the underwriter’s discount paid and $4,000,000 in proceeds from the issuance of the Private Placement Warrants to our sponsor, $300,000 in proceeds from the issuance of a promissory note to our sponsor, cash of $25,000 received from our sponsor for the issuance of Class B common stock offset in part by the payment of $619,361 for offering costs associated with the IPO and repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to our sponsor of $300,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we held approximately $1,923,321 outside the Trust Account. We expect to use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,923,321 and working capital of $490,881. In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor, any affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers or directors may, but none of them is obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. These warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. The terms of such loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor, or another affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements prior to an initial business combination to include the approximately $790,000 that we have paid for directors and officers insurance, approximately $300,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses in connection with any business combinations; approximately $150,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements; approximately $85,000 for the NYSE continued listing fees; approximately $180,000 for office space, administrative and support services; and approximately $255,000 for general working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves net of estimated interest income.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds held outside the Trust Account to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we may target businesses with enterprise values that are greater than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our IPO and the Private Placements, and, as a result, if the cash portion of the purchase price exceeds the amount available from the Trust Account, net of amounts needed to satisfy redemptions by public stockholders, we may be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. We may also obtain financing prior to the closing of our initial business combination to fund our working capital needs and transaction costs in connection with our search for and completion of our initial business combination. There is no limitation on our ability to raise funds through the issuance of equity or equity-linked securities or through loans, advances or other indebtedness in connection with our initial business combination, including pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop arrangements we may enter into. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
The net proceeds held in the Trust Account may be used as consideration to pay the sellers of a target business with which we ultimately complete our initial business combination and to pay the deferred underwriting commissions. If our initial business combination is paid for using equity or debt, or not all of the funds released from the Trust Account are used for payment of the consideration in connection with our initial business combination or the redemption of our public shares, we may apply the balance of the cash released to us from the Trust Account for general corporate purposes, including for maintenance or expansion of operations of the post-transaction company, the payment of principal or interest due on indebtedness incurred in completing our initial business combination, to fund the purchase of other companies or for working capital.
We believe that amounts not held in trust will be sufficient to pay the costs and expenses to which such proceeds are allocated through June 13, 2023. This belief is based on the fact that while we may begin preliminary due diligence of a target business in connection with an indication of interest, we intend to undertake in-depth due diligence, depending on the circumstances of the relevant prospective acquisition, only after we have negotiated and signed a letter of intent or other preliminary agreement that addresses the terms of a business combination. However, if our estimate of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, or if our sponsor exercises its extension option, we may be required to raise additional capital, the amount, availability and cost of which is currently unascertainable. If we are required to seek additional capital, we could seek such additional capital through loans or additional investments from our sponsor, members of our management team or any of their respective affiliates, but such persons are not under any obligation to loan funds to, or otherwise invest in, us.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of our initial business combination or one year from the date of this filing.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Our executive offices are at 2655 Northwinds Parkway, Alpharetta, GA 30009. The cost for our use of this space is included in the $10,000 per month fee we pay to our sponsor for office space, administrative and shared personnel support services. We consider our current office space adequate for our current operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A Common Stock features certain redemption rights that we consider to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the 20,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock subject to possible redemption in the amount of $203,000,000 is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable Class A Common Stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, we recognized a measurement adjustment from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A Common Stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net income per share
Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The calculation of diluted income per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Public Offering and (ii) Private Placement, because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted earnings per ordinary share is the same as basic earnings per ordinary share for the periods presented. As a result, diluted earnings per ordinary share is the same as basic earnings per ordinary share for the periods presented. As of December 31, 2021, the Public Warrants are exercisable to purchase an aggregate of 10,000,000 shares of Class A Common Stock.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging.” Our derivative instruments are recorded at fair value as of the closing date of the IPO (December 13, 2021) and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are a derivative instrument. As the Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative, such warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Warrant Instruments
We account for the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” whereby under that provision, the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, we classify the warrant instrument as a liability at fair value and adjust the instrument to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value at issuance was calculated using a Monte Carlo simulation model to value the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants. The valuation models utilize inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period. Upon issuance of the Private Warrants, we recorded a charge to the statement of operations of $3,059,200 for the excess fair value of private warrant liabilities over the proceeds received.