Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included herein. In addition to historical financial information, this report contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. The statements contained in this report that are not purely historical are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act. Forward-looking statements are often identified by the use of words such as, but not limited to, “anticipate,” “believe,” “can,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “project,” “seek,” “should,” “strategy,” “target,” “will,” “would” and similar expressions or variations intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are based on the beliefs and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management. Such forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other important factors that could cause actual results and the timing of certain events to differ materially from future results expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below. Furthermore, such forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report. Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements.
“Arcadia Biosciences,” “GoodWheat,” “GoodHemp,” “Zola coconut water,” “Soul Spring,” “ProVault” and “Saavy Naturals” are our registered trademarks in the United States and, in some cases, in certain other countries. This report may also contain trademarks, service marks, and trade names of other companies. Solely for convenience, the trademarks, service marks and trade names referred to in this report may appear without the ®, TM, or SM symbols, but such references do not constitute a waiver of any rights that might be associated with the respective trademarks, service marks, or trade names.
Overview
We are a producer and marketer of innovative, plant-based health and wellness products. Our history as a leader in science-based approaches to developing high value crop improvements, primarily in wheat, designed to enhance farm economics by improving the performance of crops in the field, as well as their value as food ingredients, health and wellness products, and their viability for industrial applications, has laid the foundation for our path forward. We have used non-GMO advanced breeding techniques to develop these proprietary innovations which we are now commercializing through the sales of seed and grain, food ingredients and products, hemp extracts, trait licensing and royalty agreements. The recent acquisition of the assets of Lief, EKO, and Zola, adds bath and body care products, CBD consumer products, as well as coconut water, to our portfolio of products.
Our commercial strategy is to satisfy consumer nutrition, health and wellness demands with the superior functional benefits our crops deliver directly from the farm, enabling us to share premium economics throughout the ag-food supply chain and to build a world-class estate of high value traits and varieties. The acquisition of the Lief, EKO and Zola brands allows us to broaden our reach within the health and wellness sector.
It is also estimated by the USDA, that approximately one-fifth of the FDA recommended calories consumed by people in the US are from wheat. Therefore, the market opportunity for nutritional improvements in wheat are significant not only because the wheat market itself is vast, but also because of the “share of stomach” wheat represents. Considering that most people today are not getting enough fiber or protein in their daily diets, the superior nutrient density of our non-GMO GoodWheat technology can improve the dietary intake of average consumers, by increasing their fiber and protein consumption without changing the way they eat. We believe this proprietary advantage gives GoodWheat the potential to become a global standard in wheat.
Components of Our Statements of Operations Data
Revenues
We derive our revenues from product sales, royalties, license fees, contract research agreements and government grant projects. Given our acute focus on selling our GoodWheat and Arcadia Wellness products, we do not intend to continue pursuing contract research agreements and government grant projects.
Product Revenues
Our product revenues consist primarily of sales of Arcadia Wellness products, GoodWheat grain, GLA products, and GoodHemp seeds. We recognize revenue from product sales when control of the product is transferred to third-party distributors and manufacturers, collectively “our customers,” which generally occurs upon delivery. Our revenues fluctuate depending on the timing of shipments of product to our customers and are reported net of estimated chargebacks, returns and losses.
License Revenues
Our license revenues to date consist of up-front, nonrefundable license fees, annual license fees, and subsequent milestone payments that we receive under our license agreements. Revenue generated from up-front license fees are recognized upon execution of the agreement. We recognize annual license fees when it is probable that a material reversal will not occur.
Milestone fees are variable consideration that is initially constrained and recognized only when it is probable that such amounts would not be reversed. The Company assesses when achievement of milestones are probable in order to determine the timing of revenue recognition for milestone fees. Milestones typically represent significant stages of development for our traits in a potential commercial product, such as achievement of specific technological targets, completion of field trials, filing with regulatory agencies, completion of the regulatory process, and commercial launch of a product containing our traits. Given the seasonality of agriculture and time required to progress from one milestone to the next, achievement of milestones is inherently uneven, and our license revenues are likely to fluctuate significantly from period to period.
Royalty Revenues
Our royalty revenues consist of amounts earned from the sale of commercial products that incorporate our traits by third parties. Our royalty revenues consist of a minimum annual royalty, offset by amounts earned from the sale of products. We recognize the minimum annual royalty on a straight-line basis over the year, and we recognize royalty revenue resulting from the sale of products when the third parties transfer control of the product to their customers, which generally occurs upon shipment. Our royalty revenues can fluctuate depending on the timing of shipments of product by the third parties to their customers.
Contract Research and Government Grant Revenues
Contract research and government grant revenues consist of amounts earned from performing contracted research primarily related to breeding programs or the genetic engineering of plants for third parties. Contract research revenue is accounted for as a single performance obligation for which revenues are recognized over time using the input method (e.g., costs incurred to date relative to the total estimated costs at completion).
Operating Expenses
Cost of Product Revenues
Cost of product revenues relates to the sale of Arcadia Wellness, GoodWheat, GoodHemp, and GLA products and consists of the cost of raw materials, including internal and third-party services costs related to procuring, processing, formulating, packaging and shipping our products, as well as in-licensing and royalty fees, any adjustments or write-downs to inventory or prepaid production costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in the discovery, development and testing of our products and products in development incorporating our traits. These expenses consist primarily of employee salaries and benefits, fees paid to subcontracted research providers, fees associated with in-licensing technology, land leased for field trials, chemicals and supplies, and other external expenses. These costs are expensed as incurred. Additionally, we are required from time to time to make certain milestone payments in connection with the development of technologies in-licensed from third parties. Our research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee costs, professional service fees, broker and sales commission fees, and overhead costs. Our selling, general, and administrative expenses may fluctuate from period to period. In connection with our commercialization activities for our consumer products, we expect to increase our investments in sales and marketing, including additional consulting fees.
Gain on sale of Verdeca
The gain on sale of Verdeca is the gain recognized for the sale our membership interests in the Verdeca joint venture to our partner Bioceres. See Note 11.
Loss on sale of Arcadia Spain
The loss on sale of Arcadia Spain is the loss recognized for the sale of the assets of our subsidiary Arcadia Spain. See Note 1.
Impairment of intangible assets
Impairments of intangible assets are recorded when the fair value of intangible assets drops below its carrying amount. See Note 2 and 9.
Impairment of goodwill
Impairments of goodwill are recorded when the fair value of the reporting unit drops below its carrying amount. See Note 2.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
Change in the fair value of contingent consideration is comprised of the fair value remeasurement of the liabilities associated with our contingent consideration.
Impairment of property and equipment, net
Impairment of property and equipment, net includes losses from tangible assets due to impairment or recoverability test charges to write down fixed assets to their fair value or recoverability value.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of contractual interest on notes payable relating to the purchase of company vehicles.
Other Income, net
Other income, net, consists of realized gains on corporate securities, interest income and the amortization of investment premium and discount on our cash and cash equivalents and investments.
Issuance and offering costs
Issuance and offering costs generally include placement agent, legal, advisory, accounting and filing fees related to financing transactions.
Change in the Estimated Fair Value of Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
Change in the estimated fair value of common stock warrant liabilities is comprised of the fair value remeasurement of the liabilities associated with our financing transactions.
Gain on extinguishment of PPP loan
The PPP loan amount forgiven has been recorded as gain on extinguishment of PPP loan, as the Company has been legally released from being the primary obligor. See Note 19.
Loss on Extinguishment of Warrant Liabilities
Loss on extinguishment of warrant liability is comprised of the difference between the reacquisition price and the carrying amount of the portion of the warrants associated with the warrant exercise transactions.
Offering Costs
Offering costs generally include placement agent, legal, advisory, accounting and filing fees, allocated to the common stock warrant liabilities.
Income Tax Provision
Our income tax provision has not been historically significant, as we have incurred losses since our inception. The provision for income taxes consists of state and foreign income taxes. Due to cumulative losses, we maintain a valuation allowance against our U.S. deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including but not limited to: earnings history, projected future outcomes, industry and market trends, and the nature of each of the deferred tax assets in assessing the extent to which a valuation allowance should be applied against our U.S. deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Product revenues accounted for 97% and 13% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $5.5 million, or 531%, increase in product revenues was primarily driven by $4.3 million of sales related to the newly acquired lines of products of Arcadia Wellness, plus higher sales of GoodWheat grain and GoodHemp seed.
License revenues accounted for 0% and 85% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $6.8 million decrease in license revenues is the result of amounts previously allocated to the licenses granted to Bioceres for certain intellectual property rights provided in connection with the November 2020 transaction. There were no license agreements executed in 2021.
Royalty revenues accounted for 3% and 1% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $93,000 increase of royalty revenues represents additional annual royalty fees earned.
Contract research and government grant revenues accounted for 0% and 1% of our total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $106,000, or 100%, decrease in contract research and
government grant revenues was driven by the completion of agreements and grants. Given our acute focus on selling our existing products, we do not intend to continue pursuing contract research agreements and government grant projects.
Operating Expenses (Income)
Cost of Product Revenues
Cost of product revenues increased by $3.5 million, or 67%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is mainly due to sales from the newly acquired lines of products within Arcadia Wellness, in addition to GoodWheat grain and GoodHemp seed sales. The increase was partially offset by $1.0 million lower inventory write-downs charged to cost of product revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses decreased by $4.1 million, or 51%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was driven by the Company pivoting its focus to commercialization, which led to lower employee-related expenses as we right-sized our research teams, along with the the absence of the expenses related to Verdeca.
Gain on sale of Verdeca
The gain on sale of Verdeca decreased by $8.8 million as we sold our membership interests in the Verdeca joint venture to our partner Bioceres in 2020. See Note 11.
Loss on sale of Arcadia Spain
The loss on sale of Arcadia Spain increased by $497,000 due to the transaction executed in November 2021 in which we sold our wholly owned subsidiary to a European partner. See Note 1.
Impairment of intangible assets
We recognized an impairment of intangible assets in the amount of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The impairment charges were primarily the result of lower margins in our wellness products due to unfavorable product mix and higher freight costs that have a significant impact in the near-term. A volatile economic climate and higher than normal inflation were also contributing factors, in addition to a decline in the hemp seed market forecasted sales. No impairment losses were recorded in the same period of 2020. See Note 2 and 9.
Impairment of goodwill
We recognized an impairment of goodwill in the amount of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The impairment charge was primarily the result of weakness in our newly acquired consumer product margins, combined with a volatile economic climate and higher than normal inflation. No impairment losses were recorded in the same period of 2020. See Note 2.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
The change in fair value of contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the Industrial Seed Innovations ("ISI") contingent consideration remeasurement that resulted in a decrease of the liability in the amount of $210,000. See Note 6 and 17. There was no change in fair value of contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Impairment of property and equipment, net
We recorded write-downs of fixed assets in the amount of $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The majority of this amount was because Arcadia and Legacy mutually agreed to wind down the cultivation activities of Archipelago, due to regulatory challenges and a saturated hemp market. As a result, the Company assessed Archipelago’s fixed assets for impairment, and recorded write-downs in the amount of $1.4 million for the
year ended December 31, 2021. An additional fixed assets impairment in the amount of $100,000 was recorded for other fixed assets determined to have no future economic benefit. See Note 5. No write-downs of fixed assets were recorded in 2020.
Selling, General, and Administrative
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased by $6.5 million, or 39%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by selling expenses and other general and support costs related to the acquired businesses, as well as acquisition-related investment banker success fees, legal diligence and transaction fees. We have also increased commercial and marketing personnel and consulting activities in preparation for new product and channel launches.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $20,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, 60% lower compared to the amount recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the satisfaction of notes payable agreements during 2021. There was $47,000 of interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, increased by $9.4 million, or 1267%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to the $10.2 million realized gain of corporate securities of Bioceres recorded in June 2021. See Note 6. No realized gains of corporate securities were recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020, as the prior year's other income, net balance mainly consisted of the unrealized gain of the same corporate securities in the amount of $656,000.
Gain on extinguishment of PPP loan
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we were notified by the lender that the SBA had forgiven the original PPP loan amount in full, resulting in a $1.1 million gain on the extinguishment of the PPP loan. See Note 19.
Change in the Estimated Fair Value of Common Stock Warrant Liabilities
Change in the estimated fair value of common stock warrant liabilities resulted in income of $8.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the fair value remeasurement of the common stock warrant liabilities driven by the change in the stock price, risk-free rates and volatility as of December 31, 2021 compared to the change for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Extinguishment of Warrant Liability
In connection with the May and July 2020 Warrant Exercise Transactions, the Company recognized a loss on extinguishment of warrant liabilities of approximately $635,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no such transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Issuance and offering costs
Offering costs increased by $769,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and were comprised of placement agent fees, placement agent warrants, and legal and accounting fees allocated to the stock warrant liabilities recorded with the January 2021 private placement financing transaction. There were no issuance and offering costs incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
The income tax provision resulted in a $2,000 expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a benefit of $124,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. In the prior year, purchase accounting deferred tax liabilities related to the ISI acquisition, enabled the realization of a portion of the existing deferred tax assets, thus allowing for a reduction in the valuation allowance in the amount of $107,000.
Seasonality
We and our commercial partners operate in different geographies around the world and conduct field trials used for data generation, which must be conducted during the appropriate growing seasons for particular crops and markets. Often, there is only one crop-growing season per year for certain crops and markets. Similarly, climate conditions and other factors that may influence the sales of our products may vary from season to season and year to year. In particular, weather conditions, including natural disasters such as heavy rains, hurricanes, hail, floods, tornadoes, freezing conditions, drought or fire, may affect the timing and outcome of field trials, which may delay milestone payments and the commercialization of products incorporating our seed traits. In the future, sales of commercial products that incorporate our seed traits will vary based on crop growing seasons and weather patterns within particular regions. Demand for our consumer body care products tends to vary with major holidays and demand for coconut water products is generally higher in the summer months.
The level of seasonality in our business overall is difficult to evaluate at this time due to our relatively limited number of commercialized products, our expansion into new geographical markets and our introduction of new products and traits.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
We have funded our operations primarily with the net proceeds from our private and public offerings of our equity securities and debt, as well as proceeds from the sale of our products and payments under license agreements, contract research agreements and government grants. Our principal use of cash is to fund our operations, which are primarily focused on commercializing our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $28.7 million. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had net losses of $16.1 million and $6.0 million, respectively, and net cash used in operations of $25.9 million and $30.2 million, respectively.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will not be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months from the issuance date of our 2021 financial statements, and thus raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
We may seek to raise additional funds through debt or equity financings, if necessary. We may also consider entering into additional partner arrangements. Any sale of additional equity would result in dilution to our stockholders. Our incurrence of debt would result in debt service obligations, and the instruments governing our debt could provide for additional operating and financing covenants that would restrict our operations. If we do require additional funds and are not able to secure adequate additional funding, we may be forced to reduce our spending, extend payment terms with our suppliers, liquidate assets, or suspend or curtail planned development programs. Any of these actions could materially harm our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $25.9 million. Our net loss of $16.1 million, non-cash charges including $1.5 million of stock-based compensation, $1.3 million of lease amortization, $3.6 million of write-downs of inventory, $1.5 million of impairment of property and equipment, $769,000 of issuance and offering costs, $1.6 million of impairment of goodwill, $3.3 million of impairment of
intangible assets, and $929,000 of depreciation were offset by $1.7 million adjustments in our working capital accounts, $10.2 million of realized gain on corporate securities, $8.9 million for the change in fair value of common stock warrant liabilities, $210,000 of other non-cash income from the change in fair value of contingent consideration, and $1.3 million of operating lease payments.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $30.2 million. Our net loss of $6.0 million, adjustments in our working capital accounts of $11.5 million, gain on sale of Verdeca of $8.8 million, corporate securities received in exchange for license agreement of $4.3 million, change in fair value of common stock warrant liabilities of $6.6 million, operating lease payments of $910,000, unrealized gain on corporate securities of $656,000 and net amortization of investment premium of $44,000 were partially offset by non-cash charges of $2.0 million for stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization of $662,000, lease amortization of $1.0 million, loss on extinguishment of warrant liability of $635,000, as well as $4.3 million of inventory write-downs.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $16.6 million primarily consisted of $21.8 million of proceeds from sales of investments, partially offset by $4.3 million of acquisitions, and $1.0 million in purchases of property and equipment.
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $17.3 million primarily consisted of $18.3 million of proceeds from sales and maturities of investments and $3.2 million of proceeds from the sale of Verdeca, partially offset by $2.3 million in purchases of property and equipment, $1.3 million of purchases of investments and $500,000 of acquisitions, net of cash acquired.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $21.9 million consisted of proceeds from the issuance of common stock relating to the January 2021 private placement financing transaction of $25.1 million of gross proceeds, capital contributions from the non-controlling interest in our joint venture of $750,000, and proceeds from the purchase of ESPP shares of $39,000, which were offset by payments of transaction costs related to the January 2021 private placement of $1.9 million and principal payments on debt of $2.1 million.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $20.6 million consisted of proceeds from the exercise of warrants of $9.4 million, proceeds from the issuance of stock and warrants relating to the December 2020 Offering of $8.0 million, proceeds from borrowings of $3.1 million, capital contributions from the non-controlling interest in our joint venture of $1.6 million and proceeds from the purchase of ESPP shares of $51,000. Partially offsetting these proceeds were payments of offering costs totaling $652,000 for the December 2020 Offering, as well payments of transaction costs relating to extinguishment of warrant liability of $863,000.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, including the use of structured finance, special purpose entities or variable interest entities, other than Verdeca, a joint venture sold in November 2020. See Note 11.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We consider our critical accounting policies and estimates to be revenue recognition, determination of the provision for income taxes, stock-based compensation, impairments of long-lived assets such as intangible assets and goodwill, impairment of property and equipment, and net realizable value of inventory.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to customers at an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. See Note 2 for further detail on each of the below revenue streams.
We generally recognize product revenues once passage of title has occurred, which is generally upon delivery. Shipping and handling costs charged to customers are recorded as revenues and included in cost of product revenues at the time the sale is recognized.
We have determined that, at the inception of each license agreement, there is only one deliverable for the license for access to and assistance with the development of the specified intellectual property. We recognize revenue up-front and annual license fees in full when it is deemed probable to be earned.
We recognize royalty revenue when the Company can reasonably determine the amounts earned.
We recognize revenue related to milestone payments when it is probable that such amounts would not be reversed.
Contract research revenue consists of amounts earned from performing contracted research activities for third parties. Activities performed are related to breeding programs or the genetic engineering of plants and are subject to an executed agreement. We generally recognize fees for research activities over the contractually specified performance period.
Grant revenues are recognized as eligible research and development expenses are incurred, using a proportional performance recognition methodology.
Determination of the provision for income taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and the tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation expense related to the employee stock purchase plan and stock options based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, net of estimated forfeitures. We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards of $1.5 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In determining the fair value of stock-based awards, we use the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and assumptions discussed below. Each of these inputs is subjective and generally requires significant judgment to determine.
Expected Term-The expected term is the estimated period of time outstanding for stock options granted and was estimated based on a simplified method allowed by the SEC due to insufficient historical data, and defines the term as the average of the contractual term of the options and the weighted-average vesting period for all open employee awards.
Expected Volatility-The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the Company’s shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest rate of U.S. Treasuries of comparable maturities on the date the options were granted.
Expected Dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
For stock options and other equity awards, our board of directors determine the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the NASDAQ Stock Market on the date of grant.
In addition to the Black-Scholes assumptions, we estimate our forfeiture rate based on an analysis of our actual forfeitures and will continue to evaluate the adequacy of the forfeiture rate based on actual forfeiture experience, analysis of employee turnover behavior, and other factors. The impact from any forfeiture rate adjustment would be recognized in full in the period of adjustment and if the actual number of future forfeitures differs from our estimates, we might be required to record adjustments to stock-based compensation in future periods.
Impairments of long-lived intangible assets and goodwill
The Company evaluates if events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful life of long-lived assets, such as identifiable intangible assets and goodwill, may warrant revision or that the remaining balance of these assets may not be recoverable. In evaluating for recoverability, the Company estimates the future undiscounted cash flows for intangible assets, and discounted cash flows for goodwill, expected to result from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. In the event that the balance of any asset exceeds the future undiscounted or discounted cash flow estimate, impairment is recognized based on the excess of the carrying amounts of the asset above its estimated fair value.
Impairments of property and equipment
The Company evaluates if events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful life of property and equipment may warrant revision or that the remaining balance of these assets may not be recoverable. In evaluating for recoverability, the Company estimates the future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the assets and their eventual disposition. In the event that the balance of any asset exceeds the future undiscounted cash flow estimate, impairment is recognized based on the excess of the carrying amounts of the asset above its estimated fair value.
Net realizable value of inventories
Inventory costs are tracked on a lot-identified basis, valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value and are included as cost of product revenues when sold. We compare the cost of inventories with market value and write down inventories to net realizable value, if lower. We write down inventory when conditions indicate that the net realizable value may be less than cost due to physical deterioration, obsolescence, changes in price levels or other factors. Additionally, we provide reserves for excess and slow-moving inventory to its estimated net realizable value. The inventory write-downs are based upon estimates about future demand from our customers and distributors and market conditions. Future events that could significantly influence our judgment and related estimates include conditions in target markets, introduction of new products or changes to current or future competitor products.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For discussions of the adoption and potential impacts of recently issued accounting standards, refer to Note 3 - Recent Accounting Pronouncements.