Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read this discussion and analysis in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain amounts may not foot due to rounding. Certain information in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described under the sections entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item I, Part 1A. “Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Overview
Rocket Lab is an end-to-end space company with an established track record of mission success. We deliver reliable launch services, spacecraft design services, spacecraft components, spacecraft manufacturing and other spacecraft and on-orbit management solutions that make it faster, easier and more affordable to access space.
While our business has historically been centered on the development of small-class launch vehicles and the related sale of launch services, we are currently innovating in the areas of medium-class launch vehicles and launch services, space systems design and manufacturing, on-orbit management solutions, and space data applications. Each of these initiatives addresses a critical component of the end-to-end solution and our value proposition for the space economy:
•Launch Services is the design, manufacture, and launch of orbital rockets to deploy payloads to various Earth orbits and interplanetary destinations.
•Space Systems is the design and manufacture of spacecraft components and spacecraft program management services, space data applications and mission operations.
Electron is our orbital small launch vehicle that was designed from the ground up to accommodate a high launch rate business model to meet the growing and dynamic needs of our customers for small launch services. Since its maiden launch in 2017, Electron has become the leading small spacecraft launch vehicle delivering 109 spacecraft to orbit for government and commercial customers across 20 successful missions through December 31, 2021. In 2021, Electron was the second most frequently launched rocket by companies operating in the United States and established Rocket Lab as the fourth most frequent launcher globally. Our launch services program has seen us develop many industry-leading innovations, including 3D printed electric turbo-pump rocket engines, fully carbon composite first stage fuel tanks, a private orbital launch complex, a rocket stage that can be configured to convert into a highly capable spacecraft on orbit, and the potential ability to successfully recover a stage from space, providing a path to reusability.
In March 2021, we announced plans to develop our reusable-ready medium-capacity Neutron launch vehicle which will increase the payload capacity of our space launch vehicles to approximately 8,000 kg, for launches to low Earth orbit and lighter payloads into higher orbits. Neutron will be tailored for commercial and U.S. government constellation launches and capable of human space flight, enabling us to provide crew and cargo resupply to the International Space Station. Neutron will also provide a dedicated service to orbit for larger civil, defense and commercial payloads that need a level of schedule control and high-flight cadence not available on large and heavy lift rocket rideshare programs. Neutron is expected to have the capability of launching nearly all of the spacecraft that we expect to be launched through 2029 and we expect to be able to leverage Electron’s flight heritage, various vehicle subsystems designs, launch complexes and ground station infrastructure.
Our space systems initiative is centered on the design, manufacture, and sale of the Photon family of small spacecraft, which are configurable for a range of low Earth orbit, medium Earth orbit, geosynchronous orbit and interplanetary missions. Our Photon family of spacecraft enable us to offer an end-to-end mission solution encompassing launch, spacecraft, ground services and mission operations to provide customers with streamlined access to orbit with Rocket Lab as a single mission partner.
Our space systems initiative is also supported by the design and manufacture of a range of components for spacecraft, including reaction wheels, star trackers, magnetic torque rods and batteries and has additional products in development to serve a wide variety of sub-system functions. We entered this market with our acquisitions of leading spacecraft components manufacturers Sinclair Interplanetary, Planetary Systems Corporation, SolAero Holdings and aerospace engineering firm ASI Aerospace LLC, which brought incremental vertically-integrated capabilities for our own spacecraft and also enabled Rocket Lab to deliver high-volume manufacturing of critical spacecraft components and software solutions at scale prices to the broader spacecraft merchant market.
Reorganization and Public Company Costs
Rocket Lab USA, Inc. entered into a merger agreement (the “Agreement”) with Vector Acquisition Corporation (“Vector”), on March 1, 2021, as amended by Amendment No. 1 thereto, dated May 7, 2021 and Amendment No. 2 thereto, dated June 25, 2021. The transactions contemplated by the terms of the Agreement were completed on August 25, 2021 (the “Business Combination”), in conjunction with which Vector changed its name to Rocket Lab USA, Inc.
As a consequence of the Business Combination, we are a Nasdaq listed company, which requires us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Additionally, we expect our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with ongoing activities as we:
•increase our investment in marketing, advertising, sales and distribution infrastructure for our existing and future products and services;
•develop additional new products and enhancements to existing products;
•obtain, maintain and improve our operational, financial and management performance;
•hire additional personnel;
•obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•operate as a public company.
Recent Developments
Business Combinations
Merger with Vector Acquisition Corporation
On August 25, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we consummated the previously announced merger pursuant to Merger Agreement. Vector filed a notice of deregistration and necessary accompanying documents with the Cayman Islands Registrar of Companies, and a certificate of incorporation and a certificate of corporate domestication with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware, under which Vector was domesticated and continued as a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”), changing its name to “Vector Acquisition Delaware Corporation” (“Vector Delaware”). As contemplated by the Merger Agreement, Merger Sub merged with and into Vector Delaware, with the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceasing and Vector Delaware being the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of Legacy Rocket Lab (the “First Merger”) and immediately following the First Merger, Legacy Rocket Lab merged with and into Vector Delaware with Vector Delaware being the surviving corporation in the merger (the “Second Merger,” and, together with the First Merger and the Domestication, the “Business Combination”). The Business Combination was unanimously approved by the boards of directors of each of Vector and Legacy Rocket Lab.
In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, we changed our name from Vector Acquisition Corporation to Rocket Lab USA, Inc. The “Post Combination Company” following the Business Combination is Rocket Lab USA, Inc.
Acquisition of ASI
On October 12, 2021, we entered into a membership interest purchase agreement (the “ASI Purchase Agreement”) with ASI Aerospace LLC (“ASI”), Willis Vern Holdings, Inc., the shareholders of ASI, and John A. Cuseo, as shareholder representative, pursuant to which we agreed to purchase 100% of the issued and outstanding equity interests of ASI for aggregate consideration of $40 million, subject to customary adjustments at closing for cash, working capital, transaction expenses and indebtedness, and amounts placed in escrow. The ASI Purchase Agreement also includes an additional potential earn out payment of up to $5.5 million based on achievement of certain performance metrics for the business in its fiscal year ending December 31, 2021. The ASI Purchase Agreement contains representations, warranties and indemnification provisions customary for transactions of this kind. In connection with the acquisition, we entered into customary offer letters and non-competition and non-solicitation agreements with certain key employees of ASI. The transactions contemplated by the ASI Purchase Agreement closed on October 12, 2021.
Acquisition of PSC
On November 15, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “PSC Merger Agreement”), by and among us, Platinum Merger Sub, Inc. (“PSC Merger Sub”), Planetary Systems Corporation (“PSC”), and Michael Whalen as shareholder representative, which provides for, among other things, the merger of PSC Merger Sub with and into PSC, with PSC being the surviving corporation of the merger and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of us. Pursuant to the terms of the PSC Merger Agreement, all of the issued and outstanding shares of PSC will be cancelled in exchange for aggregate consideration of up to approximately $42 million in cash, 1,720,841 shares of the Company’s common stock, and up to 956,023 shares of our common stock that are subject to a performance based earn-out, subject to customary adjustments at closing for cash, working capital, transaction expenses and indebtedness, and amounts held back by us (the “PSC Acquisition”). The PSC Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and indemnification provisions customary for transactions of this kind. In connection with the PSC Acquisition, we have entered into customary offer letters or employment agreements with certain key employees of PSC. We have also agreed to file a resale registration statement with respect to the common stock issued or issuable in the PSC Acquisition prior to the six-month anniversary of the date of the PSC Merger Agreement. The transactions contemplated by the PSC Merger Agreement closed on November 30, 2021.
Acquisition of SolAero
On December 10, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “SolAero Merger Agreement”), by and among us, Supernova Acquisition Corp. (“SolAero Merger Sub”), SolAero Holdings, Inc. (“SolAero”), and Fortis Advisors LLC as stockholder representative, which provides for, among other things, the merger of SolAero Merger Sub with and into SolAero, with SolAero being the surviving corporation of the merger and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of us. Pursuant to the terms of the SolAero Merger Agreement, all of the issued and outstanding shares of SolAero will be cancelled in exchange for aggregate consideration of $80 million in cash (the “SolAero Merger Consideration”), subject to customary adjustments at closing for cash and cash equivalents, working capital, transaction expenses and indebtedness (the “SolAero Acquisition”). In addition, $3.6 million of the SolAero Merger Consideration will be placed into escrow by us in order to secure recovery of any Adjustment Amount (as defined in the SolAero Merger Agreement) and as security against indemnity claims. The SolAero Merger Agreement contains representations, warranties and indemnification provisions customary for transactions of this kind. In connection with the SolAero Acquisition, we have entered into customary employment or consulting agreements with certain key employees of SolAero. The transactions contemplated by the SolAero Merger Agreement closed on January 18, 2022.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
COVID-19 Considerations
In December 2019, COVID-19 surfaced in Wuhan, China. In response, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) declared a global emergency on January 30, 2020, and several countries initiated travel restrictions, closed borders and implemented social distancing directives, including “shelter-in-place” orders. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. As a result of the pandemic, the United States and New Zealand governments shut down various sectors of their respective economies. In the United States, we were deemed an essential service and we not required to shut down our United States’ based operations. In New Zealand, we had to delay certain scheduled launches to a later date. In addition to existing travel restrictions, some locales have imposed and continue to impose prolonged quarantines and further restrict travel, which has, at certain times, significantly impacted the ability of our employees to get to their places of work to produce products, made it such that we are unable to obtain certain long lead time components on a timely basis or at a cost-effective price, and significantly hampered our customers from traveling to our launch facilities to prepare payloads for launch. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and with the health and safety of all our employees and their families in mind, we took and continue to take precautionary measures intended to help minimize the risks of the virus, including temporarily requiring some employees to work remotely and implementing social distancing protocols for all work conducted onsite. In addition, we suspended non-essential travel worldwide for employees and is discouraging employee attendance at other gatherings.
The extent of COVID-19’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape. At this time, it is not possible to determine the magnitude of the overall impact of COVID-19 on our business. However, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, liquidity, results of operations and cash flows.
Rocket Lab has significant operations in Auckland, New Zealand, and while some employees were able to continue their work remotely, certain business operations that require direct labor and physical presence, such as vehicle integration and testing, were suspended during this and will be again under any other Level 4 Alerts. On December 2, 2021, New Zealand replaced the Alert Level system with the COVID-19 Protection Framework. The COVID-19 Protection Framework settings allow businesses to open and operate with greater flexibility while minimizing the virus’ spread. The extent of the COVID-19 pandemic’s effect on our operational and financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration, spread and intensity of the pandemic, all of which are uncertain and difficult to predict considering the rapidly evolving landscape.
Ability to sell additional launch services, space systems service and spacecraft components to new and existing customers
Our results will be impacted by our ability to sell our launch services, space systems services, and spacecraft components to new and existing customers. We have successfully launched Electron 20 times delivering 109 spacecraft to orbit through December 31, 2021. Our spacecraft components have flown on more than 100 spacecraft and our family of Photon spacecraft has been selected for missions to the Moon, Mars and Venus. Our growth opportunity is dependent on our ability to expand our addressable launch services market with larger volumetric and higher mass payloads capabilities of our recently announced medium-capacity Neutron launch vehicle, which will address large commercial and government constellation launch opportunities. Our growth opportunity is also dependent on our ability to win spacecraft constellation missions and expand our portfolio of strategic spacecraft components. Our ability to sell additional products to existing customers is a key part of our success, as follow-on purchases indicate customer satisfaction and decrease the likelihood of competitive substitution. To sell additional products and services to new and existing customers, we will need to continue to invest significant resources in our products and services.
Ability to improve profit margins and scale our business
We intend to continue to invest in initiatives to improve our operating leverage and significantly ramp production. We believe continued reduction in costs and an increase in production volumes will enable the cost of launch vehicles to decline and expand our gross margins. Our ability to achieve our production-efficiency objectives could be negatively impacted by a variety of factors including, among other things, lower-than-expected facility utilization rates, manufacturing and production cost overruns, increased purchased material costs and unexpected supply-chain quality issues or interruptions.
Government expenditures and private enterprise investment into the space economy
Government expenditures and private enterprise investment has fueled the growth in our target markets. We expect the continued availability of government expenditures and private investment for our customers to help fund purchases of our products and services will remain. This is an important factor in our company’s growth prospects.
Key Metrics and Select Financial Data
We monitor the following key financial and operational metrics that assist us in evaluating our business, measuring our performance, identifying trends and making strategic decisions.
Launch Vehicle Build-Rate and Launch Cadence
We built approximately eight launch vehicles in 2020 and approximately eight launch vehicles in 2021. Although we experienced a negative impact in 2020 and 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 shutdowns and restrictions on our operations discussed in more detail above under “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance-Covid-19 Considerations,” we believe that the growth in build rate prior to such COVID-19 restrictions is a positive indicator of our ability to scale our manufacturing operations in support of our anticipated growth rate in the coming years.
We launched seven vehicles in 2020 and launched six vehicles in 2021. The decrease in launches in 2021 was due in part to the impact the COVID-19 shutdowns and restrictions had on our operations. Such impact is discussed in more detail above under “Key Factors Affecting Our Performance-Covid-19 Considerations.” We believe the number of launches is an indicator of our ability to convert mission awards into revenue in a timely manner and demonstrates the scalability of our launch operations. Growth rates between launches and total launch service revenue are not perfectly correlated because total revenue is affected by other variables, such as the revenue per launch, which can vary considerably based on factors such as unique orbit and insertion requirements, payload handling needs, launch location, time sensitivity of mission completion and other factors. Although we experienced a negative impact in 2020 and 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 shutdowns and restrictions, we believe that the growth in launch rate prior to such COVID-19 restrictions is a positive indicator of our ability to scale our launch operations in support of our anticipated growth rate in revenue in the coming years.
Revenue Growth
We generated $62.2 million and $35.2 million in revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a year-on-year increase in revenue of approximately 77%. This year-on-year increase primarily resulted from strength in our organic space system products and services, a higher average contractual price per launch service and initial contribution from acquisitions that closed in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Revenue Value Per Launch
Revenue value per launch represents the average revenue per launch contract attributable to launches that occurred during a period, regardless of when the revenue was recognized. Revenue value per launch can be a useful metric to provide insight into general competitiveness and price sensitivity in the marketplace. Revenue value per launch can vary considerably, based on factors such as unique orbit and insertion requirements, payload handling needs, launch location, time sensitivity of mission completion and other factors, and as such may not provide absolute clarity with regards to pricing and competitive dynamics in the marketplace.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our revenue value per launch was $8.1 million and $5.5 million, respectively. Meanwhile, cost per launch was $9.2 million and $6.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cost per launch in the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by stock based compensation charges related to the Business Combination as well as lower manufacturing absorption driven by COVID-19 impacts.
Backlog
Backlog represents future revenues that we would recognize in connection with the completion of all contracts and purchase orders that have been entered into by our customers but have not yet been fulfilled, excluding any customer options for future products or services that have not yet been exercised. Contracts for launch services and spacecraft builds typically include termination rights that may be exercised by customers upon advanced notice and payment of a specified termination fee. As of December 31, 2021, our backlog totaled $241.5 million. We expect to recognize approximately 60% of our backlog as of such date over the next 12 months and the remainder recognized thereafter.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenues are derived from a combination of long-term fixed price contracts for launch services and spacecraft builds, and purchase order spacecraft components sales. Revenues from long-term contracts are recognized using either the “point-in-time” or “over-time” method of revenue recognition. Point-in-time revenue recognition results in cash payments being initially accrued to the balance sheet as deferred revenue as contractual milestones are accomplished and then recognized as revenue once the final contractual obligation is completed. Over-time revenue recognition is based on an input measure of progress based on costs incurred compared to estimated total costs at completion. Each project has a contractual revenue value and an estimated cost. The over-time revenue is recognized based on the percentage of the total project cost that has been realized.
Estimating future revenues and associated costs and profit is a process requiring a high degree of management judgment, including management’s assumptions regarding our future operational performance as well as general economic conditions. Frequently, the period of performance of a contract extends over a long period of time and, as such, revenue recognition and our profitability from a particular contract may be affected to the extent that estimated costs to complete are revised, delivery schedules are delayed, performance-based milestones are not achieved or progress under a contract is otherwise impeded. Accordingly, our recorded revenues and operating profit from period to period can fluctuate significantly depending on when the point-in-time or over-time contractual obligations are achieved. In the event cost estimates indicate a loss on a contract, the total amount of such loss is recorded in the period in which the loss is first estimated.
For a description of our revenue recognition policies, see the section titled “- Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.”
Cost of revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of direct material and labor costs, manufacturing overhead, other personnel-related expenses, which include salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, reserves for estimated warranty costs, freight expense and depreciation expense. Cost of revenues also includes charges to write-down the carrying value of inventory when it exceeds its estimated net realizable value, including on-hand inventory that is either obsolete or in excess of forecasted demand. We expect our cost of revenues to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we sell more launch services, space systems and components. As we grow into our current capacity and execute on cost-reduction initiatives, we expect our cost of revenues as a percentage of revenue to decrease over time.
Because direct labor costs and manufacturing overhead comprise more than 60% of cost of revenues, increasing our production rate resulting in greater absorption of these costs is our most critical cost reduction initiative. Increasing our production rate is a cross-functional effort involving manufacturing, engineering, supply chain and finance.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists primarily of personnel-related expenses, consulting and contractor expenses, validation and testing expense, prototype parts and materials and depreciation expense. We intend to continue to make significant investments in developing new products and enhancing existing products. Research and development expense will be variable relative to the number of products that are in development, validation or testing. However, we expect it to decline as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses for our sales, marketing, supply chain, finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel, as well as the costs of customer service, information technology, professional services insurance, travel, allocated overhead and other marketing, communications and administrative expenses. We will continue to actively promote our products and therefore we expect to incur expenses related to sales and marketing. We also expect to further invest in our corporate organization and incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including increased legal and accounting costs, investor relations costs, higher insurance premiums and compliance costs. As a result, we expect that selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods but decline as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Interest (expense) income, net
Interest expense consists primarily of interest expense incurred on debt and interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments balances.
Gain (loss) on foreign exchange
Gain (loss) on foreign exchange relates to currency fluctuations that generate foreign exchange gains or losses on invoices denominated in currencies other than the United States (“U.S.”) Dollar.
Change in fair value of liability classified warrants
Change in fair value of liability classified warrants relates to changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations information and data as a percentage of revenue for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenue increased by $27.1 million, or 77%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Launch services revenue was $39.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $5.9 million, or 18%, primarily due to higher content per launch service agreement for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Space systems revenue was $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $21.2 million, or 1,021%, primarily due to strength in our organic space system products and services and initial contribution from acquisitions that closed in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $17.2 million, or 37%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of revenues was driven by a step-up related to our Business Combination and vesting of restricted stock units in stock-based compensation of $9.6 million, initial contribution from ASI and PSC and lower production utilization due to COVID-19 related impacts during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased to 103% of total revenue from 134% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to an increase in space system revenues, which are more profitable then launch revenues, partially offset by the aforementioned step-up of stock-based compensation expense and COVID-19 related impacts.
Research and Development, Net
Research and development expense increased by $22.6 million, or 118%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a step-up related to our Business Combination and vesting of restricted stock units in stock-based compensation of $8.8 million, Neutron development and increased labor and prototype spend focused on broadening our spacecraft component product portfolio.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $34.4 million, or 143%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $19.6 million increase in a step-up related to our Business Combination and vesting of restricted stock units in stock-based compensation and redemption compensation expense, increased costs associated with being a public company including higher staff costs and third party services, and deal related transaction costs.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
Interest expense increased by $6.4 million, or 2,836%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to borrowings under our secured term loan agreement.
Gain (Loss) on Foreign Exchange
Loss on foreign exchange increased by $3.0 million, or 123%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to fluctuations in the foreign exchange of New Zealand Dollar and Canadian Dollar as compared to the U.S. Dollar.
Change in Fair Value of Liability Classified Warrants
Change in fair value of liability classified warrants expense increased by $12.9 million, or 533%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of the change in fair value of liability classified warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense increased by $1.0 million, or 527%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to bank fees related to our term loan initiation with Hercules and the termination of the SVB term loan.
Benefit (Provision) for Income Taxes
We recorded income tax benefit of $7.5 million and income tax provision of $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The annual effective tax rate was 6.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to (0.9)% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The annual effective tax rate was lower than the federal statutory rate due primarily to a full valuation allowance in the United States and was partially offset by recurring items such as foreign taxes based on local country statutory rates, excess tax benefits related to share-based compensation, and foreign withholding taxes, as well as by discrete items that may occur in any given year but are not consistent from year to year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have funded our operations with proceeds from sales of our capital stock, bank debt, research and development grant proceeds, and cash flows from the sale of our products and services. As of December 31, 2021, we had $691.0 million of cash and cash equivalents. Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are investment in new products and technologies, the expansion of existing manufacturing facilities, working capital, debt service, acquisitions of complementary businesses, products or technologies and general corporate needs. Historically, these cash requirements have been met through the net proceeds we received through private sales of equity securities, borrowings under our credit facilities, net proceeds received in the Business Combination and payments received from customers.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and payments from customers will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next twelve months, although we may choose to take advantage of opportunistic capital raising or refinancing transactions at any time. We will continue to invest in increasing production and expanding our product offerings through acquisitions.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our launch cadence, traction in the market with our space systems offerings, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support product development efforts, the introduction of new and enhanced products, the continuing market adoption of our products, the timing and extent of additional capital expenditures to invest in existing and new office spaces and the number of acquisitions of complementary businesses, products or technologies we pursue, if any. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued product innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations and financial condition.
Indebtedness
Hercules Capital Secured Term Loan
On June 10, 2021, the Company entered into a $100 million secured term loan agreement with Hercules Capital, Inc. (the “Hercules Capital Secured Term Loan”) and borrowed the full amount under the secured term loan agreement. The term loan has a maturity date of June 1, 2024 and is secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company. Payments due for the term loan are interest-only until the maturity date with interest payable monthly in arrears. The outstanding principal bears (i) cash interest at the greater of (a) 8.15% or (b) 8.15% plus the prime rate minus 3.25% and (ii) payment-in-kind interest of 1.25% which is accrued and added to the outstanding principal balance. Prepayment of the outstanding principal is permitted under the loan agreement and subject to certain prepayment fees. In connection with the secured term loan, the Company paid an initial facility charge of $1 million and the Company will be required to pay an end of term charge of $3.25 million upon repayment of the loan. The secured term loan agreement contains customary representations, warranties, non-financial covenants, and events of default. The Company was in compliance with all debt covenants related to its long-term borrowings as of December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, there was $100.1 million outstanding under the Hercules Capital Secured Term Loan, of which $2.8 million was classified as current in the Company’s condensed consolidated balance sheets, with the remainder classified as a long-term borrowing. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no availability under the Hercules Capital Secured Term Loan.
In connection with the $100 million Hercules Capital Secured Term Loan, the Company repaid the $15 million advance under the SVB Revolving Line and Term Loan Line and terminated the Loan and Security Agreement (see below).
Revolving Line and Term Loan Line
On December 23, 2020, the Company entered into a Loan and Security Agreement (the “Loan and Security Agreement”) with Silicon Valley Bank for a maximum of $35 million in financing which included a warrant to purchase 121,689 shares of common stock at a price of $1.28 per share (see Note 11, Warrants to our condensed consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report). The $35 million may be drawn upon utilizing the Revolving Line and Term Loan subject to certain terms and conditions. On May 13, 2021, the Company borrowed $15 million as a Term Loan advance under its Loan and Security Agreement. On June 10, 2021, the Company repaid the $15 million as a Term Loan advance under its Loan and Security Agreement upon funding of the Hercules Capital Secured Term Loan and the Revolving Line was closed.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $71.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $117.3 million in net loss, $53.5 million in non-cash expense and $8.0 million in cash used in operating assets and liabilities. Included in the non-cash expense are $32.6 million in stock-based compensation expense, $15.3 million in liability-classified warrant expense and $10.9 million in depreciation and amortization. Included in the cash used in operating assets and liabilities are a $12.7 million increase in inventory, a $10.5 million increase in prepaids and other current assets and a $7.8 million increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by a $28.1 million increase in deferred revenue.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $92.1 million was driven by cash paid for the ASI and PSC acquisitions of $66.4 million and capital equipment and infrastructure investments of $25.7 million. These investments included the build of the FCL and lab areas in Long Beach, California, which will be used to support classified government programs, Launch Complex 1 in Mahia, New Zealand, where we have now completed our second launch pad and are in process of adding additional support facilities to support launch operations and safety, and our propulsion development and test facility near Auckland, New Zealand, which consolidates and supports all Curie engine development and hot fire testing.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $799.9 million was primarily related to the closing of our Business Combination with Vector and PIPE proceeds of $728.3 million, $98.9 million in a long-term secured term loan, $3.1 million from the exercise of stock options partially offset by $30.4 million in the repurchase of shares and options from management.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We believe that the following accounting policies involve a high degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of our other significant accounting policies. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting standards generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those financial statements and accompanying notes. Although we believe that the estimates we use are reasonable, due to the inherent uncertainty involved in making those estimates, actual results reported in future periods could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from launch services and space systems. Launch services may be provided as a mission dedicated to a single customer or as a rideshare arrangement with multiple spacecraft from multiple customers. Space systems revenue is comprised of space engineering, program management, spacecraft components, spacecraft manufacturing and mission operations.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised product or service is transferred to our customers at an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products or services. Historically, our revenue contracts have been fixed-price contracts. To the extent actual costs vary from the cost upon which the price was negotiated, we will generate variable levels of profit or could incur a loss.
Our launch service contracts generally contain a single performance obligation, to provide launch services, as there are not distinct and separately identifiable promises contained in the contracts aside from the complex and interrelated nature of launch services activities. Similarly, our space systems contracts generally contain a single performance obligation as there are typically not distinct and separately identifiable promises contained in the contracts aside from the complex and interrelated nature of the manufacturing, engineering or operations activities as specified per the agreement. Where contracts contain a single performance obligation, the entirety of the transaction price is allocated to this one performance obligation. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the estimated standalone selling price of the product or service underlying each performance obligation. The standalone selling price represents the amount we would sell the product or service to a customer on a standalone basis.
The transaction price represents the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised services to our customers. The consideration promised within a contract may include fixed amounts and variable amounts. Variable consideration may consist of final milestone payments or mission success fees that are earned when the payload is delivered to the specified orbit, amongst other types.
We estimate variable consideration at the most likely amount, which is included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
We recognize revenue when or as control is transferred to the customer, either over-time or at a point-in-time.
Generally, launch services revenue is recognized at a point-in-time when control transfers upon intentional ignition of the launch or where successful delivery milestones are applicable, such as upon delivery of the spacecraft to the specified orbit. In some circumstances, launch service revenue is recognized over-time when it is determined that there is no alternative use for the mission, due to contractual or practical limitations, and when we have an enforceable right to payment for the services performed to date including a reasonable profit.
Revenue for space systems is recognized at a point-in-time or over-time depending upon the nature of the contract with the customer. For contracts that provide space engineering, program management and mission operations, we recognize revenues over-time as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided by our performance as we perform. Similarly, spacecraft manufacturing is recognized over-time when it is determined that there is no alternative use for the spacecraft, due to contractual or practical limitations, and where we have an enforceable right to payment for the services performed to date including a reasonable profit. Contracts to provide components for spacecraft that do not qualify for over-time recognition are recognized at a point-in-time when control is transferred.
For revenue recognized over-time, we use an input method, based on costs incurred relative to total estimated costs at completion to estimate the percentage of completion. The costs incurred are determined by assessing the physical and technical progress on the spacecraft applied to the standard costs. Due to the nature of the work performed under spacecraft construction contracts, the estimation of physical and technical progress requires judgment and is subject to many variables including but not limited to actual progress and costs incurred, labor productivity, changes in cost and availability of materials.
Contracts for space software provide the customer with a right to use the software as it exists when made available to the customer. Customers may purchase perpetual entity-wide licenses or mission-based licenses, which provide customers with the same functionality and differ primarily in the number of spacecraft into which the software may be integrated. Revenue from space software is recognized upfront at the point in time when the software is made available to the customer. When customers purchase when and if available software maintenance in addition to the space software license, revenues allocated to the maintenance are recognized ratably over the maintenance period.
Due to their nature, time and materials contracts contain variable consideration; however, in general, our performance obligations under time and materials contracts qualify for the “right to invoice” practical expedient. Under this practical expedient, we recognize revenue, over time, in the amount to which we have a right to invoice. In addition, we are not required to estimate such variable consideration upon inception of the contract and reassess the estimate each reporting period. We determined that this method best represents the transfer of services as, upon billing, we have a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that directly corresponds with the value to the customer of our performance completed to date.
Revenue is recognized net of any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Timing may differ between the satisfaction of performance obligations and the invoicing and collection of amounts related to our contracts with customers.
Contract assets include unbilled amounts under contracts when revenue recognized exceeds the amount billed to the customer. Contract assets are transferred to accounts receivable when the right to invoice becomes unconditional and the invoice is issued. Contract assets are classified as current if the invoice will be delivered to the customer within the succeeding 12-month period with the remaining recorded as long-term. These contract assets are not considered a significant financing component of the company’s contracts as the payment terms are intended to protect the customer in the event the company does not perform on its obligations under the contract. Contract liabilities primarily consists of customer billings in advance of revenues being recognized. Contract liabilities are not a significant financing component as they are generally utilized to pay for contract costs within a one-year period or are used to ensure the customer meets contractual requirements.
Stock-based Compensation Expense
Our stock compensation plan is classified as an equity plan which permits stock awards in the form of employee stock options and restricted stock awards. For awards that vest solely based on continued service, the fair value of an award is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period on a straight-line basis. For awards that contain performance conditions, the fair value of an award is recognized based on the probability of the performance condition being met.
The fair value of stock options under our employee equity incentive plan are estimated as of the grant date using the Black-Scholes option valuation model, which is affected by estimates of the fair value per share of common stock, the risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected term and the expected share price volatility of its common shares over the expected term, which are estimated as follows:
•Fair value per share of common stock. Prior to the Business Combination, due to the absence of an active market for our common stock, the fair value of our common stock for purposes of determining the exercise price for stock option grants and the fair value at grant date was estimated based on highly subjective and uncertain information. The exercise price of stock options was set at least equal to the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. Following the completion of the Business Combination in August 2021, we estimate the fair value of common stock based on the market price of our common stock underlying the awards on the grant date.
•Expected volatility. Our shares have actively traded for a short period of time subsequent to the Business Combination, the volatility is based on the weighted average historical volatilities of a pool of public companies that are comparable to us. Expected volatility represents the estimated volatility of the shares over the expected life of the options.
•Expected term. We determine the expected term of the awards using the simplified method due to our insufficient history of option exercise and forfeiture activity. The simplified method estimates the expected term based on the average of the vesting period and contractual term of the stock option.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate for periods within the expected life of the option is derived from the U.S. treasury interest rates in effect at the date of grant.
•Estimated dividend yield. We use an expected dividend yield of zero since no dividends are expected to be paid.
The fair value of restricted stock units granted under our employee equity incentive plans are estimated as of the grant date in an amount equal to the estimated fair value per share of our common stock.
Forfeitures are recognized as incurred for as they occur. Unless otherwise approved, options must be exercised while the individual is an employee or within 90-days of termination when applicable. The expiration date of newly issued options is ten years after grant date unless earlier terminated as provided for in the plans.
The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates, however, these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of judgment. As a result, if factors change or we use different assumptions, stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized by applying the statutory tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences between the financial reporting and tax filing bases of existing assets and liabilities are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
We utilize a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain income tax positions (tax contingencies). The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount which is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We make estimates, assumptions and judgments to determine its provision for income taxes and also for deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowances recorded against deferred tax assets. Actual future operating results and the underlying amount and type of income could differ materially from our estimates, assumptions and judgments thereby impacting its consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Warrant Liability
We account for the warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss.