Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage precision medicines company transforming the drug discovery process by combining leading-edge computational and experimental technologies with the goal of bringing life-changing therapies to patients. We are among the first of a new breed of biotech created at the intersection of disparate disciplines. Our Dynamo™ platform integrates an array of leading-edge computational and experimental approaches designed to drug protein targets that have previously been intractable, or inadequately addressed. Our initial focus is on enhancing small molecule therapeutic discovery in targeted oncology and genetic disease indications.
We have deployed our technology platform to build a pipeline of product candidates to address targets in precision medicine where there is clear evidence linking target proteins to disease and where molecular diagnostics can unambiguously identify relevant patients for treatment. We believe this approach will increase the likelihood of successfully translating a specific pharmacological mechanism into clinical benefit.
Our pipeline consists of programs which we believe target previously unsolved drug discovery challenges, or what we term “Innovators”, and programs which we believe target problems with “existing” answers, such as an approved therapy, for which we believe there is inadequate treatment and seek to rapidly create novel solutions, or what we term “Challengers.” Our lead product candidates are RLY-4008, RLY-2608, which are part of our Innovator portfolio, and RLY-1971, which is part of our Challenger portfolio.
•RLY-4008. In the third quarter of 2020, we initiated a first-in-human clinical trial for RLY-4008, a potent, selective and oral small molecule inhibitor of fibroblast growth factor receptor 2, or FGFR2, for patients with advanced or metastatic FGFR2-altered solid tumors. In October 2021, we announced initial clinical data from this trial. We believe the interim clinical data as of the data cut-off date of September 9, 2021, or the Interim Data Cut-off Date, suggest robust inhibition of FGFR2 in the first 49 subjects that was not shown to be limited by off-target toxicities, including hyperphosphatemia and diarrhea. The initial pharmacokinetic and predicted receptor occupancy data suggest that all once daily dose levels above 30 mg of RLY-4008 administered as of the Interim Data Cut-off Date can achieve >85% continuous inhibition of FGFR2. At those levels, acute toxicities that would limit dose intensity have generally not been observed as of the Interim Data Cut-off Date. Approximately 80% of all patients treated achieved reductions in tumor size as of the Interim Data Cut-off Date, which was observed across dose levels, tumor types and FGFR2 alterations and lines of treatment. In December 2021, we initiated expansion cohorts at a continuous 70 mg once-daily dose. In January 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, granted orphan drug designation to RLY-4008 for the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.
•RLY-2608. In December 2021, we dosed the first patient in a first-in-human clinical trial for RLY-2608, the first known allosteric, pan-mutant (H1047X, E542X and E545X) and isoform-selective phosphoinostide 3 kinase alpha, or PI3Kα, inhibitor in clinical development. RLY-2608 is the lead program of multiple efforts in our PI3Kα franchise to discover and develop mutant selective inhibitors of PI3Kα. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we announced preclinical data for RLY-2608. The data show that in preclinical models, RLY-2608 preferentially binds to mutant PI3Kα at a novel allosteric site discovered by the Dynamo platform. The data also suggest that projected clinically relevant doses of RLY-2608 achieved tumor regression in PIK3CA mutant in vivo xenograft mouse models representing H1047R and E545K mutations with significantly reduced impact on glucose metabolism compared to non-mutant selective active site inhibitors. The data further show that in preclinical models, RLY-2608 combines with standard of care therapies facilitated regressions in ER+/HER2- breast cancer.
•RLY-1971. We initiated a Phase 1 clinical trial for RLY-1971, our inhibitor of Src homology region 2 domain-containing phosphatase-2, or SHP2, in patients with advanced solid tumors in the first quarter of 2020. In December 2020, we entered into a global collaboration and license agreement, or the Genentech Agreement, with Genentech, Inc., a member of the Roche Group, or Genentech, for the development and commercialization of RLY-1971. In July 2021, Genentech initiated the cohort of RLY-1971 in combination with GDC-6036, its KRAS G12C inhibitor, in a Phase 1b trial.
In addition to the three product candidates described above, we have over five discovery stage programs across both precision oncology and genetic disease indications. We are focused on using the novel insights derived from our approach to transform the lives of patients suffering from debilitating and life-threatening diseases through the discovery, development and commercialization of our therapies.
We were incorporated in May 2015. We have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our lead product candidates, developing our innovative computational and experimental approaches on protein motion, building our intellectual property portfolio, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations. To date, we have principally financed our operations through private placements of preferred stock, convertible debt and proceeds from public offerings of our common stock. Additionally, in 2021, we received an aggregate of $95.0 million in connection with the Genentech Agreement.
In October 2021, we completed a public offering, or the October 2021 Offering, of 15,188,679 shares of common stock, including the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 1,981,132 shares, at an offering price of $26.50 per share, for net proceeds of $382.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. In July 2020, we closed our initial public offering, or IPO, and issued 23,000,000 shares of our common stock at a price of $20.00 per share for net proceeds of $425.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Prior to our IPO, we had received gross proceeds of approximately $520.0 million from sales of our preferred stock and our issuance of convertible debt.
In December 2020, we entered into the Genentech Agreement with Genentech, for the development and commercialization of RLY-1971. Under the terms of the Genentech Agreement, we received $75.0 million in an upfront payment and $20.0 million in milestone payments from Genentech in 2021. We are eligible to receive an additional $5.0 million in near-term payments; and, if we do not opt into a U.S. profit/cost share, up to $695.0 million in additional development, commercialization and sales-based milestones for RLY-1971; and tiered royalties on annual global net sales (on a country-by-country basis), anticipated to be in the low-to-mid-teens, subject to reductions in certain circumstances. Additionally, we are eligible to receive additional royalties in the event of regulatory approval of RLY-1971 and Genentech’s compound, GDC-6036, that directly binds to and inhibits KRAS G12C, in combination. We have the right to opt-in to a 50/50 U.S. profit/cost share and if we do opt into the U.S. profit/cost share, we are eligible to receive up to $410.0 million in additional commercialization and sales-based milestones for RLY-1971 outside of the U.S. and tiered royalties on annual net sales outside of the U.S. (on a country-by-country basis), anticipated to be in the low-to-mid-teens, subject to reduction in certain circumstances. We also retain the right to develop RLY-1971 in combination with our FGFR2 and PI3Kα programs.
On April 15, 2021, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger, or the Merger Agreement, and on April 22, 2021, we acquired ZebiAI Therapeutics, Inc., or ZebiAI. Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, we were required to pay ZebiAI’s former stockholders, option holders and warrant holders, or the ZebiAI Holders, upfront consideration in an aggregate amount of approximately $85.0 million, excluding customary purchase price adjustments, composed of approximately $20.0 million payable in cash and approximately $65.0 million payable in shares of our common stock. In addition, (i) the ZebiAI Holders will be eligible to receive up to an additional $85.0 million in milestone payments upon the achievement of certain platform or program-related milestones, payable in our common stock and (ii) we will pay to the ZebiAI Holders 10% of the payments we receive within three years of the closing date of the Merger Agreement from partnering, collaboration or other agreements related to ZebiAI’s platform up to an aggregate maximum amount of $100.0 million, payable in cash.
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and continues to affect our employees, patients, communities and business operations. The extent to which the
COVID-19 pandemic may continue to affect our operations or those of our third-party partners, including our preclinical studies or clinical trial operations, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the severity and duration of additional variant outbreaks, vaccination rates where we or our third party partners conduct operations, and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. The continued spread of COVID-19 globally could adversely impact our preclinical or clinical trial operations in the United States, including our ability to obtain slots for IND-enabling studies, recruit and retain patients, principal investigators and site staff in our clinical trials, obtain sufficient clinical trial supply of our product candidates due to supply chain disruptions or interruptions in global shipping, as well as activate new clinical trial sites. To date, we have been able to continue to enroll our patients in first-in-human clinical trials for RLY-1971, RLY-4008 and RLY-2608, and we currently do not anticipate any interruptions in clinical enrollment or any material adverse impact on our financial condition or results of operations due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, we are continuing to assess the potential impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our current and future business and operations, including our expenses and clinical trials, as well as on our industry and the healthcare system. See “-The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has impacted our business and any future pandemic, epidemic, or outbreak of an infectious disease could similarly affect our business and our financial results and could cause further disruption to the development of our product candidates” for a more detailed discussion of the risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Additionally, inflation generally affects us by increasing our employee-related costs and clinical trial expenses. We do not believe that inflation had a material effect on our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses on an aggregate basis. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates. Our net losses were $363.9 million, $52.4 million and $75.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $768.1 million. These losses have resulted primarily from costs incurred in connection with research and development activities, licensing and patent investment and general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses, including the costs of operating as a public company, and generate increasing operating losses for at least the next several years.
We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•conduct our current and future clinical trials of RLY-4008, and RLY-2608 and additional preclinical research and development of our PI3Kα mutant selective inhibitor programs and other early-stage programs;
•initiate and continue research and preclinical and clinical development of our other product candidates;
•seek to identify additional product candidates;
•pursue marketing approvals for any of our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, if any;
•establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any products for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•require the manufacture of larger quantities of our product candidates for clinical development and potentially commercialization;
•obtain, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•acquire or in-license other drugs and technologies;
•hire and retain additional clinical, regulatory, quality and scientific personnel;
•build out new facilities or expand existing facilities to support our ongoing development activity; and
•add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our drug development, any future commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company.
In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our lead product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution.
As a result, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed, on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and may be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
We believe our cash, cash equivalents and investments of $958.1 million as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into at least 2025. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We will need to raise additional capital in the future to continue developing the drugs in our pipeline and to commercialize any approved drug. We may seek to obtain additional financing in the future through the issuance of our common stock, through other equity or debt financings or through collaborations or partnerships with other companies. We may not be able to raise additional capital on terms acceptable to us, or at all, and any failure to raise capital as and when needed could compromise our ability to execute on our business plan.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, our revenue consists primarily of amounts related to the Genentech Agreement. We recognize our revenue as the performance obligations are satisfied under the agreement.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have primarily consisted of research and development costs and general and administrative costs. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we also incurred other operating expenses in connection with the acquisition of ZebiAI.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include:
•salaries, benefits and other employee related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and other vendors that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical activities;
•costs of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials and lab supplies;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•facility costs, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs as the services are performed or the goods are received. We recognize costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors and our clinical investigative sites. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our financial statements as prepaid expenses or accrued research and development expenses.
We began tracking external development costs by program on January 1, 2020 for programs that have entered clinical trials. We do not allocate internal costs, facilities costs or other overhead costs to specific programs. The following summarizes our costs based on their status in development:
Our most advanced development programs, RLY-1971, RLY-4008 and RLY-2608, are enrolling patients in first-in-human clinical trials. We have over five discovery stage programs across both precision oncology and genetic disease indications. Costs incurred for these programs include costs incurred to support our discovery research and translational science efforts up to the initiation of first-in-human clinical development. Platform research and other research and development activities include costs that are not specifically allocated to active product candidates, including facilities costs, depreciation expense and other costs. Employee related expenses includes salary, wages, stock-based compensation and other costs related to our personnel, which are not allocated to specific programs or activities.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of future clinical trials and future development costs, if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval or our other research and development costs. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
•the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of our preclinical development activities, any future clinical trials of RLY-4008, RLY-2608 or other product candidates and other research and development activities that we may conduct;
•uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment or drop out or discontinuation rates;
•establishing an appropriate safety and efficacy profile with IND-enabling studies;
•the initiation and completion of future clinical trial results;
•the timing, receipt and terms of any approvals from applicable regulatory authorities including the FDA and non-U.S. regulators;
•significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
•potential additional studies requested by regulatory agencies;
•establishing clinical and commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers in order to ensure that we or our third-party manufacturers are able to make product successfully;
•the impact of any business interruptions to our operations, including the timing and enrollment of patients in our planned clinical trials, or to those of our manufacturers, suppliers or other vendors resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or a similar public health crisis;
•the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
•maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of our product candidates following approval, if any, of our product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct clinical trials of RLY-4008 and RLY-2608, as well as identify and develop additional product candidates.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant trial delays due to patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
In-Process Research and Development Expenses
In-process research and development expenses consist of the cost of acquiring in-process research and development assets that have no alternative future use, specifically in connection with our acquisition of ZebiAI. We do not expect to record incremental expenses in connection therewith in future periods.
Loss on Initial Consolidation of Variable Interest Entity
Loss on initial consolidation of variable interest entity consists of the difference between total consideration transferred and the fair value of net assets acquired and liabilities assumed in connection with our acquisition of ZebiAI. We do not expect to record incremental losses in connection therewith in future periods.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Liability
Change in fair value of contingent consideration liability consists of fluctuations in the estimated fair value of contingent milestone payments under the Merger Agreement with ZebiAI. In future periods, we expect the fair value of such contingent milestone payments to increase or decrease based on, among other things, our estimates of the probability of achieving and timing of the contingent milestone payments, as well as changes in market interest rates and the time value of money.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate and business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; other expenses associated with operating as a public company, including compliance with exchange listing and Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC requirements, director and officer insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs; travel expenses; and
facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our general and administrative personnel headcount to support personnel in research and development and to support our operations generally as we increase our research and development activities and activities related to the potential commercialization of our product candidates.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net primarily consists of interest income related to interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Income Taxes
Since our inception in 2015, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in any year or for our earned research and development tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal NOL carryforwards of $371.4 million available to reduce taxable income, of which $43.1 million expire beginning in 2035 and $328.2 million do not expire. We have state NOL carryforwards of $466.2 million as of December 31, 2021 available to reduce future state taxable income, which expire at various dates beginning in 2035.
As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $14.9 million and $4.2 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2035 and 2030, respectively.
Results of Operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
License and Other Revenue
We recognized revenue of $3.0 million and $82.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue was recognized for substantially all of the $85.0 million upfront payment under the Genentech Agreement upon transfer of the license. During the year ended December 31, 2021, $3.0 million of revenue was recognized, primarily due to the satisfaction of certain ongoing
performance obligations to provide research and development services under the Genentech Agreement to Genentech.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $172.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $99.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $72.8 million was primarily due to $30.0 million of increased employee related costs, including $10.2 million of additional stock-based compensation expense, primarily due to increases in our stock price and increased headcount, $25.3 million of increased outside and consulting services for clinical and pre-clinical candidates, $10.9 million of increased clinical trial expenses and $6.6 million of increased laboratory supplies and other costs, facility costs and depreciation expense.
In-Process Research and Development Expenses
In-process research and development expenses of $123.0 million were recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021 in connection with the in-process research and development asset pursuant to the asset acquisition of ZebiAI in the second quarter of 2021. No such expenses were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Loss on Initial Consolidation of Variable Interest Entity
Loss on initial consolidation of variable interest entity of $11.9 million was recognized for the year ended December 31, 2021 in connection with the acquisition of ZebiAI in the second quarter of 2021. No such expenses were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration Liability
The fair value of our contingent consideration liability for milestone payments under the Merger Agreement with ZebiAI increased by $2.8 million between the acquisition date in April 2021 and December 31, 2021. The increase was attributable to the time value of money. There were no similar amounts in the prior period. In future periods, we expect the fair value of contingent consideration to increase or decrease based on, among other things, our estimates of the probability of achieving and timing of the contingent milestone payments, as well as changes in market interest rates and the time value of money.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $57.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $18.8 million was primarily due to $12.8 million of increased employee related costs, including $6.3 million of additional stock-based compensation expense, primarily due to increases in our stock price and increased general and administrative headcount to support the growth of our organization, and $6.0 million of other general and administrative expenses primarily attributed to increases in insurance, advisory, consulting and other expenses.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income, net, was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to decreases in interest rates.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
License and Other Revenue
We recognized revenue of $82.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 in connection with the Genentech Agreement related to the satisfaction of our performance obligation for the license transfer. We did not recognize any revenue for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $99.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $70.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $29.6 million was primarily due to $18.5 million of increased employee related costs, including $12.0 million of additional stock-based compensation expense, primarily due to increases in our stock price and increased headcount, and $11.4 million in increased outside and consulting expenses associated with our clinical and pre-clinical candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase of $24.8 million was primarily due to $19.2 million of increased employee related costs, including $15.5 million of additional stock-based compensation expense, primarily due to increases in our stock price and increased general and administrative headcount to support the
growth of our organization, and $5.2 million of other general and administrative expenses primarily attributed to increases in insurance, legal and other expenses.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income, net, was $3.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $8.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 due primarily to decreases in interest rates and lower investment amounts.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if ever. To date, we have principally financed our operations through private placements of preferred stock, convertible debt and proceeds from public offerings of our common stock. In July 2020, we closed our IPO and issued 23,000,000 shares of common stock for net proceeds of $425.3 million. Prior to our IPO, we received gross proceeds of $520.0 million from sales of our preferred stock and our issuance of convertible debt. We received an upfront payment of $75.0 million from Genentech pursuant to the Genentech Agreement in January 2021 and $20.0 million in milestone payments in 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $958.1 million.
In August 2021, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3ASR with the SEC, or the 2021 Shelf, to register for sale an amount of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units in one or more offerings, which became effective upon filing with the SEC (File No. 333-258768).
In August 2021, we entered into a sales agreement, or Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having aggregate gross proceeds of up to $300.0 million from time to time in “at-the-market” offerings through Cowen, as our sales agent. We agreed to pay Cowen a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross proceeds of any shares sold by Cowen under the Sales Agreement. There have been no shares of our common stock sold under the Sales Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
In October 2021, we completed the October 2021 Offering of 15,188,679 shares of common stock, including the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 1,981,132 shares, at an offering price of $26.50 per share. We received net proceeds of $382.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $74.4 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $363.9 million, offset by non-cash charges of $192.1 million and cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $97.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $102.5 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $52.4 million and cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $85.2 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $35.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, operating activities used $66.1 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $75.3 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $4.9 million and cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.3 million.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities used $479.5 million, consisting primarily of $450.7 million of net purchases of investments, $25.3 million related to cash paid for the acquisition of ZebiAI and $3.5 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities provided $81.7 million, consisting primarily of $83.6 million of net investment proceeds from maturities offset by $1.9 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, investing activities used $319.0 million, consisting primarily of $311.0 million of net investment purchases and $8.0 million for the purchase of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $388.1 million, consisting of net proceeds from our follow-on offering in October 2021 of $382.2 million, proceeds from stock option exercises of $4.7 million and proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our 2020 Employee Stock Purchase Plan of $1.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $426.5 million, consisting of net proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the closing of our IPO of $425.3 million and proceeds from stock option exercises of $1.2 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $5.6 million, consisting of net proceeds from our sales of Series C convertible preferred stock of $5.0 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $0.6 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing clinical development activities related to the potential clinical development activities of RLY-4008 and RLY-2608 and the ongoing pre-clinical development activities of our PI3Ka program. In addition, we are now incurring additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We expect that our expenses will increase substantially as discussed in more detail in “ Overview” above.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $958.1 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into at least 2025. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of RLY-4008, RLY-2608 and our other product candidates and programs, and because the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for the development of our product candidates is unknown, we are unable to estimate the timing and amounts
of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the impact of any business interruptions to our operations, including the timing and enrollment of patients in our planned clinical trials, or to those of our manufacturers, suppliers or other vendors, resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or similar public health crisis;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of our current and future clinical trials of RLY-4008 and RLY-2608 and additional preclinical research of our PI3Ka programs;
•the scope, progress, results and costs of drug discovery, preclinical research and clinical trials for our other product candidates;
•the number of future product candidates that we pursue and their development requirements;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•the success of any existing or future collaborations that we may enter into with third parties;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies, including entering into licensing or collaboration arrangements for product candidates, such as our collaboration with Genentech;
•the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any existing or future collaboration agreements, if any;
•the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, clinical trial costs under any existing or future collaboration agreements, if any;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including drug sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval, to the extent that such sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution are not the responsibility of any collaborator that we may have at such time;
•the amount of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our business operations and our research and development activities; and
•the costs of operating as a public company.
Developing pharmaceutical products, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval for any product candidates or generate revenue from the sale of any product candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of drugs that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if ever. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funds to achieve our business objectives.
Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, your ownership interest may be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences and anti-dilution protections that could adversely affect your rights as a common stockholder. Additional debt or preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that may limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, which could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business, and may require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute your ownership interest.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technology, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce and/or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Intellectual Property License
On June 15, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Collaboration and License Agreement, or DESRES Agreement, with D. E. Shaw Research, LLC, or D. E. Shaw Research, extending the term and otherwise modifying the terms of the Collaboration and License Agreement originally entered into on August 17, 2016. The DESRES Agreement provides that the parties will jointly conduct research efforts with the goal of identifying and developing product candidates. On a product-by-product basis, we have agreed to pay D. E. Shaw Research milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development and regulatory milestone events for products we develop under the DESRES Agreement that are directed to a Category 1 Target or any target that was a Category 1 Target. Such payments for achievement of development and regulatory milestones total up to $7.3 million in the aggregate for each of the first three products we develop, and up to $6.3 million in the aggregate for each product we develop after the first three. In addition, we are obligated to pay D. E. Shaw Research royalty payments as defined in the DESRES Agreement. We assessed the milestone and royalty events under the DESRES Agreement as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and concluded that $1.5 million was due related to the execution of the Genentech Agreement as of December 31, 2020 and no such payments were due as of December 31, 2021.
The DESRES Agreement extended the term of the original agreement to August 16, 2025 and increased the annual fee from $1.0 million to $7.9 million, commencing on August 16, 2020. In May 2021, the annual fee was further increased, by mutual agreement of the parties, from $7.9 million to $9.9 million. The DESRES Agreement automatically renews for successive one year periods unless either party provides at least one year notice of non-renewal, and the annual fee during each of the one year renewal terms is subject to the mutual agreement of us and D. E. Shaw Research.
399 Binney Street
In December 2017, we entered into a facility lease agreement for approximately 44,336 square feet of office and laboratory space at 399 Binney Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, which was increased to 44,807 square feet in January 2018. We gained control of the space in January 2019 and the lease expires in April 2029, subject to certain renewal options, which have not been included in our right of use asset and liability on the balance sheet through December 31, 2021. In September 2020, we entered into an amendment to our existing facility lease agreement to expand the leased area by approximately 1,824 square feet of office space at 399 Binney Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. The amendment commenced in October 2020 and expires in April 2029, subject to certain renewal options. We provided a letter of credit in connection with our facility lease agreement in the amount of $0.9 million with a financial institution, which expires September 30, 2028.
60 Hampshire Street
On May 26, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to lease approximately 41,474 square feet of laboratory and office space at 60 Hampshire Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139. Our obligation to pay rent under the agreement is expected to start in 2022. The term of the agreement is ten years following the rent commencement, which is currently expected in 2022. We provided a letter of credit in connection with the agreement in the amount of $1.7 million with a financial institution, which expires August 31, 2033.
Other Significant Arrangements
We also have certain research and license arrangements with other third parties, which provide us with research services with the goal of identifying and developing product candidates until all payment obligations by us to the third party have expired. We have the right to terminate these agreements with a reasonable period of notice. We are also obligated to pay development milestone payments for up to four targets, each in the range of $4.0 million to $7.0 million, upon the achievement of certain specified contingent events. We assessed the milestones as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and concluded $0.5 million was due as of December 31, 2021 and no such milestone payments were due as of December 31, 2020.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs and CMOs for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior notice of 30 days. Payments due upon cancelation consist only of payments for services provided and expenses incurred up to the date of cancelation.
For more information, see Note 13, Commitments and Contingencies, and Note 14, Leases, of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Acquisition Accounting
We are required to make significant judgments and estimates to determine whether an acquisition constitutes an acquisition of a business or assets. For asset acquisitions, this includes whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets. We are also required to make several significant judgments and estimates in order to determine the total consideration transferred for the asset acquisition and then allocate it to the assets that we have acquired and the liabilities that we have assumed on our consolidated balance sheet.
With respect to the acquisition of ZebiAI, the determination of the fair value of in-process research and development, or IPR&D, expense did not include significant judgment, given that substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired was concentrated in a single identifiable asset. Estimating the fair value of contingent milestone payments required significant judgment and estimation, primarily with respect to estimating the probability of achieving and the related timing of the contingent milestone payments.
We are also required to reassess the fair value of the contingent milestone payments from the acquisition of ZebiAI on a quarterly basis, which requires significant judgments and estimation. These significant judgments are primarily the result of our estimates of the probability of achieving and timing of the contingent milestone payments. Changes in the fair value of the contingent milestone payments can result from changes to one or multiple inputs, including adjustments to the probability of achievement and timing of the contingent milestone payments, and, to a lesser extent, changes to the applicable discount rates. Significant judgment is used in determining these assumptions
during each reporting period. Reasonable changes in these assumptions can cause material changes to the fair value of our contingent consideration liability.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue recognition in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. We recognize revenue pursuant to ASC 606 when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract and determine those that are performance obligations. We then determine the transaction price and allocate it to the performance obligations. As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must use significant judgment to determine: (a) the number of performance obligations; (b) the transaction price, including the determination of whether milestones or other variable consideration should be included in the transaction price; and (c) the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract for the allocation of the transaction price.
We utilize key assumptions and judgments to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation, which may include discounted cash flow models, evaluation of comparable transactions, pricing considered in negotiating the transaction and estimated costs, to determine how the transaction price is allocated among the performance obligations. We use judgment to determine whether milestones or other variable consideration should be included in the transaction price. As part of management’s evaluation of the transaction price, we consider numerous factors, including whether the achievement of the milestones is outside of our control, contingent upon the efforts of others or subject to the risks of success. If we conclude it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone payment is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable until those milestones are achieved. We re-evaluate the transaction price, including estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and all constrained amounts, in each reporting period and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur. For revenue-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, we will include royalties in the transaction price at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty is allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Once the performance obligations are identified, the transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation based on the relative stand-alone selling price. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied, either at a point in time or over time. If the performance obligation is satisfied over time, we recognize revenue based on the use of either an output or input method.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development and manufacturing expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•CROs in connection with performing research activities on our behalf and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf;
•investigative sites or other service providers in connection with clinical trials;
•vendors in connection with preclinical and clinical development activities; and
•vendors related to product manufacturing and development and distribution of preclinical and clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract, which may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that we have adopted is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. None of these pronouncements had a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.