ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This section includes several forward-looking statements, within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. All statements that address expectations or projections about the future, including, but not limited to, statements about our plans, strategies, adequacy of resources and future financial results (such as revenue, gross profit, operating profit, cash flow), are forward-looking statements. Some of the forward-looking statements can be identified by words like “anticipates,” “believes,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “can,” “could,” “should,” “intends,” “project,” “predict,” “plans,” “estimates,” “goal,” “target,” “possible,” “potential,” “would,” “seek,” and similar references to future periods. These statements are not a guarantee of future performance and involve a number of risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Because these forward-looking statements are based on estimates and assumptions that are subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control or are subject to change, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from these forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to: the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us and our clients; our ability to access the capital markets by pursuing additional debt and equity financing to fund our business plan and expenses; our continued inability to issue additional shares of equity securities; negative outcome of pending and future claims and litigation and our ability to comply with our contractual covenants, including in respect of our debt; potential loss of clients and possible rejection of our business model and/or sales methods; weakness in general economic conditions and levels of capital spending by customers in the industries we serve; weakness or volatility in the financial and capital markets, which may result in the postponement or cancellation of our customers’ projects or the inability of our customers to pay our fees; delays or reductions in U.S. government spending; credit risks associated with our customers; competitive market pressures; the availability and cost of qualified labor; our level of success in attracting, training and retaining qualified management personnel and other staff employees; changes in tax laws and other government regulations, including the impact of health care reform laws and regulations; the possibility of incurring liability for our business activities, including, but not limited to, the activities of our temporary employees; our performance on customer contracts; and government policies, legislation or judicial decisions adverse to our businesses. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date hereof. We assume no obligation to update such statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. We recommend readers to carefully review the entirety of this Annual Report, including the “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report and the other reports and documents we file from time to time with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), particularly our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and our reports on Form 8-K.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations, our expectations regarding the future performance of our business and the other non-historical statements in the discussion and analysis are forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors including those described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our financial information may not be indicative of our future performance.
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Demand for Maslow EOR services and field talent is dependent upon general economic conditions and labor trends. The United States economic backdrop took a negative turn in the first quarter 2020 as COVID 19 (“COVID”) profoundly changed the business landscape. Stay at home orders which was federally mandated and later left to states and companies themselves to self-regulate in order to prevent the spread of COVID, meant many Maslow workers could not perform their type of work from home (e.g., video, sound, lighting crew, makeup-artists). This was because a large portion of Maslow employees were assigned to field, location, or studio filming projects for our clients that require close contact with others. Consequently, our business suffered as our revenues dropped from $38,444 in 2019 to $29,202 in 2020. In the first quarter of 2020 our performance, which was negatively impacted in the last 2 weeks of the quarter, saw a $500 increase over the comparative first quarter of 2019, with $8,801 to $8,301. For the remaining three quarters MMG saw quarterly 2020 declines of 46%, 38.5%, and 13.7% respectively compared to 2019.
However, despite the revenue decline year over year by 24%, MMG’s gross profit fell only by 14.6% as our margins increased due to our burgeoning higher margin media and IT staffing businesses. This was evident in our 2020 annual gross margin percentage of 11.9% being 12.4% improvement than the 10.6% derived in 2019. But what could not be managed proportionately in 2020 was our SG&A which rose 49.5% to $4,462 as public company costs added $1,532, which represented 104% of the $1,477 SG&A increase in 2020 over 2019. In May 2020, we received $5,216 in Payroll Protection Plan (“PPP”) funds, which enabled our business to be able to reduce the number of job cuts and in some cases keep customer assigned employees working.
In 2021 many companies were slow to have their employees return to an office or group setting from a work from home paradigm which continued to hamper our business. Vaccines were rolled out so by the end of the Spring 2021, many states had lifted restrictions and MMG customers began having media employees back in the studio and in the field. However, several clients had vaccine and or mask mandates that some of our workers opted not to qualify resulting in a loss of revenue. More impactfully, the Company began to feel the ill effects of a full year’s loss of some DirecTV programming from February 2020, and customers who left MMG altogether, to either eliminate media activities for foreseeable future, offshore or insource their media departments. The 6 largest attritted customers represented a $4,385 loss of revenue in 2021 over 2020, with DirecTV accounting for $1,204. Since the estimated loss of programming was estimated to be $4,000, DirecTV otherwise increased use of existing services at approximately $2,796. Also positive was MMG recognizing new client revenue in 2021 of $1,315 and existing customers increasing their business with us by $4,765.
We are hopeful that the dissemination of vaccines and the waning of serious COVID cases will result in resumption of a normally functioning economy which will continue to enable our clients to return their payrolls to normal levels that in turn, will continue ours and an overall economic rebound. However, no assurance can be given on if and when this will happen or what impact it will have on our business.
As far as cash is concerned, in 2021 our cash positioned strengthened due to our receiving forgiveness (Per the IRS on June 6, 2021) for the PPP loan we received in May 2020, and the Employee Retention Credit (ERC) which we were eligible for in the first 3 quarters of 2021 and received $1,253 in active payroll credits and refunds. Overall, our ERC refunds for quarters one through three totaled $4,465. However, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) withheld $718 of our ERC entitlements that were filed via 941X forms, to apply to our 1120 tax liability, leaving us $2,494 remaining due to us in deferred ERC refunds, which as of March 28, 2022, we have yet to receive.
Our working capital though has assumed repayment of Vivos Debtors which as of December 31, 2021, was $9,361. Our adjusted working capital excluding the $4,985 in Vivos Debtor notes is $4,376.
In 2021, we bolstered our business development department adding a vice president of sales with extensive industry experience and a second account executive. Meanwhile the Company’s executives and its board of directors worked together on managing costs with the rest of our organization tightening it’s proverbial belt by overall eliminating $484 in employee wages, tax and benefits from 2020. Some positions were eliminated and reclassed, payroll cycles consolidated, and non-essential spend ceased, to reduce overhead costs by 16.5%
and Beyond
The continued impact of the COVID pandemic cannot be precisely predicted. We do know that virtual staffing is no longer a limited niche for certain companies and certain positions. Virtual scenarios are also favored by generation Z which values work-life balance as one of the most important factors when deciding on a company to work for. Considering the perks that remote working offers, and the keen interest shown by employees from different age groups, we believe that remote working will be prevalent in 2022 and beyond. This paradigm however should not adversely impact MMG, in that whether media jobs are filled virtually or not, MMG has the pipeline of talent to fill these diversified roles.
Furthermore, we believe given the changing nature in specialized staffing there exists a greater opportunity to expand our EOR business as it offers businesses of all types and industries, more flexibility in on and off boarding employees as well as managing 1099 risk. As for media, IT and finance and accounting staffing is concerned, we believe it will grow but there are also opportunities to get into staffing specialties which represent areas where we see the most rebound or a robust demand. While we will continue to focus on growing the contingent staffing side of our business, our splash into Permanent Placement or Direct Hire, has opened up a new avenue in business of diversified relationships (Media, IT, and finance and administrative roles) that have strengthened our gross margins and has the potential to grow and flourish.
Direct hiring of talent for our existing clients has always been a part of our business model, but more often than not, however it was done by transitioning a contingent worker to a full-time position which contractually based on time of service has not resulted in any incremental revenue for the company.
But we are now finding success fulfilling this need on the front end of the employment life cycle for new clients and existing ones, having added $167 in high margin revenue in 2021.
This focus reflects our desire to shift our portfolio toward a higher margin, higher value proposition.
As a result, we have continued to move forward with our diversified offerings and future specialization staffing strategy, updating our already expert operating model and organizing our business to more easily acquire and maintain client accounts.
COMPANY OVERVIEW
Maslow is a national provider of employer of record, recruiting and staffing services, consisting of media and IT resources. We provide services to client primarily within the United States of America.
Our services consist of:
● Employer of Record (“EOR”): A unique workforce solution for any organization who seeks efficiency in employee administrative management including payroll and benefits, labor risk associated with compliance with federal-state and local regulations including Fair Labor Standards Act (“FLSA”), in onboarding and offboarding employees, and in managing benefit costs. One major difference in this service offering is that our customers usually source the talent and MMG hires and leases the employees to our customers.
● Recruiting and Staffing: Staffing covering a wide variety of specialties. Currently Media and Information Technology (“IT”) encompass most of our placements.
● Video and Multimedia Production: With 32 years of experience, the Company’s subsidiary, Maslow, offer script to screen expertise including producers, audio engineers, editors, broadcasters, makeup artists, camera crews, Gaffers and grips, drone operators and more.
● Permanent Placements: Also referred to as Direct Hires, we strategically recruit and fill a variety of fulltime roles for our customers which is only limited by our recruiting capabilities which are diversified.
The Company’s subsidiary, The Maslow Media Group, Inc. (“Maslow”) is currently the only earning entity for the business. After our Merger in October 2020, non-operational expenses (e.g., public company fees, D&O insurance, investor relations, etc.) were assigned at the corporate level. This enables a more pristine focused view of the operational side of the business we refer to as Operational Income Before Depreciation, Interest, and Amortization.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Maslow had revenues totaling $26,246 in 2021, which was a 10.1% decrease over $29,202 in 2020. The $2,956 decline can be attributed to several factors including the COVID-19 impact which undoubtedly was profound but difficult to measure given there is no way to know what level of growth existing clients may have had or revenue potential of new clients.
Overall, Maslow lost $8,354 to accounts with declining revenues => $100, including terminated accounts totaling $4,385 or 52% of the decline; but conversely added $4,765 from new or growing accounts that had at least $100 more in revenue in 2021 from 2020. AT&T’s DirecTV cancelled Sirius-XM programming in February 2020 that we believe had a negative impact of $4,000 on revenue. However overall, DirecTV year over year revenue declined by only $1,204 as the Red Zone added another week due to the NFL’s expanded 17 game schedule.
The attrition cited above at $4,385 may not be permanent as many clients hire Maslow for special events and some have elected to offshore or insource its media or IT workforce which may not work out long term. The decision to leave Maslow or not use Maslow services in 2021 by these six clients was not attributable to Maslow’s pricing, service, or performance.
Of the 6 attritted accounts, 3 were IQS legacy customers totaling $1,352 or 31% of the attritted total. The largest was Lifetouch which elected to offshore at the end of 2020 resulting is a 2021 over 2020 revenue loss of $991.
saw 11 MMG customers increase revenue year over year by =>$100, resulting in $4,765 revenue increase. This includes 17 accounts representing $1,315 in new customer revenue, which includes two accounts which actually began with marginal revenue late in 2020.
From a revenue contribution standpoint our top 10 clients represented $22,417 which is 85.4% of 2021 revenues, which was an increase in top 10 revenue reliance as in 2020 the top 10 represented 78.4% of revenue at $23,160.
$33 in rebates were issued in December 2021 which was $9 more than a year ago when they were $24 in 2020.
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated, both in dollars and as a percentage of revenues, and have been derived from our consolidated financial statements.
Revenues: By Segment
In 2020 we showed $35 as Other revenue which has been reclassified as an EOR revenue for presentation purposes.
Employer of Record (EOR) Revenues: EOR represented 81.3% of our revenue in 2021 as opposed to 80.8% in 2020 and 89.6% in 2019. The 2019 to 2021 EOR decline from $34,613 to $21,346 can be attributed to this business segment being hit the hardest by COVID-19 with large accounts not fully recovered to 2019 levels, and attritted clients. The burgeoning Media Staffing revenue by $1,135 also impacted the level of EOR’s revenue concentration.
Recruiting and Staffing Revenues: Whereas our IT Staffing business weathered a steep decline in approximately $2,000 from $2,571 to $571, our Media Staffing division did make up 60% of the decline delivering $1,135 in incremental revenue over its 2020 performance. Thus, Media Staffing at $3,042 represented 11.6% of total 2021 annual revenue whereas it only represented 6.5% based on its $1,907 in revenue in 2020.
The decline in IQS business was in motion prior to Reliability’s acquisition of IQS from the Vivos Group in December 2019. Quarter over quarter revenue decline had begun in in the third quarter 2019 when run rate revenue dropped from $3,696 to $3,419. In the fourth quarter 2019 this decline had reached a run rate of $3,004. This decline has continued for another 8 quarters ending December 2021, with COVID-19 in the 2nd quarter 2020 having the most profound impact as business dropped 19.4% to a run rate of $2,574, and then in the 4th quarter 2020 by 30.9% once it became apparent Lifetouch was offshoring its IT software assurance business which had delivered $999 in 2020 despite COVID. This brought the 2021 first quarter run rate down to $1,096.
The reason there was no bounce back for this business segment in Q4 2020 was a combination of what we still believe is the temporary loss of two clients, Inspire Brands and Accruent, who both began implementing temporary hiring freezes in early 2020. This resulted in a $745 revenue loss in 2020, and Abbott Labs through vendor management firm Tapfin, of losing 7 staffing positions to permanent offers.
Video and Multimedia Production Revenues: Video Production which includes managed services and project freelance work, was relatively flat in achieving $1,121 in revenue in 2021 against $1,125 a year earlier. This business has a number of US government contracts with the US House of Representatives leading the pack with $112 in 2021 revenue.
Gross Profit: Gross profit represents revenues from services less cost of services expenses, which consist of payroll, payroll taxes, benefits, payroll-related insurance, union benefits, field talent, recruiting software and reimbursable costs for out-of-pocket items.
Overall, our gross profits did not decline as much on a percentage basis in relation to our revenue decline. Whereas our revenue declined $2,956 or 10.1%, our gross profit decreased by $208 or 6% from $3,474 to $3,266.
This was due to a gross margin improvement from 11.9% to 12.4% as Permanent Placements alone accounted entirely for 50 basis point rise in delivering $164 in gross profit which was after only $3 in incremental COR. Although we experienced positive margin increases in our EOR and Video Productions business segments, the loss of higher margin IT staffing volume and with some margin erosion in our Media Staffing business neutralized that gain.
Although EOR’s revenue declined by $2,253 its gross margin improved 60 basis points to 9.8% from 9.2% in 2020. Our Media Staffing however saw its gross margins decline from 22.8% to 21.2% as a consequence of being more competitive to win new business as our staffing revenues increased by 59.5% or $1,135. The combined $4,900 in 2021 non EOR revenue garnered a gross profit margin of 24.1% which did not compare quite as favorably in gross margin to 2020’s $5,603 in non EOR revenue which garnered a margin percentage of 24.1%. This was because our IT Staffing revenue dropped by $2,000 and its gross margin from 30.5% to 27%.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”): SG&A expenses decreased for second straight year this time by $895 to $3,567 from $4,462 in 2020, $903 of which were related to non-operational corporate costs, with approximately $339 of which were public company based and $132 were for outside legal fees associated with our Vivos Group dispute. Otherwise, our operational SG&A decrease in 2021 over 2020 was only $231.
The overall SG&A savings were in wages and benefits of $484 in 2021 over 2020, which can be attributed to elimination of our General Counsel post, reorganization of IQS into Maslow Media, favorable replacement costs for departed overhead resources, and not filling certain open posts. We did however add two business development personnel.
Non-operational corporate costs for 2021 were $903 or 42.6% less than they totaled in 2020 when they were $1,567. These are costs classified as such after the Company went public via the reverse merger in October 2019. The 2021 savings drivers were salary, payroll tax, and benefits all totaling $348, and outside counsel (legal) at $326, investor relations at $43 and insurance at $15; all cost reductions respectively 2021 over 2020.
Interest Income: Interest income from related parties increased by $162 from $112 to $274, as a result of employing the contractual default interest rate on Vivos Debtor notes receivable which began 2021 and applied to eligible periods prior, with a note balance of $4,258 and ended with $4,985 which included a $454 net increase in principal due to $478 Libertas payment minus $24 for presumed IQS bad debt recovery.
Other Income (Expense): Other income was $9,681 as the Company took the PPP long term debt to other
income once it was forgiven in June 2021, and the $4,465 in ERC refunds.
Interest Expense: Interest expense, decreased by $242 from $281 to $39 as $35 of $57 credited in accrued PPP interest was recorded in 2020, and reliance on factoring was minimized in large part to the benefit of having ERC applied to payrolls from the end of the second quarter through the third quarter. Overall, factoring interest totaled $71; and interest on business insurance was $2.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense was $984 compared to a $230 tax credit as 2020 yielded a net operating loss (NOL) of $789 and 2021 net income of $7,893.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our working capital requirements are driven predominantly by EOR field talent payments, SG&A salaries, public company costs, interest associated with factoring, and client accounts receivable receipts. Since receipts from client payments are on average 70 days behind payments to field talent, working capital requirements can be periodically challenged. We have a Factoring Facility with Triumph Business Capital (TBC). TBC advances 93% of our eligible receivables at an advance rate of 15 basis points, an interest rate of prime plus 2%., and our prime floor rate at 4%. As of December 31, 2021, 74% of our $5,592 in A/R was current compared to 63% out of $6,629 which was current in on December 31, 2020. 17.9% is 1 to 30 days past due compared to 26% a year ago, 4.6% between 31 and 60 days past due versus 8% in 2020, and 3.6% greater than 60 days versus 3% at end of 2020.
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash generated from operations via accounts receivable and borrowings under our Factoring Facility with Triumph enabling access to the 7% unfactored portion. Because certain large clients have changed their payment practices announcing 60- and 90-day terms amounting to a unilateral extension to contractual terms by 30-60 days, we can be adversely impacted since Triumph no longer provides credit if an account obligor pays more than 120 days after the invoice date.
Our primary uses of cash are for payments to field talent, corporate and staff employees, related payroll liabilities, operating expenses, public company costs, including but not limited to general and professional liability and directors and officer’s liability insurance premiums, legal fees, filing fees, auditor and accounting fees, stock transfer services, and board compensation; followed by cash factoring and other borrowing interest; cash taxes; and debt payments.
Since we are an EOR with the majority of contracted talent paid as W-2 employees who are paid known amounts on a consistent schedule; our cash inflows do not typically align with these required payments, resulting in temporary cash challenges, which is why in the past we have employed factoring. Because we do also employ 1099 contracted firms and individuals with payments terms which vary from immediate to 30 days, our cash requirements can be quite variable.
Vivos Debtors as of December 31, 2021, had notes receivable totaling $4,985 including default on a $3,000 promissory note and on a $750 tax obligation in December 2019. After numerous failed collection attempts, on February 25, 2020, the Company initiated an action in the Circuit Court of Montgomery County Maryland against Naveen Doki and the Vivos Holdings for non-payment.
In July 2021, Maslow paid $475 to Libertas to settle a portion of Vivos Group debt which had included Maslow as a signer going back to 2018. The “Liquidation Agreement,” was supposed to shield the Company from this debt as part of the Merger Agreement; but the Vivos Group refused to comply with the agreed upon terms.
It was also anticipated that following the Merger, the Company would both access the capital markets by selling additional shares of Company common stock and use shares of Company common stock as currency to acquire other business revenues. However, all 300 million authorized shares of Company common stock were issued in connection with the Merger. No shares are expected to become available to the Company until the legal dispute with the Vivos Debtors and Vivos Group is resolved. At that point the Company can decide whether to amend the Company’s Certificate of Formation to increase the number of authorized shares of Company common stock or approve a reverse-split of the outstanding shares of Company common stock to provide additional shares for these purposes. No assurance can be given as to when this might take place.
On May 5, 2020, Maslow received $5,216 loan through the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) with a term of two (2) years and an interest rate of 1% per annum. The PPP provides that the Company may apply for forgiveness of this loan if the loan proceeds were used for payroll and certain other specified operating expenses while maintaining specified headcount requirements. The accrued interest on the PPP loan as of December 31, 2020, was $34.
The funds bolstered our working capital and enabled us to bring back employees and continue to serve our clients even though their requirements had lessened.
On June 10, 2021, MMG received notification by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) of forgiveness of its PPP 2020 Loan totaling $5,216. The forgiveness included the deferred interest of $59 totaling $5,275 in principal and interest.
Because it’s first three-quarter revenues were 80% or less than they were in 2019, the Company was eligible for the Employee Retention Credit. Consequently, Maslow received $155 in direct payroll credits from the IRS via its payroll provider Paycom in the late 2nd quarter and $1,086 in the third quarter. Maslow has to return $842 to the IRS for payroll credits received in the 4th quarter once the program ended retroactively in mid-November 2021.This payment was made to the IRS through Paycom, the Company’s payroll provider in January 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, our working capital was $9,361 compared to $5,970 in 2020 and $784 at the end of 2019. ERC of $4,450 in 2021 enabled the Company to build A/R reserves as the PPP funds in 2020 were employed to pay salaries of both outsourced and SG&A employees. Once the $2,494 in ERC is fully refunded, the Company will have sufficient capital resources, but these are based on government stimulus programs.
We anticipate approximately $500 in additional SG&A costs in 2022, when compared with 2021 relating to increase in sales and marketing head count and additional operational and payroll automation to meet growth objectives.
A summary of our operating, investing and financing activities are shown in the following table:
Operating Activities
Cash employed by operating activities consists of net income (loss), adjusted for non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, and the effect of working capital changes. The primary drivers of cash inflows and outflows are factoring, accounts receivable and accrued payroll and expenses.
During 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $2,505, an increase $4,575 compared with ($2,070) for 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to cash change driven by ERC netting $3,414 (Net Income of $7,893 minus PPP Forgiveness of $5,216), plus ERC tax payable for drawing in the 4th quarter of $841.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities consists primarily of cash paid for capital expenditures.
Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities in 2021 was ($2,544) as compared to cash employed for same purpose totaling $1,915 in 2020. The decrease was due to the Company in 2020 receiving $5,216 in PPP offset by $853 in repayments from the issuance of convertible notes starting in June of 2019 and return of cash flows from short-term borrowing via our factoring vehicle. In 2021, Maslow borrowed $6,436 from TBC, but repatriated $8,489 and paid $475 to Libertas on behalf of the Vivos Group and $37 in early part of year to pay back a term loan from TBC (See Item 1) which led to the 2021 $2,544 financing activity deficit.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We had no material off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are likely to have, a current or future material effect on our operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We have identified the policies listed below as critical to our business and the understanding of our results of operations. For a detailed discussion of the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 3 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP, requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, collectability of accounts receivable, impairment of goodwill and intangible assets, contingencies, litigation, income taxes, stock option expense, and other liabilities. Management based its estimates and judgments on historical experiences and on various other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results under circumstances and conditions different than those assumed could result in differences from the estimated amounts in the consolidated financial statements.
REVENUE RECOGNITION
On January 1, 2019, the Company adopted the new accounting standard ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, for all open contracts and related amendments as of December 31, 2019, using the modified retrospective method. The adoption had no impact to the reported results.
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with ASC 606, the core principle of which is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To achieve this core principle, five basic criteria must be met before revenue can be recognized: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when or as the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
The Company accounts for revenues when both parties to the contract have approved the contract, the rights and obligations of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, and collectability of consideration is probable. Payment terms vary by client and the services offered.
We derive our revenues from four segments: EOR, Recruiting and Staffing (temporary), Permanent Placement (Direct Hire) and Video and Multimedia Production. Revenues are recognized when promised services are delivered to client, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Revenues as presented on the consolidated statements of operations represent services rendered to client less variable consideration, such as sales adjustments and allowances. Reimbursements, including those related to out-of-pocket expenses, are also included in revenues, and equivalent amounts of reimbursable expenses are included in cost of services.
We record revenue on a gross basis as a principal versus on a net basis as an agent in the presentation of revenues and expenses. We have concluded that gross reporting is appropriate because we (i) have the risk of identifying and hiring qualified workers, (ii) have the discretion to select the workers and establish their price and duties and (iii) we bear the risk for services that are not fully paid for by client.
Temporary staffing revenues is accounted for as a single performance obligation satisfied over time because the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the Company’s performance on an hourly basis. The contracts stipulate weekly billing, and the Company has elected the “as invoiced” practical expedient to recognize revenue based on the hours incurred at the contractual rate as we have the right to payment in an amount that corresponds directly with the value of performance completed to date.
Permanent placement revenue is recognized on the date the candidate’s full-time employment with the customer has commenced. The customer is invoiced on the start date, and the contract stipulates payment due under varying terms, typically 90 days. The contract with the customer stipulates a guarantee period whereby the Company will replace the candidate for free of charge if the employee is terminated within that 90-day period. As such, the Company’s performance obligations are satisfied upon commencement of the employment, at which point control has transferred to the customer.
Allowances, recorded as a liability, are established to estimate these losses. Fees to client are generally calculated as a percentage of the new worker’s annual compensation. No fees for permanent placement services are charged to employment candidates.
Video and Multimedia Production revenues from contracts with client are recognized in the amount to which we have a right to invoice when the services are rendered by our field talent.
INTANGIBLE ASSETS
The Company holds intangible assets with finite lives. Intangible assets with finite useful lives are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives, ranging from three to ten years, based on a pattern in which the economic benefit of the respective intangible asset is realized.
Identifiable intangible assets recognized in conjunction with acquisitions are recorded at fair value. Significant unobservable inputs are used to determine the fair value of the identifiable intangible assets based on the income approach valuation model whereby the present worth and anticipated future benefits of the identifiable intangible assets were discounted back to their net present value.
The Company evaluates the recoverability of intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an intangible asset’s carrying amount may not be recoverable. The Company annually evaluates the remaining useful lives of all intangible assets to determine whether events and circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining period of amortization. The Company determined that there were impairment indicators for these assets during the year ended December 31, 2021, and thus impaired $170 in remaining carrying value of IQS based intangible assets.
GOODWILL
Goodwill represents the difference between the enterprise value/cash paid less the fair value of all recognized net asset fair values including identifiable intangible asset values in a business combination. The Company reviews goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. Based on annual testing, the Company has determined that there was goodwill impairment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Thus, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment adjustment of $518 upon finalizing the detailed step two impairment analysis for the IQS segment that led to a decrease in revenue ($2,000) in 2021 from 2020. In total the Company recorded $688 in goodwill and intangible impairment charges for the IQS business segment.
The Company first evaluates qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not (that is, a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, including goodwill. If after qualitatively assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then further testing is unnecessary. If after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, the Company then estimates the fair value of the reporting unit and compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, including goodwill, as discussed below.
In assessing whether it is more likely than not that an indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, the Company assesses relevant events and circumstances that could affect the significant inputs used to determine the fair value.
The quantitative impairment test for an indefinite-lived intangible asset consists of a comparison of the fair value of the asset with its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of an intangible asset exceeds its fair value, the Company shall recognize an impairment loss in an amount equal to that excess.
The quantitative goodwill impairment test involves a two-step process. In the first step, the Company compares the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired, and no further testing is required. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, The Company must perform the second step of the impairment test to measure the amount of impairment loss. In the second step, the reporting unit’s fair value is allocated to all of the assets and liabilities of the reporting unit, including any unrecognized intangible assets, in a hypothetical analysis that calculates the implied fair value of goodwill in the same manner as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUCEMENTS
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements and their potential effect on our results of operations and financial condition, refer to Note 3 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.