ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes thereto (“financial statements”) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements. See “Forward-Looking Statements” and “Item 1A.-Risk Factors” for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The historical results of operations discussed in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are those of RE/MAX Holdings, Inc. (“Holdings”) and its consolidated subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “we,” “our” or “us”).
Executive Summary
Business Overview
We are one of the world’s leading franchisors in the real estate industry. We franchise real estate brokerages globally under the RE/MAX brand and mortgage brokerages in the U.S. under the Motto Mortgage brand. We also sell ancillary products and services, primarily technology, to our franchise networks and, in certain instances, we commercialize those offerings outside our franchise networks. RE/MAX and Motto are 100% franchised-we do not own any of the brokerages that operate under these brands. We focus on enabling our networks’ success by providing powerful technology, quality education, and valuable marketing to build the strength of the RE/MAX and Motto brands. Though we support our franchisees in growing their brokerages, our franchisees fund the cost of developing their brokerages. As a result, we maintain a relatively low fixed-cost structure which, combined with our primarily recurring fee-based revenue model, enables us to optimize the inherent leverage of the franchising business, yielding high margins and significant cash flow.
To best serve our customers, we are organized into the following segments based on the services we provide:
● Real Estate, which includes our RE/MAX brand and G73 and First product offerings;
● Mortgage, which includes our Motto Mortgage and wemlo brands; and
● Marketing Funds, which includes our collective franchise marketing funds, which operate at no profit.
Acquisition
On July 21, 2021, we acquired the operating companies of the North American regions of RE/MAX INTEGRA (“INTEGRA”) for cash consideration of approximately $235 million. INTEGRA’s regions include five Canadian provinces (New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario and Prince Edward Island) and nine U.S. states (Connecticut, Indiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont and Wisconsin).The acquisition converted these formerly Independent Regions into Company-Owned Regions, allowing us to scale, enhance our ability to deliver value to our affiliates and recapture the value differential of more than 19,000 agents (approximately 12,000 in Canada and 7,000 in the U.S.).
Financial and Operational Highlights
During 2021, we focused our efforts on increasing RE/MAX agent count; expanding our Motto brand through increased franchise sales and office openings; integrating G73, First and wemlo offerings; and purchasing and integrating INTEGRA. Our efforts contributed to the following results:
(Compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, unless otherwise noted)
● Total revenue increased 23.9% of $329.7 million.
● Total revenue excluding the Marketing Funds(a), increased 22.7%, or $45.7 million, and was comprised of 11.8% organic growth, 9.8% growth from acquisitions and 1.1% growth from foreign currency movements.
● Net income (loss) attributable to RE/MAX Holdings, Inc. of ($15.6) million.
● Adjusted EBITDA of $119.7 million and Adjusted EBITDA margin of 36.3% compared to Adjusted EBITDA of $92.6 million and Adjusted EBITDA margin of 34.8% from the prior year.
● Total agent count increased by 3.1% to 141,998 agents.
● U.S. and Canada combined agent count increased 1.4% to 85,471 agents with 10.0% Canadian agent growth more than offsetting a decline in U.S. agent count.
● Total open Motto Mortgage offices increased 32.6% to 187 offices.
(a) Revenue excluding the Marketing Funds is a non-GAAP measure of financial performance that differs from the U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. Revenue excluding the Marketing Funds is calculated directly from our consolidated financial statements as Total revenue less Marketing Funds fees.
The Financial and Operational Highlights, Results of Operations and Sources and Uses of Cash, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 and as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, has been previously disclosed in Item 7 of our 2020 Amendment No. 1 to Annual Report on Form 10-K/A and in Item 7 of our 2019 Annual Report on Form 10-K and are incorporated herein by reference.
Key Performance Indicators
Operating Performance Indicators
We believe that agent count (particularly in the U.S. and Canada) and open Motto offices, and to a lesser extent, RE/MAX and Motto franchise sales, are key operating measures of our success.
Financial Performance Indicators
We believe that revenue growth excluding the Marketing Funds and Adjusted EBITDA (both in dollars and margin) are key financial measures of our success.
Revenue Growth. The Marketing Funds operate at no profit; accordingly, there is no impact to overall profitability of the Company from these revenues. Because the Marketing Funds do not contribute to operating profit, we do not consider Marketing Funds revenue changes a part of our key performance indicators.
We review year-over-year revenue growth excluding the Marketing Funds as a key measure of our success in addressing customer needs. We measure revenue growth in terms of organic, acquisitive, and foreign currency impacts. We define these components as follows:
● Organic - We define organic revenue growth as total revenue growth other than the Marketing Funds, acquisitions and foreign currency movements. We drive this type of revenue growth through many means, including by selling more franchises, expanding our franchise networks, increasing the productivity of our networks, pricing, increasing home prices, expanding wallet share of existing customers through up-selling and cross-selling efforts, securing new customer business, and selling new or enhanced product offerings.
● Acquisitive - We define acquisitive revenue as the revenue generated from acquired products and services from the date of acquisition to the first anniversary date of that acquisition.
● Foreign currency - We define the foreign currency impact on revenue as the difference between current revenue measured at current exchange rates and current revenue measured at the corresponding prior period exchange rates. Due to the significance of revenue transacted in foreign currencies, we believe it is important to measure the impact of foreign currency movements on revenue.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are non-GAAP financial measures. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin and a reconciliation of the differences between Adjusted EBITDA and net income (loss), which is the most comparable U.S. generally accepted
accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) measure for operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenue.
Selected Operating and Financial Highlights
The following tables summarize several key performance indicators and our results of operations for the last three years.
(1) Excludes virtual offices and Branchises.
(2) Includes franchise sales in the U.S., Canada and global regions.
(1) See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further discussion of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin and a reconciliation of the differences between Adjusted EBITDA and net income (loss), which is the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure for operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenue.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
A summary of the components of our revenue is as follows (in thousands except percentages):
Revenue excluding the Marketing Funds, increased $45.7 million or 22.7%, which was comprised of 11.8% organic growth, 9.8% acquisitive growth and 1.1% growth from foreign-currency movements. Organic growth increased primarily due to increased broker fees due to rising home prices and higher transactions per agent, temporary COVID-19 financial support introduced in the prior year, which included a waiver or discount of Continuing franchise fees, fewer agent recruiting initiatives versus the prior year, a price increase in RE/MAX continuing franchise fees, and Motto growth. Growth attributable to acquisitions was due to revenue from the RE/MAX INTEGRA North American regions acquisition. Consolidated revenue increased due to the aforementioned factors plus growth in Marketing Funds fees primarily from acquisitions.
Continuing Franchise Fees
Revenue from Continuing franchise fees increased primarily due to contributions from the acquisition of INTEGRA, temporary COVID-19 financial support initiatives in the prior year, which included a waiver or discount of Continuing franchise fees, fewer agent recruiting initiatives in the current year, RE/MAX monthly fee increases, and Motto expansion. Beginning April 1, 2021, there was an average price increase of 3.8% in RE/MAX Continuing franchise fees in most of our U.S. Company-Owned regions.
Broker Fees
Revenue from Broker fees increased primarily due to rising home prices, higher total transactions per agent and contributions from the acquisition of INTEGRA.
Marketing Funds fees
Revenue from the Marketing Funds fees increased primarily due to contributions from the acquisition of INTEGRA, temporary COVID-19 financial support initiatives introduced in the prior year, which included a waiver or discount of Marketing Funds fees, and fewer agent recruiting initiatives in the current year.
Franchise Sales and Other Revenue
Franchise sales and other revenue increased primarily due to incremental revenue from our 2020 acquisitions of wemlo and Gadberry, partially offset by continued attrition of booj’s legacy customer base and lower event-based revenue due to our 2021 annual agent conference having limited in-person attendance due to COVID-19 restrictions.
Operating Expenses
A summary of the components of our operating expenses is as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
n/m - not meaningful
Selling, Operating and Administrative Expenses
Selling, operating and administrative expenses consists of personnel costs, professional fee expenses, lease costs and other expenses. Other expenses within selling, operating and administrative expenses include certain marketing and production costs that are not paid by the Marketing Funds, including travel and entertainment costs, and costs associated with our events and technology services.
A summary of the components of our selling, operating and administrative expenses is as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
Total selling, operating and administrative expenses increased as follows:
● Personnel costs increased primarily due to higher equity-based compensation expense (see Note 13, Equity-Based Compensation). In addition, increased headcount largely from acquisitions, compensation increases for existing employees, higher costs due to an increase in the corporate bonus from the prior year, and higher costs associated with acquiring and integrating new companies also contributed to the increase.
● Professional fees increased primarily due to an increase in acquisition related expenses, primarily related to advisor, legal, accounting and tax fees from acquiring INTEGRA. Legal fees also increased including fees related to the Moehrl-related suits (See section titled “Legal Proceedings,” set forth in Part I, Item 3 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
● Other selling, operating and administrative expenses increased primarily due to higher travel and events expenses, increased spend on technology, and increased acquisition and integration expenses, partially offset by lower bad debt expense driven by improved collections.
Marketing Funds Expenses
We recognize an equal and offsetting amount of expenses to revenue such that there is no impact to our overall profitability.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased primarily due to new amortization related to our acquisitions.
Settlement and Impairment Charges
Loss on Contract Settlement (2021)
We recorded a $40.9 million loss on our contractual relationship with INTEGRA which was settled with the acquisition of INTEGRA. The loss represents the fair value of the difference between the historical contractual rates paid by INTEGRA and the current market rate. The loss is recorded in “Settlement and impairment charges” in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Income (Loss). See Note 6, Acquisitions for additional information about our acquisition.
Impairment Charge - Goodwill (2021)
We identified impairment indicators associated with the First reporting unit in the Real Estate segment, primarily due to lower than expected adoption rates of the technology, resulting in downward revisions to long-term forecasts which is a significant input in the fair value of the reporting unit. Therefore, we performed an interim impairment test on the goodwill of the First reporting unit and recorded a non-cash impairment charge of $5.1 million. See Note 8, Intangible Assets and Goodwill for additional information.
Impairment charge - leased assets (2020)
We began executing on a plan to both refresh our corporate headquarters and sublease space made available through the refresh. As a result, we performed an impairment test on the portion of our headquarters we intend to sublease and recognized an impairment charge of $7.9 million. See Note 3, Leases, for additional information about our leases.
Other Expenses, Net
A summary of the components of our operating expenses is as follows (in thousands, except percentages):
Other expenses, net increased primarily due to an increase in interest expense and loss on extinguishment of debt because of the refinance and increase of our Senior Secured Credit Facility (see Note 10, Debt, for more information) the proceeds of which were used to fund the acquisition of INTEGRA. Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) are primarily the result of transactions denominated in the Canadian Dollar.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate was (11.1)% and 30.8% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in the effective tax rate was primarily due to (a) the $40.9 million loss on contract settlement that has no tax provision; (b) decreases in the 2021 provision for income taxes related to the settlement of uncertain tax positions; and (c)
2020 nonrecurring taxes arising from the conversion of wemlo and First from C Corporations to flow-through entities (which is expected to provide long-term tax amortization benefits). See Note 12, Income Taxes for additional information.
Our effective income tax rate depends on many factors, including a rate benefit attributable to the fact that the portion of RMCO’s earnings attributable to the non-controlling interests are not subject to corporate-level taxes because RMCO is classified as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes and therefore is treated as a “flow-through entity,” as well as annual changes in state and foreign income tax rates. See Note 4, Non-controlling Interest, further details on the allocation of income taxes between Holdings and the non-controlling interest and see Note 12, Income Taxes for additional information.
Adjusted EBITDA
See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for our definition of Adjusted EBITDA and for further discussion of our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA as well as a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss), which is the most comparable GAAP measure for operating performance.
Adjusted EBITDA was $119.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $27.1 million from the comparable prior year period. Adjusted EBITDA increased due to higher broker fees, temporary COVID-19 financial support initiatives in the prior year, incremental revenue from fewer agent recruiting initiatives, a price increase in RE/MAX continuing franchise fees, and improved collections, partially offset by higher personnel costs due an increase in the corporate bonus compared to the prior year, headcount increases and compensation increases for existing employees in our Real Estate segment offset by continued investment in our Mortgage segment. Adjusted EBITDA also increased due to contributions from the acquisition of INTEGRA.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) has adopted rules to regulate the use in filings with the SEC and in public disclosures of financial measures that are not in accordance with U.S. GAAP, such as Revenue excluding the Marketing Funds and Adjusted EBITDA and the ratios related thereto. These measures are derived on the basis of methodologies other than in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Revenue excluding the Marketing Funds is a non-GAAP measure of financial performance that differs from the U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. Revenue excluding the Marketing Funds is calculated directly from our consolidated financial statements as Total revenue less Marketing Funds fees.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA (consolidated net income (loss) before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, interest income and the provision for income taxes, each of which is presented in our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K), adjusted for the impact of the following items that are either non-cash or that we do not consider representative of our ongoing operating performance: gain or loss on sale or disposition of assets, settlement and impairment charges, equity-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expense, gains or losses from changes in the tax receivable agreement liability, expense or income related to changes in the fair value measurement of contingent consideration and other non-recurring items.
As Adjusted EBITDA omits certain non-cash items and other non-recurring cash charges or other items, we believe that it is less susceptible to variances that affect our operating performance resulting from depreciation, amortization and other non-cash and non-recurring cash charges or other items. We present Adjusted EBITDA, and the related Adjusted EBITDA margin, because we believe they are useful as supplemental measures in evaluating the performance of our operating businesses and provides greater transparency into our results of operations. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin as factors in evaluating the performance of our business.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these measures either in isolation or as a substitute for analyzing our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● these measures do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● these measures do not reflect our interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
● these measures do not reflect our income tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
● these measures do not reflect the cash requirements to pay dividends to stockholders of our Class A common stock and tax and other cash distributions to our non-controlling unitholders;
● these measures do not reflect the cash requirements pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreements (“TRAs”);
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often require replacement in the future, and these measures do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements;
● although equity-based compensation is a non-cash charge, the issuance of equity-based awards may have a dilutive impact on earnings per share; and
● other companies may calculate these measures differently, so similarly named measures may not be comparable.
The adjustments to EBITDA in future periods are generally expected to be similar to the kinds of charges and costs excluded from Adjusted EBITDA in prior periods. The exclusion of these charges and costs in future periods will have a significant impact on our Adjusted EBITDA. We are not able to provide a reconciliation of anticipated non-GAAP financial information for future periods to the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures without unreasonable effort because of the uncertainty and variability of the nature and amount of these future charges and costs.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss) is set forth in the following table (in thousands):
(1) Represents the effective settlement of the pre-existing master franchise agreements with INTEGRA that was recognized with the acquisition. See Note 6, Acquisitions for additional information.
(2) The loss was recognized in connection with the amended restated Senior Secured Credit Facility. See Note 10, Debt for additional information.
(3) Represents the impairment recognized on a portion of our corporate headquarters office building in the prior year. See Note 3, Leases for additional information.
(4) Lower than expected adoption rates of the First technology resulted in downward revisions to long-term forecasts, resulting in an impairment charge to the First reporting unit goodwill. See Note 8, Intangible Assets and Goodwill for additional information.
(5) Acquisition-related expense includes personnel, legal, accounting, advisory and consulting fees incurred in connection with the evaluation, due diligence, execution and integration of acquisitions.
(6) Fair value adjustments to contingent consideration include amounts recognized for changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration liabilities. See Note 11, Fair Value Measurements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview of Factors Affecting Our Liquidity
Our liquidity position is affected by the growth of our agent and franchise base and conditions in the real estate market. In this regard, our short-term liquidity position from time to time has been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors including agents in the RE/MAX network, particularly in Company-Owned Regions. Our cash flows are primarily related to the timing of:
(i) cash receipt of revenues;
(ii) payment of selling, operating and administrative expenses;
(iii) investments in technology and Motto;
(iv) cash consideration for acquisitions and acquisition-related expenses;
(v) principal payments and related interest payments on our Senior Secured Credit Facility;
(vi) dividend payments to stockholders of our Class A common stock;
(vii) distributions and other payments to non-controlling unitholders pursuant to the terms of RMCO’s limited liability company operating agreement (“the RMCO, LLC Agreement”);
(viii) corporate tax payments paid by the Company;
(ix) payments to the TRA parties pursuant to the TRAs; and
(x) share buybacks.
We have satisfied these needs primarily through our existing cash balances, cash generated by our operations and funds available under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. We may pursue other sources of capital that may include other forms of external financing, such as additional financing in the public capital markets, in order to increase our cash position and preserve financial flexibility as needs arise.
Financing Resources
RMCO and RE/MAX, LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of RMCO, have a credit agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, and various lenders party thereto (the “Senior Secured Credit Facility”). On July 21, 2021, we amended and restated our Senior Secured Credit Facility to fund the acquisition of INTEGRA and refinance our existing facility. The revised facility provides for a seven-year $460.0 million term loan facility and a five-year $50.0 million revolving loan facility. The revised facility also provides for incremental facilities under which RE/MAX, LLC may request to add one or more tranches of term facilities or increase any then existing credit facility in the aggregate principal amount of up to $100 million (or a higher amount subject to the terms and conditions of the Senior Secured Credit Facility), subject to lender participation.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility requires RE/MAX, LLC to repay term loans at $1.2 million per quarter. We are also required to repay the term loans and reduce revolving commitments with (i) 100% of proceeds of any incurrence of additional debt not permitted by the Senior Secured Credit Facility, (ii) 100% of proceeds of asset sales and 100% of amounts recovered under insurance policies, subject to certain exceptions and a reinvestment right and (iii) 50% of Excess Cash Flow (or “ECF” as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility) at the end of the applicable fiscal year if RE/MAX, LLC’s Total Leverage Ratio (or “TLR” as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility) is in excess of 4.25:1. If the TLR as of the last day of such fiscal year is equal to or less than 4.25:1 but above 3.75:1, the repayment percentage is 25% of ECF and if the TLR as of the last day of such fiscal year is less than 3.75:1, no repayment from ECF is required.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility is guaranteed by RMCO and is secured by a lien on substantially all of the assets of RE/MAX, LLC and other operating companies.
The Senior Secured Credit Facility provides for customary restrictions on, among other things, additional indebtedness, liens, dispositions of property, dividends, transactions with affiliates and fundamental changes such as mergers, consolidations and liquidations. With certain exceptions, any default under any of our other agreements evidencing
indebtedness in the amount of $15.0 million or more constitutes an event of default under the Senior Secured Credit Facility.
Borrowings under the term loans and revolving loans accrue interest, at our option on (a) LIBOR, provided LIBOR shall be no less than 0.50% plus an applicable margin of 2.50% and, provided further that such rate shall be adjusted for reserve requirements for eurocurrency liabilities, if any (the “LIBOR Rate”) or (b) the greatest of (i) the prime rate as quoted by the Wall Street Journal, (ii) the NYFRB Rate (as defined in the Senior Secured Credit Facility) plus 0.50% and (iii) the one-month Eurodollar Rate plus 1.00%, (such greatest rate, the “ABR”) plus, in each case, an applicable margin of 1.50%. The Senior Secured Credit Facility includes a provision for transition from LIBOR to the alternative reference rate of Term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”)) on or before June 2023 (the LIBOR Rate cessation date). As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate on the term loan facility was 3.0%.
Whenever amounts are drawn under the revolving line of credit, the Senior Secured Credit Facility requires compliance with a leverage ratio (calculated as net debt to EBITDA as defined therein). A commitment fee of 0.5% per annum (subject to reductions) accrues on the amount of unutilized revolving line of credit.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $452.1 million of term loans outstanding, net of unamortized discount and issuance costs, and no revolving loans outstanding under our Senior Secured Credit Facility.
Sources and Uses of Cash
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had $126.3 million and $101.4 million, respectively, in cash and cash equivalents, of which approximately $8.9 million and $4.2 million were denominated in foreign currencies, respectively.
Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities decreased primarily as a result of:
● an increase in Adjusted EBITDA of $27.1 million that more than offset by;
● a decrease due to the loss on contract settlements of $40.9 million;
● a decrease due to higher tax payments of $10.6 million, primarily related to settlement of uncertain tax positions;
● a decrease due to higher acquisition related costs, which are excluded from Adjusted EBITDA; and
● timing differences on various operating assets and liabilities.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the change in cash (used in) provided by investing activities was primarily the result of the INTEGRA acquisition and work completed on our corporate headquarters refresh.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the change in cash provided by (used in) financing activities was primarily due to net cash received from the increase in our term loan.
Capital Allocation Priorities
Liquidity
Our objective is to maintain a strong liquidity position. We have existing cash balances, cash flows from operating activities, access to our revolving facility and incremental facilities under our Senior Secured Credit Facility available to support the needs of our business. As needs arise, we may seek additional financing in the public capital markets.
Acquisitions
As part of our growth strategy, we may pursue acquisitions of Independent Regions in the U.S. and Canada as well as additional acquisitions or investments in complementary businesses, services and technologies that would provide access to new markets, revenue streams, or otherwise complement our existing operations. We may fund any such growth with various sources of capital including existing cash balances and cash flow from operations, as well as proceeds from debt financings including under existing credit facilities or new arrangements raised in the public capital markets.
Capital Expenditures
The total aggregate amount for purchases of property and equipment and capitalization of developed software was $15.2 million, $6.9 million and $13.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts primarily relate to spend on our corporate headquarters refresh and investments in technology. In order to expand our technology, we plan to continue to re-invest in our business in order to improve operational efficiencies and enhance the tools and services provided to the affiliates in our networks. Total capital expenditures for 2022 are expected to be between $10.0 million and $13.0 million. See Financial and Operational Highlights above for additional information.
Return of Capital
Our Board of Directors approved quarterly cash dividends of $0.23 and $0.22 per share on all outstanding shares of Class A common stock every quarter in 2021 and 2020, respectively, as disclosed in Note 5, Earnings Per Share and Dividends. On February 22, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.23 per share on all outstanding shares of Class A common stock, which is payable on March 16, 2022 to stockholders of record at the close of business on March 4, 2022. On January 11, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a common stock repurchase program of up to $100 million. Future capital allocation decisions with respect to return of capital either in the form of additional future dividends, and, if declared, the amount of any such future dividend, or in the form of share buybacks, will be subject to our actual future earnings and capital requirements and any amounts authorized will be at the discretion of our Board of Directors.
Distributions and Other Payments to Non-controlling Unitholders by RMCO
Distributions to Non-Controlling Unitholders Pursuant to the RMCO, LLC Agreement
As authorized by the RMCO, LLC Agreement, RMCO makes cash distributions to its members, Holdings and RIHI. Distributions are required to be made by RMCO to its members on a pro-rata basis in accordance with each members’ ownership percentage in RMCO. These distributions have historically been either in the form of payments to cover its members’ estimated tax liabilities, dividend payments, or payments to ensure pro-rata distributions have occurred.
As a limited liability company (treated as a partnership for income tax purposes), RMCO does not incur significant domestic federal, state or local income taxes, as these taxes are primarily the obligations of its members. RMCO is generally required to distribute cash to its members to cover each member’s estimated tax liabilities, if any, with respect to their allocable share of RMCO earnings. Such distributions are required if any other distributions from RMCO (i.e., in the form of dividend payments) for the relevant period are otherwise insufficient to enable each member to cover its estimated tax liabilities.
Holdings’ only source of cash flow from operations is in the form of distributions from RMCO. Holdings receives distributions from RMCO on a quarterly basis that are equal to the dividend payments Holdings makes to the stockholders of its Class A common stock. As a result, absent any additional distributions, Holdings may have insufficient funds to cover its estimated tax and TRA liabilities. Therefore, as necessary, RMCO makes a separate distribution to Holdings, and because all distributions must be made on a pro-rata basis, RIHI receives a separate payment to ensure such pro-rata distributions have occurred.
Payments Pursuant to the Tax Receivable Agreements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company reflected a total liability of $30.5 million under the terms of its TRAs. The liability pursuant to the TRAs will increase upon future exchanges by RIHI of RMCO common units, with the increase representing 85% of the estimated future tax benefits, if any, resulting from such exchanges. Payments are made on this liability as tax benefits are realized by Holdings.
Distributions and other payments pursuant to the RMCO, LLC Agreement and TRAs were comprised of the following (in thousands):
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods (in thousands):
(1) We have reflected full payment of our Senior Secured Credit Facility in July 2028 at maturity. The Senior Secured Credit Facility may require additional prepayments throughout the term of the loan based on the TLR as discussed above.
(2) The variable interest rate on the Senior Secured Credit Facility is assumed at the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2021 of 3.0%.
(3) We are obligated under non-cancelable leases for offices and equipment. Future payments under these leases and commitments, net of payments to be received under sublease agreements of $4.5 million in the aggregate, are included in the table above, See Note 3, Leases, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
(4) As described elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we entered into TRAs, that will provide for the payment by us of 85% of the amount of cash savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that we realize as a result of tax deductions arising from the increase in tax basis in RMCO’s assets.
(5) Represents outstanding purchase orders with vendors initiated in the ordinary course of business for operating and capital expenditures, including payments from the Marketing Funds.
(6) Represents estimated payments to the former owner of Motto and former owners of Gadberry as required per the purchase agreements. See Note 11, Fair Value Measurements, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information.
Commitments and Contingencies
Our management does not believe there are any matters involving us that could result, individually or in the aggregate, in a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no material off balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Several of the estimates and assumptions we are required to make relate to matters that are inherently uncertain as they pertain to future events. We base estimates on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. We believe that the accounting policies and estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Mortgage Goodwill
We assess goodwill for impairment at least annually or whenever an event occurs, or circumstances change that would indicate impairment may have occurred at the reporting unit level. Reporting units are driven by the level at which segment management reviews operating results. We perform our required impairment testing annually on October 1. For most of our reporting units, the fair value of the reporting unit significantly exceeded its carrying value at the latest assessment date and only a qualitative impairment test was performed.
The Mortgage reporting unit, which has a carrying value of goodwill as of December 31, 2021 of $18.6 million, is an early-stage business and its fair value is tied primarily to franchise sales over the next several years, the adoption rate of wemlo processing services, and the discount rate used in our discounted cash flow analysis. Failure to achieve targeted franchise sales (which are currently estimated at between 70 and 80 per year over the next 10 years) or loan processing double digit annualized growth rates could result in an impairment of this goodwill balance.
Purchase Accounting for Acquisitions
We allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to its identifiable assets and liabilities based on estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the amount allocated to the identifiable assets less liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Purchase price allocations require management to make assumptions and apply judgment to estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities. Management estimates the fair value of assets and liabilities primarily using discounted cash flow analysis.
We engage outside appraisal firms to assist in the fair value determination of identifiable intangible assets, primarily franchise rights, and in measuring the loss on settlement of pre-existing master franchise contracts (if applicable). The timing and amount of expected future cash flows used in the valuation requires estimates, among other items, of revenue and agent growth rates, operating expenses and expected operating cash flow margins. The development of these cash flows, and the discount rate applied to the cash flows, is subject to inherent uncertainties. Any estimate of loss on settlement is dependent on determining market rates for similar services. We adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, after the acquisition closing date through the end of the measurement period of one year or less as we finalize valuations for the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. If estimates or assumptions used to complete the initial purchase price allocation and estimate the fair value of acquired assets and liabilities significantly differed from assumptions made in the final valuation, the allocation of purchase price between goodwill and intangibles could significantly differ. Such a difference would impact future earnings through amortization expense of these intangibles. In addition, if forecasts supporting the valuation of the intangible assets or goodwill are not achieved, impairments could arise, as discussed further above.
Deferred Tax Assets and TRA Liability
As discussed in Item 1. Business, Holdings has twice acquired significant portions of the ownership in RMCO. When Holdings acquired this ownership in the form of common units, it received a significant step-up in tax basis on the underlying assets held by RMCO. The step-up is principally equivalent to the difference between (1) the fair value of the
underlying assets on the date of acquisition of the common units and (2) their tax basis in RMCO, multiplied by the percentage of units acquired. The majority of the step-up in basis relates to intangibles assets, primarily franchise agreements and goodwill, and is included within deferred tax assets on our consolidated balance sheets. The computation of the step-up requires valuations of the intangible assets of RMCO and has the same complexities and estimates as discussed in Purchase Accounting for Acquisitions above. In addition, the step-up is governed by complex IRS rules that limit which intangibles are subject to step-up, and also imposes further limits on the amount of step-up. Given the magnitude of the deferred tax assets and complexity of the calculations, small adjustments to our model used to calculate these deferred tax assets can result in material changes to the amounts recognized , especially in years when Holdings acquires ownership interest in RMCO. There were no redemptions of common units in RMCO in the periods presented. However, if more common units of RMCO are redeemed by RIHI, the percentage of RE/MAX Holdings’ ownership of RMCO will increase, and additional deferred tax assets will be created as additional tax basis step-ups occur and such amounts are likely to be material.
Pursuant to the TRA agreements, Holdings makes annual payments to RIHI and Parallaxes Rain Co-Investment, LLC (“Parallaxes”) (a successor to the TRAs prior owners) equivalent to 85% of any tax benefits realized on each year’s tax return from the additional tax deductions arising from the step-up in tax basis. A TRA liability of $30.5 million exists as of December 31, 2021 for the future cash obligations expected to be paid under the TRAs and is not discounted. The calculation of this liability is a function of the step-up described above and therefore has the same complexities and estimates. Similar to the deferred tax assets, these liabilities would likely increase materially if RIHI redeems additional common units of RMCO.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, for recently issued accounting pronouncements applicable to us and the effect of those standards on our financial statements and related disclosures.