ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included in this 2021 Form 10-K. Unless differences among reportable segments are material to an understanding of our business taken as a whole, we present the discussion in this MD&A on a consolidated basis. Terms not defined in this MD&A have the meanings ascribed to them in the Consolidated Financial Statements. All dollars are reported in thousands, except per share and per unit amounts.
Organization
RumbleOn was incorporated in October 2013 under the laws of the State of Nevada as SmartServer, Inc. In 2016, following the acquisition of SmartServer by RumbleOn founders Marshall Chesrown and Steven Berrard, we changed our name to RumbleOn, Inc. Since that time, we have grown our business through organic development and strategic acquisitions into the first and only true Omnichannel powersports retailer. Headquartered in the Dallas Metroplex, RumbleOn is revolutionizing the customer experience for outdoor enthusiasts across the country and making powersport vehicles accessible to more people, in more places than ever before.
Overview
RumbleOn is the nation’s first technology-based Omnichannel marketplace in powersports, leveraging proprietary technology to transform the powersports supply chain from acquisition of supply through distribution of retail and wholesale. RumbleOn provides an unparalleled technology suite and ecommerce experience, national footprint of physical locations, and full-line manufacturer representation to transform the entire customer experience. Our goal is to integrate the best of both the physical and the digital, and make the transition between the two seamless.
We buy and sell new and used vehicles through multiple company-owned websites and affiliate channels, as well as via our proprietary cash offer tool and network of more than 41 company-owned retail locations at December 31, 2021 primarily located in the Sunbelt. Deepening our presence in existing markets and expanding into new markets through strategic acquisitions helps perpetuate our flywheel. Our cash offer technology brings in high quality inventory, which attracts more riders and drives volume in used unit sales. This flywheel enables us to quickly and effectively gain market share. As a result of our growth to date, RumbleOn enjoys a leading, first-mover position in the highly fragmented $100 billion+ powersports market.
RumbleOn’s powersports business offers motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, utility terrain vehicles, personal watercraft, and all other powersports products, parts, apparel, and accessories. Facilitating our platform, RumbleOn’s retail distribution locations represent all major OEMs and their representative brands, including those listed below.
RumbleOn leverages technology and data to streamline operations, improve profitability, and drive lifetime engagement by offering a best-in-class customer experience with unmatched Omnichannel capabilities. Our Omnichannel platform offers consumers the fastest, easiest, and most transparent transactions available in powersports. RumbleOn customers have access to the most comprehensive powersports vehicle offering, including the ability to buy, sell, trade, and finance online, in store at any of our bricks-and-mortar locations, or both. RumbleOn offers financing solutions for consumers; trusted physical
retail and service locations; online or in-store instant cash offers, and access to pre-owned inventory; and apparel, parts, service, and accessories. In addition to our powersports operations, we operate in complementary businesses including the brokerage of vehicle transportation and the wholesale distribution automotive business.
KEY OPERATING METRICS
We regularly review a number of key operating metrics to evaluate our segments, measure our progress, and make operating decisions. Our key operating metrics reflect what we believe will be the primary drivers of our business, including increasing brand awareness, maximizing the opportunity to source vehicles from consumers and dealers, and enhancing the selection and timing of vehicles we make available for sale to our customers. Our key operating metrics also enhance management’s ability to translate this information into sales through multiple sales channels. The Key Operations Metrics table below includes the results of the RideNow Entities exclusively from August 31, 2021 (the “Acquisition Date”) through December 31, 2021. Please note that RideNow’s results prior to the Acquisition Date are not reflected in the presentation below. The Acquired Entities have certain lines of business, including new vehicle sales, material finance and insurance revenue, and parts and service revenue, that RumbleOn did not have prior to the RideNow Transaction. As such all increases in these line items are exclusively the result of the acquisition and the reader should note that most period-over-period dollar comparisons (as opposed to per unit amounts) are materially impacted by the introduction of the new business (the “Acquisition Effect”)
Powersports and Automotive Segments
Revenue
Revenue of is comprised of vehicle sales, finance and insurance products bundled with retail vehicle sales (“F&I”), and parts, service and accessories/merchandise (“PSA”). We sell both new and pre-owned vehicles through retail and wholesale channels. F&I and PSA revenue is almost exclusively earned through retail channels. Automotive sales are almost exclusively via wholesale channels, and therefore, contribute to a very small portion of F&I revenue. These sales channels provide us the opportunity to maximize profitability through increased sales volume and lower average days to sale by selling through the channel where the opportunity is the greatest at any given time based on customer demand, market conditions or inventory availability. The number of vehicles sold to any given channel may vary from period to period these factors. Subject to the lingering impact of COVID-19 and the resulting Demand/Supply Imbalances, as discussed elsewhere in this MD&A, we expect pre-owned vehicle sales to increase as we begin to utilize a combination of brand building and direct response channels to efficiently source and scale our addressable markets while expanding our suite of product offerings to consumers who may wish to trade-in or to sell us their vehicle independent of a retail sale. Factors primarily affecting pre-owned vehicle sales include the number of retail pre-owned vehicles sold and the average selling price of these vehicles.
Gross Profit
Gross profit generated on vehicle sales reflects the difference between the vehicle selling price and the cost of revenue associated with acquiring the vehicle and preparing it for sale. Cost of revenue includes the vehicle acquisition cost, inbound transportation cost, and particularly for pre-owned vehicles, reconditioning costs (collectively, we refer to reconditioning and transportation costs as “Recon and Transport”). The aggregate gross profit and gross profit per vehicle vary across vehicle type, make, model, etc. as well as through retail and wholesale channels, and with regard to gross profit per vehicle, are not necessarily correlated with the sale price. Vehicles sold through retail channels generally have the highest dollar gross profit per vehicle given the vehicle is sold directly to the consumer. Pre-owned vehicles sold through wholesale channels, including directly to other dealers or through auction channels, including via our dealer-to-deal auction market, generally have lower margins and do not include other ancillary gross profit attributable to financing and accessory. Factors affecting gross profit from period to period include the mix of new versus used vehicles sold, the distribution channel through which they are sold, the sources from which we acquired such inventory, retail market prices, our average days to sale, and our pricing strategy. We may opportunistically choose to shift our inventory mix to higher or lower cost vehicles, or to opportunistically raise or lower our prices relative to market to take advantage of Demand/Supply Imbalances in our sales channels, which could temporarily lead to gross profits increasing or decreasing in any given channel.
Vehicles Sold
We define vehicles sold as the number of vehicles sold through both wholesale and retail channels in each period, net of returns. Vehicles sold is the primary driver of our revenue and, indirectly, gross profit. Vehicles sold also enables complementary revenue streams, such as financing. Vehicles sold increases our base of customers and improves brand
awareness and repeat sales. Vehicles sold also provides the opportunity to successfully scale our logistics, fulfillment, and customer service operations.
Total Gross Profit per Unit
Total gross profit per unit is the aggregate gross profit of the Company in a given period, divided by retail units sold in that period including gross profit generated from the sale of the new and used vehicles, income related to the origination of loans originated to finance the vehicle, revenue earned from the sale of F&I products including extended service contracts, maintenance programs, guaranteed auto protection, tire and wheel protection, and theft protection products, gross profit on the sale of PSA products, and gross profit generated from wholesale sales of vehicles.
Vehicle Logistics Segment
Revenue
Revenue is derived from freight brokerage agreements with dealers, distributors, or private party individuals to transport vehicles from a point of origin to a designated destination. The freight brokerage agreements are fulfilled by independent third-party transporters who must meet our performance obligations and standards. Wholesale Express is considered the principal in the delivery transactions since it is primarily responsible for fulfilling the service. In the normal course of operations, Wholesale Express also provides transportation services to Wholesale Inc.
Vehicles Delivered
We define vehicles delivered as the number of vehicles delivered from a point of origin to a designated destination under freight brokerage agreements with dealers, distributors, or private parties. Vehicles delivered are the primary driver of revenue and in turn profitability in the vehicle logistics segment.
Total Gross Profit Per Unit
Total gross profit per vehicle transported represents the difference between the price received from non-affiliated customers and our cost to contract an independent third-party transporter divided by the number of third party vehicles transported.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
_________________________
(1) Automotive gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 included an inventory reserve adjustment on $7,879 related to the Nashville Tornado.
(2) Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of operating performance that does not represent and should not be considered an alternative to net loss or cash flow from operations, as determined by GAAP. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a useful measure to us and to our investors because it excludes certain financial and capital structure items that we do not believe directly reflect our core operations and may not be indicative of our recurring operations, in part because they may vary widely across time and within our industry independent of the performance of our core operations. See the section titled “Adjusted EBITDA” below for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to Net Loss.
Revenue
Total vehicle revenue increased by $522,013 to $938,440 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $416,427 in 2020. The Acquisition Effect specific to new vehicles, F&I and PAS revenue accounted for approximately $279,131 of the increase, with $169,632 of new vehicle sales, which the Company did not sell before the RideNow Transaction. On a unit basis, the Company sold 16,742 more vehicles in 2021 than in 2020, again, primarily related to the Acquisition Effect.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased in total by $114,811 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, driven collectively by the Acquisition Effect of significantly more vehicles sales, an increase in the average selling price per vehicle and an increase in the gross margin dollars per unit sold. Gross profit increase were evident across all businesses, including both new and used powersport vehicle sales, F&I, PAS, automotive, and transportation and logistics. The Acquisition Effect was the primary driver of the powersport vehicle gross profit, while Demand/Supply Imbalances drove automotive gross profit as well as vehicle logistics and transportation gross profit.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
____________________
(1) Per vehicle values calculated as revenue or gross profit as applicable, divided by its respective units sold, except the other and total categories which are divided by total used units sold.
Revenue
Total vehicle revenue increased by $386,148 to $433,674 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $47,526 in 2020. The Acquisition Effect specific to new vehicles, F&I and PAS revenue accounted for approximately $169,632, $42,530, and $66,969, respectively, of the increase; the Company did not sell new vehicles prior to the RideNow Transaction. The total number of vehicles sold increased by 17,102 to 22,385 for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven primarily from the Acquisition Effect; new vehicle sales accounted for 10,555 of the increase, used units increased by 6,547. It is notable that 78.5% of the used unit increase is to retail consumers, who on average pay over $2,700 more per vehicle than wholesale customers. Overall, the average revenue per vehicle increased by $9,121 from $13,541 to $22,662, much of which is attributable to higher price point vehicles like UTVs and side-by-sides. We anticipate that unit purchasing levels and sales will continue to grow as we increase penetration in existing markets, build out fulfillment centers and acquire new dealers.
Gross Profit
Powersports vehicle gross profit increased by $110,366 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. This increase in gross profit was primarily due to the Acquisition Effect; $33,278 was specific to new vehicles, $18,560 was due to used vehicles sales and F&I, and PAS collectively accounted for $58,528 of the increase. Gross Profit per vehicle increased $1,280 per unit, from $5,114 in 2020 to $6,394 in 2021. The Acquisition Effect was the primary driver of this, as all new vehicle sales fell into this category, however F&I and parts and service represent new revenue channels for the Company in 2021 after the RideNow Transaction.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
(1) Total Gross profit per vehicle retailed is calculated by dividing the sum of new vehicle, used vehicle, and finance, and insurance gross profit by total retail vehicle unit sales.
Revenue
Total automotive vehicle revenue increased by $123,803 to $460,888 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $337,085 for 2020 despite a 2.8% decrease in the total number of automotive units sold to 12,381. The revenue per vehicle in 2021 benefited from the Demand/Supply Imbalances, while the corresponding period was materially impacted by the Nashville Tornado and the effect of shelter-in-place orders and other responses to COVID-19.
Gross Profit
Automotive vehicle gross profit increased by $2,462 to $30,746 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $28,284 in 2020. A 2.8% decrease in the number of automotive vehicles sold was more than offset by a 11.9% increase in the gross profit per automotive vehicle sold to $2,483.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $12,917 or 36.0% to $48,804 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $35,887 in 2020. The increase in total revenue resulted from the transport of 84,540 vehicles at revenue per vehicle transported of $577 compared to revenue from the transport of 61,314 vehicles at a revenue per vehicle transported of $585 in 2020.
In the normal course of operations, the Company utilizes transportation services of its vehicle logistics and transportation services segment. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, intercompany freight services provided by Wholesale Express was $4,925 and $4,071, respectively and was eliminated in the consolidated financial statements.
Gross Profit
Total gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $1,984 or 26.1% to $9,600, or $114 per vehicle transported, as compared to $7,616 or $124 per vehicle transported in 2020. The increased gross profit was attributed to an increase in the number of vehicle transported offset by slightly lower revenue per vehicle transported and gross profit per vehicle transported.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to December 31, 2020
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expenses include costs and expenses for compensation and benefits, advertising and marketing, development and operating our product procurement and distribution system, managing our logistics system, and other corporate overhead expenses, including expenses associated with technology development, legal, accounting, finance, and business development. Selling, general and administrative expenses will continue to increase in future periods as we execute and aggressively expand our business through increased marketing spending and the addition of management and support personnel to ensure we adequately develop and maintain operational, financial and management controls as well as our reporting systems and procedures, but we anticipate they will decline as a percentage of sales revenue.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $110,418 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. In each case other than technology development and software, the increases were the result of the Acquisition Effect,
with over 1,800 additional employees, marketing initiatives at the store level, general and administrative costs associated with a larger team, and lease/facility expense related to 40+ new locations from the RideNow Transaction. In the case of technology and development, in the third quarter of 2021 we began some strategic technology projects focused on inventory management, infrastructure, and integration efforts. Notwithstanding the preceding, both the Nashville Tornado and the nationwide economic slowdown of COVID-19 late in the first quarter of 2020 lasting until the spring of 2021, resulted in artificially lower costs incurred in 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $3,960 to $6,103 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2,143 for 2020. The increase in depreciation and amortization is a result of the cumulative investments made in connection with the development of the business which included capitalized technology acquisition and development costs of $1,266 and $2,707 in additions to property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1,887 of capitalized technology acquisition and development costs and $3,530 in additions to property and equipment for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, amortization of capitalized technology development was $1,710 as compared to $1,887 for the same period of 2020. Depreciation and amortization on vehicle, furniture, equipment and leasehold improvements was $210 as compared to $256 for the same period of 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $9,955 to $16,405 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6,450 in 2020. Interest expense consists of interest on the: (i) term loan credit agreement (the “Oaktree Credit Facility”); (ii) various floorplan facilities; (iii) private placement notes; and (iv) convertible senior notes. The increase in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 is primarily related to the RideNow Transaction, as we borrowed $280,000 in new debt on the Closing Date from the Oaktree Credit Facility and RideNow had various floorplan facilities with powersports manufacturers. The Company assumed floorplan facilities as part of the RideNow Transaction, which were used throughout the year ended December 31, 2021 to finance the purchase of inventory. See Note 9-Notes Payable and Lines of Credit for additional discussion.
Seasonality
Historically, both the powersports and automotive industries have been seasonal with traffic and sales strongest in the spring and summer quarters. Sales and traffic are typically slowest in the winter quarter but increase typically in the spring season, coinciding with tax refunds and improved weather conditions. Given this seasonality, we expect our quarterly results of operations, including our revenue, gross profit, profit/loss, and cash flow to vary accordingly. Over time, we expect to normalize to seasonal trends in both segments, using data and logistics to move inventory to the right place, at the right time, at the right price.
Loss Contingencies and Insurance Recoveries
On March 3, 2020, a severe tornado damaged the Company's Nashville facilities, and the Company incurred the following losses: (1) inventory, assessed by the insurance carrier at approximately $13,000; (2) building and personal property assessed by the insurance carrier at $2,783; and (3) loss of business income, for which the company has coverage in the amount of $6,000.
The Company's inventory claim is subject to a litigation with the carrier as to the policy limits applicable to the loss; however, the insurer has, to date, advanced $8,750, $3,135 of which was funded in 2021, against the final settlement. The insurer has agreed to pay the full $2,778 limit, net of deductible, on the building and personal property loss and to date has advanced $2,270 to the landlord. The loss of business income claim is ongoing and remains in the process of negotiation, however, the insurer has advanced $250 against the final settlement during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company will continue to pursue the claims but can make no assurance that additional amounts will be recovered.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded an impairment loss on inventory of $11,738 comprised of $4,454 for vehicles that were a total loss and $7,284 in loss in value for vehicles partially damaged and subject to repair. The impairment loss is reported in cost of revenue in the consolidated statements of operations. Advances made against the final settlement of the inventory claim have been recorded as a separate component of operating loss in the Consolidated Statement of Operations in the period in which received.
Derivative Liability
In connection with our various financings, we undertake an analysis of each financial instrument to determine the appropriate accounting treatment, including which, if any require bifurcation into liability and equity components; we have determined that the following financings have such components:
Convertible Senior Notes
In connection with the issuance of the Convertible Senior Notes, a derivative liability was recorded at issuance with an interest make whole provision of $21 based on a lattice model using a stock price of $14.60, and estimated volatility of 55.0% and risk-free rates over the entire 10-year yield curve.
The change in value of the derivative liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $49 and $11, respectively, and is included in change in derivative liability in the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The value of the derivative liability as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 was approximately $66 and $17, respectively.
Oaktree Warrant
In connection with providing the debt financing for the RideNow Transaction, and pursuant to the commitment letter executed on March 15, 2021, the Company issued warrants to purchase $40,000 of shares of Class B common stock to Oaktree Capital Management, L.P. and its lender affiliates (the “Warrant”). The initial warrant liability and deferred financing charge recognized was $10,950. The warrant liability was subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value was recognized as a component of change in derivative liability in the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The fair value of the Warrant was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation based on a combination of level 1 and level 2 inputs. Upon closing of the RideNow Transaction, the warrants were considered equity linked contracts indexed to the Company’s stock and therefore met the equity classification guidance. As a result, the $19,700 was reclassified to additional paid-in-capital. The $10,950 deferred financing charge was reclassified as part of the debt discount related to the Oaktree Credit Agreement. The recognition of the warrant liability and deferred financing charge and the reclassification of the warrant liability to additional paid-in capital and the reclassification of the deferred financing charge to debt discount are non-cash items.
Stock-Based Compensation
In connection with the closing of the RideNow Transaction and the execution of the certain Executive Employment Agreements, the Company accelerated the vesting of and waived certain market-based share price hurdles for all then outstanding restricted stock units (“RSUs”) for all participants, which resulted in excess of $23,943 of incremental stock-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income (loss) or net income (loss) as a measure of operating performance or cash flows or as a measure of liquidity. Non-GAAP financial measures are not necessarily calculated the same way by different companies and should not be considered a substitute for or superior to U.S. GAAP.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) adjusted to add back interest expense (including debt extinguishment), depreciation and amortization, interest income and miscellaneous income, changes in derivative liabilities and certain recoveries, income tax benefits, and other non-recurring costs, as these recoveries, charges and expenses are not considered a part of our core business operations and are not an indicator of ongoing, future company performance.
Adjusted EBITDA is one of the primary metrics used by management to evaluate the financial performance of our business. We present Adjusted EBITDA because we believe it is frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. Further, we believe it is helpful in highlighting trends in our operating results, because it excludes, among other things, certain results of decisions that are outside the control of management, while other measures can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure and capital investments.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, adjustments to calculating Adjusted EBITDA are primarily comprised of:
•Impairment loss on inventory and plant and equipment resulting from the Nashville Tornado and the related proceeds received from the Company’s insurance carriers,
•Non-cash stock-based compensation expense recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Operations,
•Acquisition costs associated with the RideNow Transaction, which primarily include professional fees and third-party costs,
•Other non-reoccurring costs, which include one-time expenses incurred. For the year ended December 31, 2021, approximately $1,342 was incurred for compensation to the estate of Steven R. Berrard, the Company’s former Chief Financial Officer,
•Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness, which includes loan principal balances forgiven by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”), and
•Purchase accounting adjustments, primarily comprised of the valuation adjustments for inventory acquired as part of the RideNow Transaction which increased the cost of revenue included in the Consolidated Statement of Operations.
The following tables reconcile Adjusted EBITDA to net loss for the periods presented:
Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA
The following supplemental pro forma information presents pro forma financial results as if the RideNow Transaction was completed at January 1, 2020.
Add backs and adjustments to calculating Pro Forma Adjusted EBITDA are consistent with the adjustments used to calculate Adjusted EBITDA. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, pro forma EBITDA adjustments primarily represent the amortization of debt fees and gross profit on intercompany transactions on a pro-forma basis.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are available cash, amounts available under our floor plan lines of credit, and monetization of our retail loan portfolio. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we completed two public offerings that provided net proceeds of $191,000 and obtained the Oaktree Credit Facility, which initially provided net proceeds of $261,000 that was used to finance a portion of the cash consideration for the RideNow Transaction. As of December 31, 2021, the Oaktree Credit Facility provides for up to $120,000 in additional financing that may be used for acquisitions and up to an additional $100,000 in incremental financing that may be used for acquisitions and working capital purposes. On February 18, 2022, in conjunction the acquisition of Freedom Powersports, the Company drew down $83,400 against the Oaktree Credit Facility.
Our financial statements reflect estimates and assumptions made by management that affect the carrying values of the Company’s assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. The judgments, assumptions and estimates used by management are based on historical experience, management’s experience, and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Because of the nature of the judgments and assumptions made by management, actual results could differ materially from these judgments and estimates, which could have a material impact on the carrying values of the Company’s assets and liabilities and the results of operations. We will continue to evaluate the nature and extent of the impact to our business and our results of
operations and financial condition as conditions evolve as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting Demand/Supply Imbalances.
The Company's consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which assumes the continuity of operations, the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities as they come due in the normal course of business. Management believes that current working capital, results of operations, and existing financing arrangements are sufficient to fund operations for at least one year from the financial statement date.
We had the following liquidity resources available as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
(1) Amounts included in restricted cash represent the deposits required under the Company's short-term revolving facilities.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, excluding operating lease liabilities and the derivative liability, the outstanding principal amount of indebtedness was $384,585 and $53,109, respectively, summarized in the table below. See Note 9-Notes Payable and Lines of Credit, Note 10-Convertible Notes, and Note 11-Stockholders Equity to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this 2021 Form 10-K for further information on our debt.
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows.
Operating Activities
Our primary sources of operating cash flows result from the sales of new and pre-owned vehicles and ancillary products. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are purchases of inventory, parts and merchandise, cash used to acquire customers, technology development, and personnel-related expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities of $32,177 was an increase of $49,320 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $17,143 in 2020. The increase in our net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to: (i) an outflow of $45,732 in operating assets and liabilities, primarily in vehicle inventory, other assets, and accounts receivable and (ii) an adjustment in the valuation of the deferred taxes of $22,545; partially offset by a decrease in our net loss of $15,274 and the recognition of the stock based compensation expense of $29,219.
Investing Activities
Our primary use of cash for investing activities is for technology development and acquisitions to expand our operations. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $378,831, an increase of $376,549 compared to 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities results from (i) primarily the 2021 acquisition of RideNow, (ii) additional purchase of property and equipment of $5,646 to expand our operations, and (iii) an outflow of $1,871 in technology development during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities primarily relate to our short and long-term debt activity and proceeds from equity issuances which have been used to provide working capital and for general corporate purposes, including paying down our short-term revolving facilities. Cash provided by financing activities was $459,466 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in financing activities of $18,071 for 2020. The $477,537 increase in cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period of 2020 was a result of: (i) an increase in net proceeds of $261,451 received from the senior secured debt; (ii) proceeds of $191,241 received from sale of common stock in April 2021 and August 2021; and (iii) an increase in borrowings of $17,187 on the floor plan lines of credit; partially offset by the repayment of notes payable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Subsequent Events
Acquisition of Freedom Powersports
On February 18, 2022, the Company closed on the acquisition of Freedom Powersports, which included all business and real estate assets, subject to customary net working capital and indebtedness adjustments, for an aggregate consideration of approximately $129,971. The aggregate consideration consisted of approximately $83,291 for the Freedom Powersports business and approximately $46,680 for acquired real estate properties, including the payoff of outstanding mortgage debt on the real estate assets in the aggregate amount of approximately $27,025. The aggregate consideration was paid using cash on hand, $84,500 drawn from the Company’s delayed draw facility under the Oaktree Credit Facility, and the issuance of 1,048,718 restricted shares of RumbleOn Class B common stock. The restricted shares are subject to a six-month lock-up and resale registration rights.
Funding of RumbleOn’s Consumer Finance Subsidiary
On February 4, 2022, ROF SPV I, LLC (“ROF SPV”), an indirect subsidiary of RumbleOn, entered into a secured loan facility primarily to provide up to $25,000. All loans under this agreement will be secured by certain collateral including the consumer finance loans purchased by ROF SPV.
ROF SPV and ROF provided customary representations and covenants under the agreements which include financial covenants and collateral performance covenants. Loans sold to or in the facility are subject to certain eligibility criteria, concentration limits and reserves.
Related Party Software License
On January 19, 2022, the Audit Committee approved, and the Company entered into both a Perpetual Software License Purchase Agreement, and a Platform Service Agreement with Bidpath Incorporated, a Company owned by Adam Alexander, a member of the Company’s Board of Directors. The license agreement provides the Company with a perpetual, non-exclusive license to the then-current source code as well as all future source code. This code provides additional functionality to the Company’s inventory management platform, and the Company is paying in aggregate $3,600, of which $1,080 has been paid to date, The services agreement provides for support and maintenance services on a monthly basis for $30 per month. The initial terms is thirty-six (36) months but can be terminated by either party upon sixty (60) days notice to the other party.
Appointment of Chief Financial Officer
On February 1, 2022, the Company appointed Narinder Sahai as the Company’s Chief Financial Officer.
Change in Executive Officers
On February 11, 2022, William Coulter, a director and the Executive Vice Chairman of the Company, and Mark Tkach, a director and the Chief Operating Officer of the Company, resigned from all positions with the Company. The Company appointed Peter Levy, the President of the Company, to also serve as Chief Operating Officer of the Company.
Repayment of Convertible Note
On January 31, 2022, the Company made its final scheduled payment on the convertible note entered into on February 3, 2019 in connection of the acquisition of AutoSport. The carrying amount on the Company’s balance sheet as of December 31, 2021 was $154.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"). The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Certain accounting policies involve significant judgments and assumptions by management, which have a material impact on the carrying value of assets and liabilities and the recognition of income and expenses. Management considers these accounting policies to be critical accounting policies. The estimates and assumptions used by management are based on historical experience and other factors, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The significant accounting policies and estimates which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results are described below. Refer to Note 1 - Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this 2021 Form 10-K, for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
We adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers on January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective method. ASC 606 prescribes a five-step model that includes: (1) identify the contract; (2) identify the performance obligations; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied. Based on the manner in which we historically recognized revenue, the adoption of ASC 606 did not have a material impact on the amount or timing of our revenue recognition, and we recognized no cumulative effect adjustment upon adoption.
For vehicles sold at wholesale to dealers we satisfy our performance obligation for vehicles sales when the wholesale purchaser obtains control of the underlying vehicle, which is upon delivery when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership and control pass to the dealer. We recognize revenue at the amount we expect to receive for the pre-owned vehicle, which is the fixed price determined at the auction. The purchase price of the wholesale vehicle is typically due and collected within 30 days of delivery of the wholesale vehicle.
For vehicles sold to consumers the purchase price is set forth in the customer contracts at a stand-alone selling price which is agreed upon prior to delivery. We satisfy our performance obligation for pre-owned vehicle sales upon delivery when the transfer of title, risks and rewards of ownership and control pass to the customer. We recognize revenue at the agreed upon purchase price stated in the contract, including any delivery charges, less an estimate for returns. Our return policy allows customers to initiate a return during the first three days after delivery. Estimates for returns are based on an analysis of historical experience, trends and sales data. Changes in these estimates are reflected as an adjustment to revenue in the period identified. The amount of consideration received for pre-owned vehicle sales to consumers includes noncash consideration representing the value of trade-in vehicles, if applicable, as stated in the contract. Prior to the delivery of the vehicle, the payment is received, or financing has been arranged. Payments from customers that finance their purchases with third parties are typically due and collected within 30 days of delivery of the pre-owned vehicle. In future periods additional provisions may be necessary due to a variety of factors, including changing customer return patterns due to the maturation of the online vehicle buying market, macro- and micro-economic factors that could influence customer return behavior and future pricing environments. If these factors result in adjustments to sales returns, they could significantly impact our future operating results. Revenue exclude any sales taxes, title and registration fees, and other government fees that are collected from customers.
Vehicle logistics revenue is generated primarily by entering into freight brokerage agreements with dealers, distributors, or private party individuals to transport vehicles from a point of origin to a designated destination. The transaction price is based on the consideration specified in the customer's contract. A performance obligation is created when the customer under a transportation contract submits a bill of lading for the transport of goods from origin to destination. These performance obligations are satisfied as the shipments move from origin to destination. The freight brokerage agreements are fulfilled by independent third-party transporters. While the Company is primarily responsible for fulfilling to customers, these transporters are obligated to meet our performance obligations and standards. Performance obligations are short-term, with transit days less than one week. Generally, customers are billed either upon shipment of the vehicle or on a monthly basis, and remit payment according to approved payment terms, generally not to exceed 30 days. Revenue is recognized as risks and rewards of transportation of the vehicle is transferred to the owner during delivery. Wholesale Express is considered the principal in the delivery transactions since it is primarily responsible for fulfilling the service. As a result, revenue is recorded gross.
Valuation of Inventory
Pre-owned vehicle inventory is accounted for pursuant to ASC 330, Inventory and consists of pre-owned vehicles primarily acquired from consumers and includes the cost to acquire and recondition a pre-owned vehicle. Reconditioning costs are billed by third-party providers and includes parts, labor, and other repair expenses directly attributable to a specific vehicle. Transportation costs are expensed as incurred. Pre-owned inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Vehicle inventory cost is determined by specific identification. Net realizable value is based on the estimated selling price less costs to complete, dispose and transport the vehicles. Selling prices are derived from historical data and trends, such as sales price and inventory turn data of similar vehicles, as well as independent market resources. Each reporting period, the Company recognizes any necessary adjustments to reflect pre-owned vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value, which is recognized in cost of revenue in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually as of December 31st, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist.
We have three reportable segments as defined in generally accepted accounting principles for segment reporting: (1) powersports, (2) automotive and (3) vehicle logistics, each of which is separately evaluated for purposes of goodwill testing. We first review qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount; if we determine that it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then our goodwill is not considered to be impaired. However, if based on the qualitative assessment we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect to bypass the optional qualitative assessment as provided for under GAAP, we proceed with performing the quantitative impairment test.
In connection with its annual goodwill impairment test as of December 31, 2021, the Company performed impairment assessments by reviewing qualitative factors for each of its reporting units. The results of the assessments indicated that it was not more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting units were greater than the carrying values and no goodwill impairment was determined to exist for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Newly Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“ASU 2016-13”), which amends the guidance on the impairment of financial instruments by requiring measurement and recognition of expected credit losses for financial assets held. ASU 2016-13 is effective for fiscal years, and for interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019, and earlier adoption is permitted beginning in the first quarter of fiscal 2019. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-10, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), and Leases (Topic 842): Effective Dates (“ASU 2019-10”). The purpose of this amendment is to create a two-tier rollout of major updates, staggering the effective dates between larger public companies and all other entities. This granted certain classes of companies, including Smaller Reporting Companies (“SRCs”), additional time to implement major FASB standards, including ASU 2016-13. Larger public companies will still have an effective date for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019, including interim periods within those fiscal years. All other entities are permitted to defer adoption of ASU 2016-13, and its related amendments, until the earlier of fiscal periods beginning after December 15, 2022. Under the current SEC definitions, the Company meets the definition of an SRC as of the ASU 2019-10 issuance date and is adopting the deferral period for ASU 2016-13.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes (“ASU 2019-12”). ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application. The Company adopted ASU 2019-12 for its fiscal year beginning January 1, 2021 and it did not have a material effect on its consolidated financial statements.