ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Investing in our common stock involves a high degree of risk. You should carefully consider the risks and uncertainties described below, together with all of the other information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, before making an investment decision. The risks and uncertainties described below may not be the only ones we face. If any of the risks actually occur, our business, financial condition, operating results, cash flows and prospects could be materially and adversely affected. In that event, the market price of our common stock could decline, and you could lose part or all of your investment.
Overview
Ra Medical Systems, Inc. is a medical device company leveraging our advanced excimer laser-based platform for use in the treatment of vascular immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. We believe our products enhance patients’ quality of life by restoring blood flow in arteries.
Consistent with our business strategy to continue focusing on the peripheral artery disease, or PAD, market, we completed the sale of our Pharos laser business, or Dermatology Business, to STRATA Sciences, Inc., or Strata, on August 16, 2021. Accordingly, the financial information of the Dermatology Business has been presented as discontinued operations for all periods presented. See Note 3. Discontinued Operations to the financial statements for additional information on discontinued operations. Unless otherwise noted, amounts for all periods discussed below reflect the results of operations and financial condition from our continuing operations.
The DABRA laser and single-use catheter, together referred to as DABRA, is used as a tool in the treatment of peripheral artery disease, or PAD, which commonly occurs in the legs. DABRA is cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, as a device for crossing chronic total occlusions in patients with symptomatic infrainguinal lower extremity vascular disease and with an intended use for ablating a channel in occlusive peripheral vascular disease. DABRA was also granted CE mark approval in Europe in September 2016 for the endovascular treatment of infrainguinal arteries via atherectomy and for crossing total occlusions.
Our business strategy is focused on multiple engineering efforts to improve our catheter offering as well as conducting a clinical study to obtain an atherectomy “indication for use” in the United States. Key catheter engineering efforts currently underway include projects to:
•
Extend our catheter’s shelf life. During 2020, we identified the factors limiting our shelf life, including the introduction of unwanted elements in the catheter’s fluid core and the degradation of the coating on the inner diameter, and are currently implementing multiple remediations to address these issues. Our initial internal accelerated aging test data supports shelf life for our catheter of at least six months;
•
Increase the robustness of our catheter via a braided overjacket, or a similar design, to make the catheter more kink-resistant when navigating tortuous anatomy. We completed the engineering work for this catheter and subsequently submit to the FDA for clearance in February 2022; and
•
Develop a version of the DABRA catheter that is compatible with a standard guidewire. We selected a design in December 2021 based on physician evaluation in a preclinical model. We expect to finalize the design for this catheter by mid-year 2022. Engineering validation and verification will follow design freeze, and we will subsequently submit to the FDA for clearance.
As stated, we are currently pursuing an atherectomy indication for use, which the FDA defines to include a prespecified improvement in luminal patency. To satisfy the FDA’s data requirements to support an atherectomy indication, we are performing a pivotal study designed to allow the FDA to evaluate the use of DABRA in atherectomy procedures. We received an Investigational Device Exemption, or IDE, approval in January 2020 and the study is approved for up to 10 clinical sites and 100 subjects. In January 2022, primarily due to subject fallout for follow-up visits due to COVID-19, we filed a protocol amendment with the FDA to add an additional 25 subjects to the study. The protocol amendment was approved by the FDA in February 2022, increasing the total number of approved subjects from 100 to 125.
We enrolled the first subject in February 2020. Throughout much of 2021 and 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic substantially impacted our ability to activate new sites and enroll additional subjects. Many sites or potential sites have been or are currently operating at a reduced capacity, and some have been closed from time to time. In addition, potential study subjects may voluntarily opt to postpone their procedures due to COVID-19 concerns. As of March 21, 2022, we have enrolled 98 subjects and seven sites have been cleared to enroll subjects. Due to the unpredictable impact the COVID-19 pandemic has had and will continue to have on enrollment in this study, we currently cannot estimate when enrollment will be completed, although we aim to complete study enrollment by the middle of 2022 and to complete the six-month follow-up in early 2023.
We are continuing to supply catheters to those sites involved in our atherectomy clinical study. We paused shipments of catheters to commercial sites while we conducted further studies on the stability of their shelf life. We submitted additional test data with respect to the DABRA catheter shelf life in a traditional 510(k) in March 2021, which was cleared by the FDA in July 2021. Although eligible, we have not resumed commercial sales as we continue evaluating our commercial catheter strategy.
Finally, we are conducting research to prove the feasibility of using our liquid-filled catheter and excimer laser technology to fracture calcium in arteries in a procedure known as lithotripsy. Preliminary research work has demonstrated that our laser system can be utilized to create shockwaves of sufficient magnitude to fracture calcium in arteries. Fracturing calcium in coronary or peripheral arteries can help make the arteries less rigid, thus making subsequent procedures easier and/or safer to perform. We are fabricating various prototype systems and intend to advance our initial benchtop results.
Recent Developments
Underwritten Public Offering
On February 4, 2022, we entered into the Underwriting Agreement with Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. Inc., as representative of the Underwriters, pursuant to which we issued and sold in the Public Offering (i) 9,535,000 units, priced at a public offering price of $0.50 per unit, with each unit consisting of one share of common stock, one Series A Warrant and one Series B Warrant, and (ii) 14,467,893 pre-funded units, priced at a public offering price of $0.4999 per unit, with each unit consisting of one Pre-Funded Warrant, one Series A Warrant and one Series B Warrant.
In addition, pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement, we granted the Underwriters the Overallotment Option to purchase up to (i) 3,600,000 additional shares of common stock, (ii) 3,600,000 additional Series A Warrants and/or (iii) 3,600,000 additional Series B Warrants, solely to cover overallotments. The Underwriters partially exercised the Overallotment Option on February 7, 2022 to purchase 3,600,000 Series A Warrants and 3,600,000 Series B Warrants.
The units were not certificated and the shares of common stock, the Series A Warrants and the Series B Warrants comprising such units were immediately separable and were issued separately in the Public Offering. The pre-funded units were not certificated and the Warrants comprising such units were immediately separable and were issued separately in the Public Offering. The securities were offered by the Company pursuant to the Registration Statement.
On February 8, 2022, the Public Offering closed, and we issued and sold (i) 9,535,000 shares of common stock, (ii) 27,602,893 Series A Warrants (which includes 3,600,000 Series A Warrants sold pursuant to the exercise of the Overallotment Option), (iii) 27,602,893 Series B Warrants (which includes 3,600,000 Series B Warrants sold pursuant to the Overallotment Option), and (iv) Pre-Funded Warrants to purchase 14,467,893 shares of common stock, pursuant to the Registration Statement and the Underwriting Agreement. The net proceeds to the Company, after deducting the underwriting discount and commissions and offering expenses paid or payable by the Company, were approximately $10.2 million. On February 10, 2022, we issued and sold an additional 1,245,116 shares of common stock pursuant to the Overallotment Option resulting in net proceeds, after deducting the underwriting discount, of approximately $0.5 million.
Each Series A Warrant is exercisable at a price per share of common stock of $0.50, each Series B Warrant is exercisable at a price per share of common stock of $0.50 and each Pre-Funded Warrant is exercisable at a price per share of common stock of $0.0001. Each Warrant is immediately exercisable. The exercise prices of the Warrants are subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of recapitalization events, stock dividends, stock splits, stock combinations, reclassifications, reorganizations or similar events affecting the Company’s common stock. Subject to limited exceptions, a holder of Warrants will not have the right to exercise any portion of its Warrants if the holder (together with such holder’s affiliates, and any persons acting as a group together with such holder or any of such holder’s affiliates) would beneficially own a number of shares of common stock in excess of 4.99% (or, upon election by a holder prior to the issuance of any Warrants, 9.99%) of the shares of common stock then outstanding. At the holder’s option, upon notice to the Company, the holder may increase or decrease this beneficial ownership limitation not to exceed 9.99% of the shares of Common Stock then outstanding, with any such increase becoming effective upon 61 days’ prior notice to the Company.
The Underwriting Agreement contains representations, warranties and covenants made by the Company that are customary for transactions of this type. Under the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, the Company has agreed to indemnify the Underwriter against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, the Company and its executive officers and directors have entered into lock-up agreements providing that the Company and each of these persons may not, without the prior written approval of the Underwriter, subject to limited exceptions, offer, sell, transfer or otherwise dispose of the Company’s securities for a period of 90 days following the date of the Underwriting Agreement.
On February 8, 2022, we entered into the Warrant Agency Agreement with our transfer agent, American Stock Transfer & Trust Company LLC, who will also act as our warrant agent.
We are contractually obligated to pay a former placement agent a tail fee equal to 7.5% cash compensation for the gross proceeds raised, and 7% warrant coverage of the number of shares of common stock placed, in any public or private offering consummated within twelve months of the expiration or termination of our engagement with such placement agent by any investor contacted by the placement agent during the term of our engagement. A number of the investors in the Public Offering had previously been contacted by such placement agent and, as a result, we may be obligated to pay such placement agent a cash fee in connection with the Public Offering which we estimate to be between approximately $0.7 million and $0.9 million. In addition, we may be obligated to issue between 1.4 million and 1.7 million warrants to purchase common stock valued at between $0.2 million and $0.3 million.
Termination of ATM Agreement
On January 18, 2022, H.C. Wainwright & Co. delivered written notice to us that it was terminating the “at the market”, or ATM, Agreement with us dated January 26, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 3,811,170 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $16.0 million through the ATM equity offering facility, or ATM Facility, under the ATM Agreement. With the provision of such notice, the ATM Facility is no longer available to us.
Chief Executive Officer Health
Will McGuire, our Chief Executive Officer, was recently diagnosed with a serious illness not caused by COVID-19 and has been undergoing treatment for his disease. He continues to fulfill all of his duties and responsibilities and has stated his desire to continue in such roles. Our board of directors has discussed a plan of succession and will continue to evaluate and monitor our options on an ongoing basis should Mr. McGuire need to relinquish any of his responsibilities or duties at any time as a result of his illness or otherwise.
Effects of COVID-19 and Market Conditions
The global effects of COVID-19 have created significant volatility, uncertainty and economic disruption. Although the number of reported cases of COVID-19 has recently decreased, the ultimate effects of COVID-19 on our business, operations and financial condition are unknown at this time. We expect that enrollment in our atherectomy clinical trial will continue to be affected by the uncertainty relating to COVID-19, as patients may continue to elect to postpone voluntary treatments and physicians’ offices are either remaining closed, operating
at a reduced capacity or are in the process of reopening or returning to full capacity. Our manufacturing facility located in Carlsbad, California is currently operational. We have experienced delays in receiving shipments of parts which has had an impact on the timing of our key engineering efforts but has not affected our ability to support our atherectomy clinical study. However, the extent to which COVID-19 impacts our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions to contain it or treat its impact, among others.
We, like many companies, are also experiencing increased difficulty in attracting and retaining key personnel due to a tight labor market.
Components of our Results of Operations
Net Revenues
Product sales revenues consisted of the sales of catheters for use with the DABRA laser. We are currently not selling commercial product and are only selling catheters for use on our atherectomy clinical trial.
Service and other revenues consisted primarily of billable services, including fees related to DABRA laser commercial usage agreements, which are recognized when the services are provided.
We have historically used distributors outside the U.S. in markets where we have received regulatory approval. We expect to continue to seek regulatory approvals for our products in additional strategic markets.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for product sales consists primarily of costs of components for use in our products, the labor used to produce our products, and the manufacturing overhead that supports production.
Gross Profit (Loss)
We calculate gross profit (loss) as revenues less cost of revenues. Our gross profit (loss) has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, primarily production volumes, the cost of direct materials, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount and cost-reduction strategies. Our gross profit (loss) would be reduced if our production volume increased and certain costs remained fixed or increased at a slower rate. We intend to use our design, engineering and manufacturing capabilities to further advance and improve the efficiency of our manufacturing processes, which we believe will reduce costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense. Other SG&A expenses include professional services fees, including legal, audit and tax fees, insurance costs, general corporate expenses and facility-related expenses. We expect continued legal costs associated with ongoing litigation and the government investigation.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses include the following:
•
certain employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel expense and stock-based compensation expense;
•
cost of clinical studies to support new products and product enhancements, including expanded indications;
•
supplies used for internal R&D and clinical activities; and
•
cost of outside consultants who assist with technology development and clinical affairs.
We expense R&D costs as incurred. In the future, we expect R&D expenses to increase as we continue to develop new products, enhance existing products and technologies and perform activities related to obtaining additional regulatory approval. However, we expect R&D expenses to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trials and studies and other related activities.
Results of Continuing Operations
The following table sets forth our results of continuing operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenues
The decrease of approximately $0.2 million in net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was due to decreased catheter unit sales as a result of pausing commercial sales in late 2020 while we conducted further studies on the stability of the catheter’s shelf life. We have continued to supply catheters to clinical trial sites.
We expect our net revenue to be negatively impacted in the short term as we only sell catheters to support our atherectomy clinical study while we continue efforts to remedy the inconsistencies in our DABRA catheter performance and obtain an atherectomy indication.
Cost of Revenues
The decrease of approximately $0.6 million in cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was due to a decrease in catheter unit sales, partially offset by increases in costs of repairs and maintenance on catheter manufacturing equipment. We expect our cost of revenues to decrease in the near term due to a reduction in depreciation expense as a result of an increase in the estimated useful life of our lasers included in property and equipment.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease of approximately $9.1 million in SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was due to decreases of $2.8 million in legal expenses, primarily due to the $2.7 million settlement in 2020 for the DOJ False Claims Act investigation, $1.6 million in salary, benefits and other personnel-related costs primarily due to the reduction in our sales force, $1.5 million in stock-based compensation expense, $0.9 million in insurance expense, $0.7 million in depreciation expense and $1.0 million in other expenses and an increase of $0.6 million in gain on sale of fixed assets.
Research and Development Expenses
The increase of approximately $3.3 million in R&D expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year was primarily due to increases of $2.2 million in personnel and consulting expenses, $0.7 million in R&D supplies expense and $0.5 million in other expenses, including clinical study expenses, partially offset by a decrease of $0.1 million in stock-based compensation. These increases were due to engineering efforts on our next-generation catheters, including increased shelf life and improved deliverability, and progress on the atherectomy clinical study.
Other Income (Expense), Net
The increase of approximately $1.9 million in other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to the $2.0 million gain on the forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP, promissory note under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Non-GAAP Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are performance measures that provide supplemental information we believe is useful to analysts and investors to evaluate our ongoing results of operations, when considered alongside other GAAP measures. These Non-GAAP measures exclude the financial impact of items management does not consider in assessing our ongoing operating performance, and thereby facilitate review of our operating performance on a period-to-period basis.
We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are that:
•
EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets, although these are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future; and
•
Adjusted EBITDA further excludes stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy.
In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison.
A reconciliation for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with U.S. GAAP is included below. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business. We define Adjusted EBITDA as our GAAP loss from continuing operations as adjusted to exclude depreciation and amortization, interest income, interest expense, income tax expense, stock-based compensation, gain on extinguishment of PPP promissory note and loss (gain) on sales and disposals of property and equipment.
The following is a reconciliation of loss from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
The decrease in negative Adjusted EBITDA of $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the corresponding period in the prior year was primarily due to the decrease in SG&A expenses due to lower legal expenses related to the government investigation and lower personnel and other expenses due to our continued cost saving initiatives, partially offset by an increase in R&D expenses related to efforts to improve our catheter design and costs related to our clinical study.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $15.0 million and an accumulated deficit of $178.3 million. Our primary sources of capital have been the net proceeds of $67.3 million from our initial public offering, $19.1 million from our 2020 public offerings, $15.2 million from our 2021 ATM offerings, $3.5 million from the sale of the Dermatology Business, $2.0 million received in the form of a PPP promissory note and, to a lesser extent, private placements of common stock and equipment financing arrangements. In addition, in February 2022, we completed the Public Offering resulting in net cash proceeds of $10.7 million.
Management expects operating losses and negative cash flows to continue for the foreseeable future with our reduced commercial footprint, and as we continue to incur costs related to our atherectomy clinical trial, engineering efforts to improve the shelf life of our catheters and develop next generation products and legal costs associated with ongoing litigation. We also expect the COVID-19 pandemic to continue to have a negative impact on the timing of enrollment our atherectomy clinical trial as well as our ability to secure additional financing in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. In the third quarter of 2019, we began implementing certain operational efficiency and cost savings initiatives intended to align our resources with our product strategy, reduce our operating expenses and manage our cash flows. These cost efficiency initiatives included targeted workforce reductions of our sales and marketing teams. We reduced the size of our DABRA sales force from 34 employees as of June 30, 2019 to six clinical specialists as of December 31, 2021. In addition, we may need to decrease or defer capital expenditures and development activities to further optimize our operations. Such measures may impair our ability to invest in developing, marketing and selling new and existing products.
As a public company, we incur and will continue to incur significant legal, accounting, insurance and other expenses. We expect legal and related expenses to remain high in the near term in connection with the legal proceedings discussed in Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in the notes to the financial statements.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
our ability to complete our atherectomy trial in a timely manner or at all, which may be affected by reductions in voluntary medical procedures during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic as well as by limitations in our DABRA catheter performance, as described above;
•
the amount and timing of revenue generated by sales of our DABRA products and other products that get approved in the U.S. and select non-U.S. markets, as well as the amount of sales personnel required to generate the revenue;
•
our ability to remedy the inconsistencies in our DABRA catheter performance; including extending shelf life and reducing non-calibrations, reducing kinking, and identifying other future issues, if any;
•
our ability to develop a guidewire-compatible version of our DABRA catheter designed to allow physicians to navigate the vasculature more easily;
•
our ability to develop a larger diameter catheter to facilitate treatment of larger vessels more commonly seen in above-the-knee procedures;
•
following our voluntary product recall, our ability to achieve market acceptance of DABRA;
•
matters arising out of our completed Audit Committee investigation and our ability to comply with the CIA;
•
the cost, timing and outcomes of any litigation involving our company, products and business activities, including securities class actions and shareholder derivative lawsuits, and government investigation in which we are involved;
•
the extent to which our products are adopted by the physician community;
•
the ability of our customers to obtain adequate reimbursement from third-party payors for procedures performed using DABRA;
•
the degree of success we experience in commercializing DABRA;
•
the costs, timing and outcomes of any future clinical studies and regulatory reviews, including to seek and obtain approvals for new indications for our products;
•
the costs and timing of developing variations of DABRA and, if necessary, obtaining FDA clearance to market such variations;
•
the emergence of competing or complementary technologies;
•
the number and types of future products we develop and commercialize;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•
the level of our selling, general and administrative expenses.
Although we recently bolstered our liquidity resources, have an effective shelf registration statement and may receive additional funds from the exercise of our warrants depending on market conditions, management has concluded that the aforementioned conditions, including the ongoing uncertainty related to the negative impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, continue to raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a period of at least 12 months from the date of issuance of the financial statements. We plan to address this uncertainty by raising additional funds, if necessary, through public or private equity or debt financings as well as by engaging in regular and ongoing reviews of our business model and strategic options to help ensure that we are focusing our cash resources on advancing our key corporate initiatives. However, we may not be able to secure such financing in a timely manner or on favorable terms, if at all. Furthermore, if we issue equity securities to raise additional funds, our existing stockholders may experience dilution, and the new equity securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders.
Further, SEC regulations limit the amount of funds we can raise during any 12-month period pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3. We are currently subject to the Baby Shelf Rule and the amount of funds we can raise through primary public offerings of securities in any 12-month period using our registration statement on Form S-3 is limited to one-third of the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates. We are currently limited by the Baby Shelf Rule as of the filing of this Annual Report, until such time as our public float exceeds $75 million.
Our financial statements include explanatory disclosures regarding substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Future reports on our financial statements may also include explanatory disclosures with respect to our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts of liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue our operations.
Cash Flows
The following information reflects cash flows for continuing operations and discontinued operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities of $27.6 million consisted of a net loss of $25.1 million, gains of $6.0 million consisting of the gains on the sale of the Dermatology Business of $3.5 million, extinguishment of the PPP promissory note of $2.0 million and sale of fixed assets of $0.5 million, partially offset by non-cash expenses of $3.8 million consisting primarily of stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization of $2.2 million and $1.6 million, respectively, and a decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $0.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities of $28.3 million consisted of a net loss of $36.0 million, partially offset by non-cash expenses of $6.7 million, consisting primarily of stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization of $4.1 million and $2.4 million, respectively, and an increase in operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million.
Net Cash Provided by Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities of $3.8 million consisted primarily of the net proceeds of $3.5 million from the sale of the Dermatology Business and $0.6 million in proceeds from the sales of equipment, partially offset by purchases of equipment of $0.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by investing activities of $15.9 million consisted of $16.0 million in proceeds from maturities of investments, partially offset by $0.1 million in purchases of equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities of $15.0 million consisted primarily of net proceeds of $15.2 million from our ATM offerings, partially offset by payments of $0.3 million on our financed equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities of $21.7 million primarily consisted of net proceeds of $19.1 million received from our 2020 public offerings, $2.0 million from the PPP promissory note and $0.8 million from the exercise of warrants, partially offset by payments of $0.3 million on our financed equipment.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in transactions that generate relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, as a part of our ongoing business. Accordingly, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements during any of the periods presented.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions for the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective and complex judgments.
Accounting for Long-Lived Assets-Useful Lives
We are required to make subjective assessments as to the useful lives of our property and equipment for purposes of determining depreciation expense that, if incorrectly estimated, could be material to our financial statements. Depreciation expense for our property and equipment is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of our various assets of property and equipment. The most significant portion of our property and equipment represents the cost of our lasers which historically have been depreciated over an estimated useful life of 5 years. We review the expected useful lives of our assets on an ongoing basis and adjust, if necessary. See Note 2 to the financial statements for further discussion regarding depreciation of our lasers.
Research and Development Expenses
We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual accordingly. Services related to research and development projects are expensed as research and development costs at the time such costs are incurred.
Clinical Trial Costs and Accruals
We accrue clinical trial costs based on work performed. In determining the amount to accrue, we rely on estimates of total costs incurred based on enrollment, the completion of clinical trials and other events. We follow this method because we believe reasonable dependable estimates of the costs applicable to various stages of a clinical trial can be made. However, the actual costs and timing of clinical trials are highly uncertain, subject to risks and may change depending on a number of factors. Differences between the actual clinical trial costs and the estimated clinical trial costs that we have accrued in any prior period are recognized in the subsequent period in which the actual costs become known. Historically, our estimated accrued expenses have approximated actual expenses incurred; however, material differences could occur in the future.
Stock-Based Compensation
We calculate the cost of awards of equity instruments based on the grant date fair value of the awards issued to employees, members of our board of directors and nonemployee consultants using the Black-Scholes option pricing valuation model, or Black-Scholes model, which incorporates various assumptions including volatility, expected term and risk-free interest rate. The expected term of the options is the estimated period of time until exercise and was determined using the SEC’s safe harbor rules, using an average of vesting and contractual terms, as we did not have sufficient historical experience of similar awards. Expected stock price volatility is based on historical volatilities of certain “guideline” companies, as the Company does not have sufficient historical stock price data. The risk-free interest rate is based on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with an equivalent term. The estimated fair value of stock-based compensation awards is amortized on a straight-line basis over the relevant vesting period, adjusted for actual forfeitures at the time they occur.
Jobs Act Accounting Election
An emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. Thus, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, we are not subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
New Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board or other standard setting bodies that are adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations upon adoption.