Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following information should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW (dollars in thousands)
RMR Inc. is a holding company and substantially all of its business is conducted by RMR LLC. RMR Inc. has no employees, and the personnel and various services it requires to operate are provided by RMR LLC. RMR LLC manages a diverse portfolio of real estate and real estate related businesses. As of September 30, 2022, RMR LLC managed 2,100 properties in 46 states, Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico and Canada that are principally owned by the Managed Equity REITs.
Business Environment and Outlook
The continuation and growth of our business depends upon our ability to operate the Managed REITs so as to maintain, grow and increase the value of their businesses, to assist our Managed Operating Companies to grow their businesses and operate profitably and to successfully expand our Managed Private Real Estate Capital business through the execution of new business ventures and additional investments. Our business and the businesses of our clients generally follow the business cycle of the U.S. real estate industry, but with certain property type and regional geographic variations. Typically, as the general U.S. economy expands, commercial real estate occupancies increase and new real estate development occurs; new development frequently leads to increased real estate supply and reduced occupancies; and then the cycle repeats. These general trends can be impacted by property type characteristics or regional factors; for example, demographic factors such as the aging U.S. population, the growth of e-commerce retail sales or net population migration across different geographic regions can slow, accelerate, overwhelm or otherwise impact general cyclical trends. Because of such multiple factors, we believe it is often possible to grow real estate based businesses in selected property types or geographic areas despite general national trends.
Beyond general real estate industry trends, we also take into account general economic factors impacting our clients. More specifically, in the U.S., the Federal Reserve has increased the federal funds rate six times since the beginning of calendar 2022 and has announced an expectation that it will continue to raise rates, in an attempt to slow inflation, which has in turn lead to increased borrowing costs and disruptions in the financial markets. In a period of increased borrowing costs, real estate transaction volumes often slow along with real estate valuation growth, which the commercial real estate industry has been experiencing. Rising interest rates also adversely impact our clients with floating rate debt, which they, in some instances, attempt to address with interest rate caps and other strategic actions to reduce leverage. Further, while the Federal Reserve is looking to slow inflation, its efforts may not be successful. The impact of rising costs, both for goods and human capital, are impacting us and our clients and we and our clients are implementing mitigation strategies to minimize the impact of increased costs on our and our clients’ earnings, where possible.
We consider industry and general economic factors when providing services to our clients and attempt to take advantage of opportunities when they arise. For example: (i) since March 2020, ILPT and DHC have completed several joint venture transactions with institutional investors and subsequently grown some of those ventures by acquiring additional properties; (ii) SVC transitioned over 200 hotels from other hotel operators to Sonesta, which on March 17, 2021, completed its acquisition of RLH Corporation, establishing it as one of the largest hotel companies in the U.S. and expanding its franchising capabilities; (iii) on September 30, 2021, SEVN and TRMT merged, resulting in a larger, more diversified mortgage REIT with an expanded capital base; and (iv) on February 25, 2022, ILPT completed its acquisition of 126 new, Class A, single tenant, net leased, e-commerce focused industrial properties as a result of its acquisition of Monmouth Real Estate Investment Corporation, or MNR, in an all-cash transaction valued at approximately $4.0 billion. In addition, we balance our pursuit of growth of our and our clients’ businesses by executing, on behalf of our clients, prudent capital recycling or business arrangement restructurings in an attempt to help our clients prudently manage leverage and increased operating costs. We also look to reposition their portfolios and businesses when circumstances warrant such changes or when other more desirable opportunities are identified.
Please see elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Warning Concerning Forward Looking Statements”, Part 1, Item 1 “Business” and Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” for a discussion of some of the circumstances that may adversely affect us and our business.
Managed Equity REITs
The base business management fees we earn from the Managed Equity REITs are calculated monthly in accordance with the applicable business management agreement and are based on a percentage of the lower of (i) the average historical cost of each REIT’s properties and (ii) each REIT’s average market capitalization. The property management fees we earn from the Managed Equity REITs are principally based on a percentage of the gross rents collected at certain managed properties owned
by the Managed Equity REITs, excluding rents or other revenues from hotels, travel centers, senior living properties and wellness centers, which are separately managed by our Managed Operating Companies or a third party. Also under the terms of the property management agreements, we receive construction supervision fees in connection with certain construction activities undertaken at the properties owned by the Managed Equity REITs and certain of the Managed Operating Companies based on a percentage of the cost of such construction. For further information regarding the fees we earn, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following table presents for each Managed Equity REIT a summary of its primary strategy and the lesser of the historical cost of its assets under management and its market capitalization as of September 30, 2022 and 2021, as applicable:
A Managed Equity REIT’s historical cost of assets under management includes the real estate it owns and its consolidated assets invested directly or indirectly in equity interests in or loans secured by real estate and personal property owned in connection with such real estate (including acquisition related costs which may be allocated to intangibles or are unallocated), all before reserves for depreciation, amortization, impairment charges or bad debts or other similar non-cash reserves. A Managed Equity REIT’s average market capitalization includes the average value of the Managed Equity REIT’s outstanding common equity value during the period, plus the daily weighted average of each of the aggregate liquidation preference of preferred shares and the principal amount of consolidated indebtedness during the period.
The table above presents for each Managed Equity REIT, the lesser of the historical cost of its assets under management and its market capitalization as of the end of each period. The basis on which our base business management fees are calculated for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 may differ from the basis at the end of the periods presented in the table above. As of September 30, 2022, the market capitalization was lower than the historical cost of assets under management for each of the Managed Equity REITs; the historical cost of assets under management for DHC, ILPT, OPI and SVC as of September 30, 2022, were $7,354,104, $5,693,562, $5,907,788 and $11,285,303, respectively.
The fee revenues we earned from the Managed Equity REITs for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 are set forth in the following tables:
Managed Operating Companies and Managed Private Real Estate Capital
We provide business management services to the Managed Operating Companies. ALR operates senior living communities throughout the United States, many of which are owned by and managed for DHC. Sonesta manages and franchises hotels,
resorts and cruise ships in the United States, Latin America, the Caribbean and the Middle East; many of the U.S. hotels that Sonesta operates are owned by SVC. TA operates, leases and franchises travel centers along the U.S. interstate highway system, many of which are owned by SVC, and standalone truck service facilities. Generally, our fees earned from business management services to the Managed Operating Companies are based on a percentage of certain revenues.
In addition, we also provide management services to the Managed Private Real Estate Capital clients and earn fees based on a percentage of average invested capital, as defined in the applicable agreements, property management fees based on a percentage of rents collected from managed properties and construction management fees based on a percentage of the cost of construction activities.
Our fee revenues from services to the Managed Operating Companies and the Managed Private Real Estate Capital clients for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, are set forth in the following tables:
Advisory Business
Tremont provides advisory services to SEVN, a publicly traded mortgage REIT that focuses on originating and investing in first mortgage whole loans secured by middle market and transitional commercial real estate. Tremont also provided advisory services to TRMT until September 30, 2021, when it merged with and into SEVN. Tremont is primarily compensated pursuant to its management agreements with SEVN (beginning January 6, 2021) and TRMT (until September 30, 2021) based on a percentage of equity, as defined in the applicable agreements.
For the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, we earned advisory services revenue of $4,530 and $3,956, respectively, and incentive fees of $0 and $620, respectively.
The Tremont business acts as a transaction broker for non-investment advisory clients for negotiated fees. The Tremont business earned fees for such brokerage services of $99 and $467 for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, which amounts are included in management services revenue in our consolidated statements of income.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS (dollars in thousands)
The following table presents the changes in our operating results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021:
n/m - not meaningful
References to changes in the income and expense categories below relate to the comparison of consolidated results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. For a comparison of consolidated results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020, see Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021.
Management services revenue. Management services revenue increased $24,348 primarily due to (i) growth in base business management fees of $9,700 and property and construction management fees of $3,909 earned from ILPT, primarily due to its acquisition of MNR, (ii) increases in construction supervision fees earned from OPI, SVC and DHC aggregating $7,152 due to increased development activity, and (iii) an increase in management fees earned from Sonesta of $4,229 primarily resulting from an increase in travel as pandemic restrictions have eased and an increase in the number of hotels that it manages and franchises during the current fiscal year. These increases were partially offset by a decline in base business
management fees earned from DHC and SVC of $7,166 driven by declines in the enterprise values of these respective clients during the current fiscal year.
Incentive business management fees. Incentive business management fees of $620 in the prior fiscal year represent fees earned from TRMT. For further information about these incentive fees, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Advisory services revenue. Advisory services revenue increased $574 primarily due to the expiration of the fee waiver that was previously provided to TRMT in effect until December 31, 2020. For further information about this waiver, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Reimbursable compensation and benefits. Reimbursable compensation and benefits include reimbursements, at cost, that arise primarily from services our employees provide pursuant to our property management agreements at the properties of our clients. A significant portion of these compensation and benefits are charged or passed through to and paid by tenants of our clients. Reimbursable compensation and benefits increased $4,315 primarily due to increases in employee compensation and benefits for which we receive reimbursement.
Reimbursable equity based compensation. Reimbursable equity based compensation includes awards of common shares by our clients directly to certain of our officers and employees in connection with the provision of management services to those clients. We record an equal offsetting amount as equity based compensation expense for the value of these awards. Reimbursable equity based compensation revenue decreased $2,082 primarily as a result of decreases in our clients’ respective share prices.
Other reimbursable expenses. For further information about these reimbursements, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits consist of employee salaries and other employment related costs, including health insurance expenses and contributions related to our employee retirement plan. Compensation and benefits expense increased $10,228 primarily due to annual employee merit and bonus increases in the current fiscal year and increased headcount.
Equity based compensation. Equity based compensation consists of the value of vested shares awarded to certain of our employees under our and our clients’ equity compensation plans. Equity based compensation decreased $1,886 primarily as a result of decreases in our clients’ respective share prices.
Separation costs. Separation costs consist of employment termination costs. For further information about these costs, see Note 5, Related Person Transactions, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist of office related expenses, information technology related expenses, employee training, travel, professional services expenses, director compensation and other administrative expenses. General and administrative costs increased $5,958 primarily due to increases in technology infrastructure costs, third-party costs related to our expanded role in construction oversight and increases in recruiting and other professional fees.
Transaction and acquisition related costs. The decrease in transaction and acquisition related costs primarily relates to costs incurred in the prior fiscal year in connection with RMR Mortgage Trust’s conversion from a registered investment company to a commercial mortgage REIT and other strategic initiatives.
Interest and other income. Interest and other income increased $562 primarily due to higher interest earned during the current fiscal year as a result of higher interest rates.
Gain on Tremont Mortgage Trust investment. The gain on Tremont Mortgage Trust investment in the prior fiscal year represents the difference between the cost basis of our former investment in TRMT and the fair value of our investment in SEVN on the date of the Merger. For further information see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Equity in earnings of investees. Equity in earnings of investees represents our proportionate share of earnings from our former equity interest in TRMT. For further information, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Unrealized gain on equity method investments accounted for under the fair value option. Unrealized gain on equity method investments accounted for under the fair value option represents the unrealized gain or loss on our investments in SEVN and TA common shares. For further information, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income tax expense. The increase in income tax expense of $81 is primarily attributable to higher taxable income during the current fiscal year and an increase in the annual effective tax rate compared to the prior fiscal year. For further information see Note 3, Income Taxes, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts)
Our current assets have historically been comprised predominantly of cash, cash equivalents and receivables for business management, property management and advisory services fees. As of September 30, 2022 and 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $189,088 and $159,835, respectively, of which $21,492 and $23,338, respectively, was held by RMR Inc., with the remainder being held at RMR LLC. Cash and cash equivalents include all short term, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. As of September 30, 2022 and 2021, $181,219 and $131,065, respectively, of our cash and cash equivalents were invested in money market funds. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents leave us well positioned to pursue a range of capital allocation strategies, with a focus on the growth of our private capital business, and to fund our operations and obligations, in the next twelve months.
Our liquidity is highly dependent upon our receipt of fees from the businesses that we manage. Historically, we have funded our working capital needs with cash generated from our operating activities and we currently do not maintain any credit facilities. We expect that our future working capital needs will relate largely to our operating expenses, primarily consisting of employee compensation and benefits costs, our obligation to make quarterly tax distributions to the members of RMR LLC, our plan to make quarterly distributions on our Class A Common Shares and Class B-1 Common Shares and our plan to pay quarterly distributions to the members of RMR LLC in connection with the quarterly dividends to RMR Inc. shareholders. Our management fees are typically payable to us within 30 days of the end of each month or, in the case of annual incentive business management fees earned from the Managed Equity REITs, if any, within 30 days following each calendar year end. Quarterly incentive fees earned from SEVN, if any, are payable generally within 30 days following the end of the applicable quarter. Historically, we have not experienced losses on collection of our fees and have not recorded any allowances for bad debts.
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, we paid cash distributions to the holders of our Class A Common Shares, Class B-1 Common Shares and to the other owner of RMR LLC membership units in the aggregate amount of $44,330. On October 13, 2022, we declared a quarterly dividend on our Class A Common Shares and Class B-1 Common Shares to our shareholders of record as of October 24, 2022 in the amount of $0.40 per Class A Common Share and Class B-1 Common Share, or $6,642. This dividend will be partially funded by a distribution from RMR LLC to holders of its membership units in the amount of $0.32 per unit, or $10,114, of which $5,314 will be distributed to us based on our aggregate ownership of 16,605,741 membership units of RMR LLC and $4,800 will be distributed to ABP Trust based on its ownership of 15,000,000 membership units of RMR LLC. The remainder of this dividend will be funded with cash accumulated at RMR Inc. We expect the total dividend will amount to approximately $11,442 and we expect to pay this dividend on or about November 17, 2022. See Note 6, Shareholders’ Equity, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding these distributions.
For the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, pursuant to the RMR LLC operating agreement, RMR LLC made required quarterly tax distributions to its holders of its membership units totaling $30,281, of which $15,940 was distributed to us and $14,341 was distributed to ABP Trust, based on each membership unit holder’s then respective ownership percentage in RMR LLC. The $15,940 distributed to us was eliminated in our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the $14,341 distributed to ABP Trust was recorded as a reduction of their noncontrolling interest. We used a portion of these funds distributed to us to pay our tax liabilities and amounts due under the tax receivable agreement.
Tax Receivable Agreement
We are party to a tax receivable agreement which provides for the payment by RMR Inc. to ABP Trust of 85.0% of the amount of savings, if any, in U.S. federal, state and local income tax or franchise tax that RMR Inc. realizes as a result of (a) the increases in tax basis attributable to RMR Inc.’s dealings with ABP Trust and (b) tax benefits related to imputed interest deemed to be paid by it as a result of the tax receivable agreement. See Note 5, Related Person Transactions, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As of September 30, 2022, our consolidated balance sheet reflects a liability related to the tax receivable agreement of $25,583, of which we expect to pay $2,275 to ABP Trust during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2023.
Cash Flows
Our changes in cash flows for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year were as follows: (i) net cash from operating activities increased from $71,794 in the prior fiscal year to $101,270 in the current fiscal year; (ii)
net cash used in investing activities increased from $1,142 in the prior fiscal year to $10,590 in the current fiscal year; and (iii) net cash used in financing activities decreased from $280,480 in the prior fiscal year to $61,427 in the current fiscal year.
The increase in net cash from operating activities for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year primarily reflects increases in net income, after the exclusion of non-cash gains and losses, as well as favorable changes in working capital. The increase in net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to the purchase of 882,407 SEVN common shares in the current fiscal year. The decrease in net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year was primarily due to a one-time, special cash dividend of $7.00 per Class A Common Share and Class B-1 Common Share, or $219,851, paid in the prior fiscal year.
As of September 30, 2022, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have had or that we expect would be reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Market Risk and Credit Risk
We have not invested in derivative instruments, borrowed through issuing debt securities or transacted in foreign currencies. As a result, we are not now subject to significant direct market risk related to interest rate changes, changes to the market standard for determining interest rates, commodity price changes or credit risks; however, if any of these risks were to negatively impact our clients’ businesses or market capitalization, our revenues would likely decline. To the extent we change our approach on the foregoing activities, or engage in other activities, our market and credit risks could change. Please see Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the risks to us and our clients.
Risks Related to Cash and Short Term Investments
Our cash and cash equivalents include short term, highly liquid investments readily convertible to known amounts of cash that have original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase. We invest a substantial amount of our cash in money market funds. The majority of our cash is maintained in U.S. bank accounts. Some U.S. bank account balances exceed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance limit. We believe our cash and short term investments are not subject to any material interest rate risk, equity price risk, credit risk or other market risk.
Related Person Transactions
We have relationships and historical and continuing transactions with Adam D. Portnoy, the Chair of our Board and one of our Managing Directors, as well as our clients. For further information about these and other such relationships and related person transactions, please see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 5, Related Person Transactions, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference, the section captioned “Business” above in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our other filings with the SEC and our definitive Proxy Statement for our 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, or the 2023 Proxy Statement, to be filed within 120 days after the close of the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022. In addition, for more information about these transactions and relationships and about the risks that may arise as a result of these and other related person transactions and relationships, please see elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including “Warning Concerning Forward Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors.” We may engage in additional transactions with related persons, including businesses to which RMR LLC or its subsidiaries provide management services.
Critical Accounting Estimates
An understanding of our accounting policies is necessary for a complete analysis of our results, financial position, liquidity and trends. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires our management to make certain critical accounting estimates and judgments that impact (i) the revenue recognized during the reporting periods and (ii) our principles of consolidation. These accounting estimates are based on our management’s judgment. We consider them to be critical because of their significance to our consolidated financial statements and the possibility that future events may cause differences from current judgments or because the use of different assumptions could result in materially different estimates. We review these estimates on a periodic basis to test their reasonableness. Although actual amounts likely differ from such estimated amounts, we believe such differences are not likely to be material.
Revenue Recognition. Our principal sources of revenue are:
•business management fees, including base and incentive business management fees; and
•property management fees, including construction supervision fees and reimbursement for certain compensation and benefits related expenses.
We recognize revenue from business management and property management fees as earned in accordance with our management agreements. We consider the incentive business management fees earned from the REITs that we manage to be contingent performance based fees, which we recognize as revenue when earned at the end of each measurement period. We also recognize as revenue certain compensation and benefits reimbursements in our capacity as property manager, at cost, when we incur the related reimbursable compensation and benefits and other costs on behalf of our clients. See the “Revenue Recognition” section of Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a detailed discussion of our revenue recognition policies and our contractual arrangements.
Consolidation. Our consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K include only the accounts of the entities we control. We continually assess whether our existing contractual rights give us the ability to direct the activities of the entities we manage that most significantly affect the results of that entity. The activities and factors we consider include, but are not limited to:
•our representation on the entity’s governing body;
•the size of our investment in each entity compared to the size of the entity and the size of other investors’ interests; and
•the ability and rights to participate in significant policy making decisions and to replace our manager of those entities.
Based on our historical assessments, we have not consolidated the entities we manage. We will reassess these conclusions if and when facts and circumstances indicate that there are changes to the elements evidencing control.