ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the “Financial Statements” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K including the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report, our actual
results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
TransCode Therapeutics is an RNA oncology company created on the belief that cancer can be defeated through the intelligent design and effective delivery of RNA therapeutics. For decades, RNA has been a topic of investigation by the scientific community as a potentially attractive therapeutic modality because it can target any gene and it lends itself to rational and straightforward drug design. RNA-based therapeutics are highly selective to their targets, potentially making available a broad array of previously undruggable targets in the human genome. The therapeutic potential of RNA in oncology remains unrealized due in large part to the difficulty in safely and effectively delivering synthetic RNAs called oligonucleotides to tumors. TransCode believes it has solved this challenge. The company has developed an RNA delivery platform, the TTX platform, which leverages an iron oxide nanoparticle already approved as a clinical cancer imaging agent and treatment for iron deficiency anemia, as the physical carrier of the oligonucleotide.
Our TTX delivery system is built around a core iron oxide nanoparticle designed to minimize kidney and liver clearance. This is expected to translate into a long circulation half-life that allows for efficient accumulation of the therapeutic candidate in tumor cells and metastatic sites. Nanoparticles similar in design to those we use have an excellent clinical safety record of low toxicity and low immunogenicity. Further, the ability to image these particles enables quantification of their delivery to target tissues.
Advancing new RNA therapies through a modular approach
The TransCode TTX platform is modular by design, both at the level of the core nanoparticle and at the therapeutic loading. The size, charge, and surface chemistry of the core nanoparticles can be tuned to optimize them for the intended target and therapeutic load. Also, the therapeutic load can be adapted to the specific approach being developed, ranging from RNA interference, or RNAi, which includes small interfering RNAs, or siRNAs, antisense oligonucleotides, non-coding RNA mimics to mRNA-based cancer vaccines, and Clustered Regularly Interspaced Palindromic Repeats, or CRISPR, -based gene repair and replacement platforms as well as Pattern Recognition Receptors such as retinoic acid inducible gene, or RIG-I. The TTX platform can further be used for developing RNA-targeted radiolabeled therapeutics and diagnostics candidates and other custom products targeting known and novel biomarkers and other genetic elements as they are discovered and validated. The TTX platform is intended to overcome issues of stability, efficiency, and immunogenicity faced by existing lipid and liposomal nanoparticle platforms while optimizing delivery to and accumulation in tumor cells and metastatic sites.
The company’s lead therapeutic candidate, TTX-MC138, targets microRNA-10b, or miRNA-10b, a master regulator of metastatic cell viability in a range of cancers, including breast, pancreatic, ovarian, colon, glioblastomas, and others. TransCode expects to submit an exploratory investigational new drug, or IND, application to conduct a Phase 0 clinical trial with TTX-MC138 with the objective of demonstrating delivery to metastatic lesions in patients with Stage IV breast cancer. In parallel, the company plans to finalize IND-enabling studies for a Phase I/II clinical trial with TTX-MC138.
The company’s other preclinical programs include two solid tumor programs: TTX-siPDL1, an siRNA-based modulator of programmed death-ligand 1, or PD-L1, and TTX-siLIN28B, an siRNA-based inhibitor of RNA-binding protein LIN28B. TransCode also has three cancer agnostic programs: TTX-RIGA, an RNA-based agonist of the RIG-I-driven immune response in the tumor microenvironment; TTX-CRISPR, a CRISPR/Cas9-based therapy platform for the repair or elimination of cancer-causing genes inside tumor cells; and TTX-mRNA, an mRNA-based platform for the development of cancer vaccines meant to activate cytotoxic immune responses against tumor cells.
All these therapeutic candidates are intended to utilize our proprietary delivery mechanism and are designed with the goal of significantly improving outcomes for cancer patients.
We are also exploring LIN28B as a potential target for pancreatic cancer under an option to license a siRNA technology from The General Hospital Corporation, d/b/a Massachusetts General Hospital, or MGH. The option allows us time to complete our evaluation of this technology. Should the results of the evaluation meet our criteria for including this technology in our portfolio, we intend to negotiate adding it to our existing MGH license.
Additionally, we are interested in pursuing diagnostic approaches for RNA targets that might be relevant and important to informing treatment of patients using RNA therapeutics. Our 2018 license with MGH includes a patented microRNA screening assay
with the potential to detect expression of microRNAs in patient blood. We intend to optimize this diagnostic test to detect miR-10b in cancer patients as our first commercial testing product. If approved, this test could be used as a screening assay to detect metastasis in a variety of tumor types. Also, we may be able to use this test to evaluate miR-10b expression before, during and after treatment to best determine timing of therapeutic intervention.
In September 2021, research conducted by MGH was published in Cancer Nanotechnology, entitled “Radiolabeling and PET-MRI microdosing of the experimental cancer therapeutic, MN-anti-miR10b, demonstrates delivery to metastatic lesions in a murine model of metastatic breast cancer.” This paper reported on an MGH study using a radiolabeled derivative of TTX-MC138 (referred to in the paper as MN-anti-miR10b). In this study, TTX-MC138 was tagged with copper-64, or Cu-64. As a result, highly sensitive and specific quantitative determination of pharmacokinetics and biodistribution, as well as observation of delivery of the Cu-64 labeled TTX-MC138 to metastases, was made in laboratory tests using noninvasive positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance imaging, or PET-MRI. The key results of the study suggest that TTX-MC138, when injected intravenously, accumulates in metastatic lesions. These results suggest that our TTX platform delivers its therapeutic candidate as intended and supports clinical evaluation of TTX-MC138. In addition, the MGH investigation describes a microdosing PET-MRI approach to measure TTX-MC138 biodistribution in cancer patients and its delivery to clinical metastases. (Microdoses are minute, subpharmacologic doses of a test compound, not greater than 0.1 micrograms.) The capacity to carry out microdosing PET-MRI studies in patients under an exploratory IND, or eIND, application could be important because it has the potential to facilitate FDA authorization of additional human studies. This research, published by Dr. Zdravka Medarova, our Chief Technology Officer and scientific co-founder, and others describes what we believe is an effective approach to assessing delivery of TTX-MC138 in metastatic cancer patients. Since the PET-MRI technique is sensitive enough to determine the concentration of radiolabeled drug in the sub-picomolar range, microgram quantities of the radiolabeled drug are believed to be sufficient to perform such a study in humans. We believe this capability has significant advantages in the initial phases of drug development. Because the low mass of the radiolabeled drug does not induce reactions in humans, we believe the regulatory process will be less complex.
Dr. Medarova’s paper suggests that the radiolabeling does not impact tumor cell uptake or the ability of TTX-MC138 to engage its target. The paper also shows that the biodistribution of Cu-64 labeled TTX-MC138, when injected at a microdose, reflects its biodistribution at the level of a therapeutic dose. These key findings are expected to enable a microdosing study with TTX-MC138 in patients. We believe that a microdosing study has numerous advantages over our original Phase 0 trial design, the intent of which was to dose patients with a single therapeutic dose of TTX-MC138 and image its delivery by MRI alone. Specifically, as compared to the original Phase 0 study design, a microdosing study:
(i) allows more precise quantitation of the amount of TTX-MC138 delivered to the metastatic lesions because of the higher sensitivity and quantitative accuracy of positron emission tomography. By contrast, imaging of drug delivery by MRI alone is much less sensitive and less quantitative;
(ii) permits measurement of the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of TTX-MC138 not only in the metastatic lesions but in other tissues throughout the body. This knowledge can inform Phase I/II clinical trial designs by allowing us to determine drug uptake and clearance from vital organs. By contrast, measurement of TTX-MC138 delivery by MRI alone, as envisioned in the original Phase 0 trial design, would only allow us to assess drug accumulation in the metastatic lesions;
(iii) enables measurement of pharmacokinetic endpoints potentially informing dosing for Phase II/III clinical trials. Specifically, because of the high sensitivity and quantitative nature of PET-MRI, it may be possible to derive a more precise calculation of drug concentration in the metastatic lesions over time and then correlate that information to the effective dose defined in our preclinical studies; and
(iv) further informs patient enrollment during Phase II/III trials by allowing patient inclusion in the trials based on which patients’ metastases demonstrated accumulation of TTX-MC138 in prior trials.
Because of the benefits we believe we can derive from a microdosing Phase 0 trial, and reflecting the studies described in Cancer Nanotechnology, we now intend to pursue a microdosing Phase 0 trial for our First-in-Human clinical trial. We also believe the timeline to complete this study will more closely align with the timeline planned for our original Phase 0 study.
Success in the microdosing study could also validate delivery generally for our TTX pipeline which potentially opens-up additional relevant RNA targets that have been previously undruggable. Concurrent with the Phase 0 study, we expect to complete studies to support an IND for a Phase I clinical trial with TTX-MC138.
In the microdose Phase 0 study, we plan to enroll 10 patients with late-stage advanced solid tumors, infuse a single microdose of radiolabeled TTX-MC138, and use PET-MRI to measure TTX-MC138 delivery to metastatic lesions and other tissues in the body. We plan to conduct the clinical portion of the study at a major cancer center as originally planned.
SBIR Award
In April 2021, we received a Fast-Track Small Business Innovation Research award, or SBIR Award, from the National Cancer Institute. The SBIR Award is expected to provide $2,392,845 to fund a two-phased research partnership between us and Massachusetts General Hospital. The program commenced on April 15, 2021, and is expected to end in March 2024. We received SBIR Award funds of $308,861 in May 2021 and expect to receive $1,213,387 in the second year of the award and $870,597 in the third year. If we achieve the milestones associated with a particular stage sooner than scheduled at the time of the award, we may receive the funding for the subsequent stage sooner than originally scheduled.
In the SBIR Award application, we proposed performing key translational experiments including IND-enabling and supporting imaging studies using MRI to assess delivery and target engagement of TTX-MC138 in metastatic lesions of breast cancer patients. The experiments are designed to achieve the following aims:
SBIR Phase I:
Aim 1. Optimize a method for measuring miR-10b expression in breast cancer clinical samples.
SBIR Phase II:
Aim 2. File an IND application for TTX-MC138.
Aim 3. Use imaging to determine the uptake of TTX-MC138 by radiologically-confirmed metastases in breast cancer patients.
We believe that we have achieved the first milestone which included development and validation of a method for the use of a test called qRT-PCR to measure miR-10b expression in patient blood and tissue samples. The qRT-PCR test is often considered the gold standard for quantifying circulating miRNAs with high sensitivity and specificity and with a wide analytical measurement range. This validated test was used to identify the level that would be considered a positive expression of miR-10b in samples from metastatic cancer patients. An expected criterion for patient inclusion in our Phase 0 First-in-Human study is to enroll only patients with a positive expression of miR-10b. We have submitted our request for the next tranche of funding under this Award which we expect to receive in the second quarter of 2022.
Financial Operations Overview
From inception in January 2016 through approximately mid-2021, we devoted substantially all of our efforts and financial resources to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, securing intellectual property rights, conducting limited research and development activities, and preparing for manufacturing clinical-trial quantities of our lead product candidate. Following our IPO, we have expanded our R&D activities and our company operations. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We may never be able to develop or commercialize a marketable product. We have not yet completed any clinical trials, obtained any regulatory approvals, manufactured a commercial-scale drug, or conducted sales and marketing activities. Through December 31, 2021, we had received gross proceeds of $31.0 million primarily from our IPO and from borrowings obtained between 2018 and 2020 under convertible promissory notes.
We have incurred significant operating losses since inception. Our net losses were $6.8 million and $2.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $10.3 million. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual
commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates for which there is no assurance of occurrence. We expect that our expenses and capital requirements will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly if and as we:
● continue preclinical studies and initiate clinical trials for TTX-MC138 and other product candidates we may develop;
● advance the development of our product candidate pipeline;
● continue to develop and expand our proprietary TTX platform to identify additional product candidates;
● obtain new intellectual property and maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● seek marketing approvals for our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, if any;
● hire additional clinical, scientific, commercial and administrative personnel to increase our overall knowledge base, scientific expertise, experience and capabilities;
● acquire or license additional product candidates;
● expand our infrastructure and facilities to accommodate increased activities and personnel; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our research and development programs, any future commercialization efforts and our further transition to operating as a public company.
Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, insurance, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our business strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through sales of equity, debt financings or other capital sources, which may include collaborations with other companies or other strategic transactions. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as and when needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates or delay our pursuit of potential licenses or acquisitions.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $20.8 million. We expect to receive an additional $2 million under the SBIR Award. We believe that these amounts will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the first quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. To finance our operations beyond that point, we will need to raise additional capital which cannot be assured. If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms we find acceptable, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of our product candidates or other research and development initiatives. See “Liquidity and capital resources.”
Impact of the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic
Since it was reported to have surfaced in December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, or COVID-19, has spread across the world and has been declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. Efforts to contain the spread of COVID-19 have intensified and governments around the world, including in the United States, Europe and Asia, have implemented severe travel
restrictions, social distancing requirements, stay-at-home orders and have delayed the commencement of some non-COVID-19-related clinical trials, among other restrictions. As a result, the current COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as contributing to significant volatility and negative pressure on the U.S. economy and in financial markets. We believe that COVID-19 precautions and effects have affected and will continue to directly or indirectly affect the timeline for some of our preclinical studies and possibly our planned clinical trials. As a result of the outbreak, many companies have experienced disruptions in their operations and in markets served. To date, we have initiated some precautionary measures and we may take additional temporary precautionary measures intended to help ensure our employees’ well-being and minimize business disruption. These measures include devising contingency plans and securing additional resources from third-party service providers. Certain of our third-party service providers have also experienced delays, shutdowns or other business disruptions. We are continuing to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our current and future business operations, including our expenses, preclinical studies and planned clinical studies, and other development timelines, as well as on our industry and the healthcare system.
Components of our results of operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from any sources, including from product sales, and we do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval of any product candidate, or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from product sales or licensing agreements. However, there can be no assurance as to when, if ever, we will generate any such revenue.
Operating expenses
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts and the development of product candidates. We expense research and development costs as incurred, which include:
● expenses incurred in performing preclinical and clinical development;
● expenses incurred to conduct the necessary preclinical studies and clinical trials related to seeking regulatory approval to market our product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, conducting drug discovery work, preclinical studies, and clinical trials for us, and with contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, engaged to produce preclinical and clinical drug substance and drug product for our research and development activities;
● other costs related to acquiring and manufacturing materials in connection with our drug discovery efforts and our preclinical studies, materials for our clinical trials, including manufacturing validation batches, as well as costs related to investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials, preclinical studies and other scientific development services;
● payments made under third-party licensing, acquisition and option agreements;
● personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and other related expenses, and share-based compensation expense for research and development personnel;
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
● allocated facilities costs, including rent and utilities, and depreciation and other facilities or equipment expenses.
We recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our service providers. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. Nonrefundable advance payments that we make for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. Such amounts are subsequently expensed as the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed, or until it is no longer expected that the goods will be delivered or the services rendered.
We intend to track our research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis. Our direct external research and development expenses comprise primarily fees paid to outside consultants, CROs, CMOs, research laboratories, and suppliers in connection with our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities. Our direct external research and development expenses also include fees incurred under license and option agreements. We do not intend generally to allocate costs of management personnel, certain costs associated with our discovery efforts, certain supplies used in the laboratory, and certain facilities costs, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific programs when these costs are incurred across multiple programs and where it may not be practical to track them by program. We use internal resources along with outside parties primarily to conduct our research and discovery as well as for managing our preclinical development, process development, manufacturing and clinical development activities.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally are expected to have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. As a result, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially over the next several years if we commence planned clinical trials for TTX-MC138, as well as conduct other preclinical and clinical development, including submitting regulatory filings. In addition, we expect our discovery research efforts and related personnel costs will increase and, as a result, we expect our research and development expenses, including costs associated with share-based compensation, will increase significantly over prior levels. Also, we may incur additional expenses related to milestone and royalty payments to third parties with whom we have entered or may enter into license, acquisition and option agreements to assess, use or acquire intellectual property rights or rights to future product candidates.
In September 2021, we signed a statement of work with a European CMO to manufacture TTX-MC138 in accordance with good manufacturing practices, or GMP. Separately, we engaged a contract research organization, or CRO, to assist us in designing and conducting IND-enabling studies including pharmacokinetic, or PK, studies. These studies are designed to examine multiple parameters with a range of analytical support in support of regulatory submissions using radiolabeled or non-radiolabeled test substances. Toxicokinetic assessments can be conducted in parallel or concurrent with ongoing toxicology programs and in compliance with good laboratory practice, or GLP, requirements. We have also engaged an analytical testing laboratory to provide testing and other services, as well as documentation and reporting that meet regulatory requirements.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates or when, if ever, material net cash inflows may commence from or related to any of our product candidates. The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates is highly uncertain due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development and commercialization, including:
● the scope, progress, outcome and costs of our preclinical development activities, clinical trials and other research and development;
● the requirement to establish an appropriate safety and efficacy profile in IND-enabling studies;
● the timing and terms of regulatory approvals, if any, to conduct clinical trials;
● the number of sites and patients needed to complete clinical trials, the length of time required to enroll suitable patients and complete clinical trials, and the duration of patient follow-ups;
● the timing, receipt and terms of marketing approvals, if any, from applicable regulatory authorities including the FDA and regulators outside the U.S.;
● the extent of any post-marketing approval commitments that may be required by regulatory authorities;
● establishing clinical and commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers to supply the quantities and quality of product we need;
● development and timely delivery of clinical-grade and commercial-grade drug formulations as required for use in our clinical trials and for commercial launch;
● obtaining, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● significant and changing government regulation;
● launching commercial sales of our product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
● competitive developments;
● the impact of any business interruptions on our operations, including the timing and enrollment of patients in our planned clinical trials, or to those of our manufacturers, suppliers, or other vendors resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or similar public health crisis or for any other reason; and
● maintaining an acceptable safety profile of our product candidates following approval, if any, of our product candidates.
Any changes in or adverse outcome of any of these variables or others with respect to the development of our product candidates in preclinical and clinical development could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of staffing costs comprising mainly salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation expense for personnel serving in executive, finance, and other business functions; insurance costs, especially directors and officers liability insurance; professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, investor and public relations, accounting, tax and audit services; corporate and office expenses, including facilities costs; and information technology costs.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our R&D activities, prepare for potential commercial activities including possible partnerships for the development or marketing of approved product candidates, if any, and the increased requirements of a larger and publicly-traded company. We also anticipate that we will incur significantly increased accounting, audit, tax, legal, regulatory, compliance and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company. Additionally, if and when we believe regulatory approval of a product candidate appears likely, we anticipate an increase in payroll and other personnel-related expenses as we prepare for commercial operations, especially as it relates to the sales and marketing of that product candidate. There is a risk that we could incur the foregoing expenses but not receive the anticipated regulatory approval.
In September 2021, we engaged an independent executive compensation advisory firm to support the continued development of our compensation programs and governance model for officers, directors and employees. Our goal is to ensure that our culture, values, and strategic priorities are effectively represented in our compensation philosophy and strategy.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense
Interest expense has consisted primarily of accrued interest on our convertible promissory notes and charges for amortizations of debt discount related to the embedded derivative liability of our convertible promissory notes and of debt issuance costs. Since the notes converted into shares of common stock concurrent with our IPO, we will no longer incur interest expense on these notes.
Interest income
Interest income consists primarily of income earned on our cash balances. Our interest income has not been significant due to low cash balances and, since the IPO, low interest rates earned on our cash balances.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
Our convertible promissory notes provided for conversion into our common stock at a discount which conversion feature met the accounting definition of a derivative instrument. We classified this derivative instrument as a liability on our balance sheets. While the notes were outstanding, we remeasured fair value of this derivative liability at each reporting date and recognized any changes in fair value as other income (expense) in our statements of operations. Following conversion of the notes into common stock concurrent with our IPO, we no longer have derivative liabilities.
Gains related to conversion of convertible promissory notes and exercise of warrants
We estimated that the fair value of the shares of our common stock issued in connection with the conversion of our convertible promissory notes in the IPO was less than the carrying value of the notes, including related liabilities, that were extinguished on conversion. The difference between our estimated fair value of the shares and the carrying value of the notes and note-related liabilities was approximately $0.7 million. This difference represents a non-cash gain to our equity recorded at the time of conversion. There was a comparable non-cash expense related to the exercise of the warrants in connection with the IPO. We estimate the warrant-related expense to be approximately $15 thousand.
Grant income
From time to time, we apply for grant funding from government programs and may, in the future, apply for grants from non-government sources as well. There is no assurance that any grants will be awarded to us or, if awarded, that we will receive all the funds expected from such award. Grant payments received in advance of us performing the work for which the grant was awarded are recorded as deferred grant income on our balance sheets. Grant income is recognized in our statements of operations as and when earned for performance of the specific R&D activities for which the grants are awarded. Grant income earned in excess of grant payments received is recorded as grant receivable on our balance sheets.
Results of operations
The following table summarizes our unaudited results of operations for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and development expenses
Research and development, or R&D, expenses increased $2,470 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to purchases of materials, compensation and related personnel costs which we did not have in 2020, except for stock compensation expenses, license fees and costs related to development of intellectual property, and lab facility expenses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $2,955 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily a result of increased expenses for directors and officers liability insurance, compensation and related personnel costs which we did not have in 2020, except for stock compensation expenses, and investor relations and other costs of being a public company.
Grant Income
Grant income of $278 thousand in the year ended December 31, 2021, was recognized under an NIH grant awarded in April 2021 to fund certain study costs to advance our lead therapeutic candidate into clinical trials. No grant income was recognized in the prior year.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities
The fair value of derivative liabilities charge was $867 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. The derivative liabilities represent an embedded derivative in our convertible promissory notes which were issued at various times between 2018 and 2020. At each balance sheet date, we estimated the fair value of the derivative liability and recognized any change in our statements of operations. At the IPO, when these notes converted into common stock, the balance of the derivative liabilities was extinguished.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
The fair value of the warrant liability charge was $6 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. We issued warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in consideration for finder’s services in connection with a sale of one of our convertible promissory notes in 2018. We classified these warrants as a liability on our balance sheets which we remeasured to fair value at each reporting date. Changes in the fair value of the warrant liability were recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our statements of operations. The warrants were exercised shortly prior to our initial public offering. Thereafter, there will be no liability related to these warrants.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased $300 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease reflects conversion of our convertible promissory notes into our common stock in connection with our IPO, and the agreement by noteholders to cease interest accrual at May 31, 2021.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of liquidity
Since inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales or any other sources, and we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if ever. We have funded our operations to date primarily with proceeds from borrowings under convertible promissory notes and with funds from our initial public offering and SBIR Award. Through December 31, 2021, we had received gross cash proceeds of $31 million from these sources.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $20.8 million. We expect to receive an additional $2 million under our SBIR Award.
Future requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing and planned activities, particularly as we advance preclinical activities and pursue clinical trials of TTX-MC138. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, tax, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on our ability to, among other things:
● advance clinical development of TTX-MC138;
● manufacture, or have manufactured on our behalf, our preclinical and clinical drug materials and develop processes for commercial manufacturing of any product candidates that may receive regulatory approval;
● seek regulatory approvals for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● establish a sales, marketing, medical affairs and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval and intend to commercialize on our own;
● establish collaborations to commercialize any product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval but do not intend to commercialize on our own;
● expand our operational, financial and management systems and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support our clinical development, quality control, scientific research, manufacturing and commercialization efforts, our general and administrative activities and our operations as a public company; and
● obtain or develop new intellectual property and maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of $20.8 million. We believe that these funds along with additional funding under our SBIR Award, assuming receipt of these funds, will be sufficient to fund our operating expense and capital expenditure requirements into the first quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We do not believe that our existing cash will be sufficient to fund our planned operating and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months from the date of our financial statements.included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Potentially changing circumstances may also result in the depletion of our capital resources more repidly than we currently anticipate. These circumstances raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We anticipate that we will require additional capital for additional research, development, clinical trials, as we seek regulatory approval of our product candidates, company operations, and for licenses or acquisitions of other product candidates we may choose to pursue. If we receive regulatory approval for TTX-MC138 or other product candidates we may develop, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, sales, marketing and distribution, all of which will vary depending on where and how we choose to commercialize approved product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of biologic product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount and timing of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on and could increase significantly as a result of many factors, including:
● the scope, progress, outcome and costs of conducting preclinical development activities, clinical trials, and other research and development;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
● the costs, timing and requirements to manufacture our product candidates to supply our preclinical development efforts and our clinical trials;
● the costs of future activities, including product sales, medical affairs, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs of manufacturing commercial-grade product and building inventory to support commercial launch;
● the ability to receive non-dilutive funding, including grants from governments, organizations and foundations;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our products, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining, expanding and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● the terms of any industry collaborations we may be able to establish;
● the extent to which we acquire or license other product candidates and technologies; and
● the efficiency with which we operate our business.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, governmental funding, collaborations, strategic partnerships and alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties. There is no assurance that funding from any of the foregoing sources or otherwise will be available on acceptable terms, if at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, ownership interests in our common stock may be materially diluted, and the terms of such securities could include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. In addition, debt financing would result in fixed payment obligations.
If we raise additional funds through governmental funding, collaborations, strategic partnerships and alliances, or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue or earnings streams, research programs or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our unaudited cash flows for the periods indicated:
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used cash of $5,267 thousand in operating activities compared to using $493 thousand in the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash used in operating activities in the 2021 period primarily reflected our net loss of $6,843 thousand and an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1,903 thousand, offset in part by an $867 thousand loss from the changed fair value of derivative liabilities, an increase of $2,134 thousand in accounts payable and accrued expenses, and increased share-based compensation expense of $141 thousand.
Changes in accounts payable and accrued expenses were generally due to the amounts and timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used cash of $252 thousand in investing activities, primarily for purchases of laboratory equipment. No such purchases were made in the 2020 period.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we obtained cash of $25.5 million from financing activities, primarily from our initial public offering, net of offering costs.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we obtained cash from financing activities of $1.1 million, primarily from borrowings under convertible promissory notes.
Contractual obligations and commitments
As of December 31, 2021, we had no future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating lease commitments. We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CMOs, CROs and other third parties for the manufacture of our product candidates, to support clinical trials and preclinical research studies and testing, and for other purposes. These contracts are generally cancelable by us. Any payments due upon cancellation of these contracts generally consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation although some agreements provide for termination fees.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
We have based our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements. Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with United States GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for our judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from amounts derived from these estimates or from amounts obtained under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our audited financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and development expenses
In preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses.
We rely to a significant extent on third parties to conduct preclinical studies, provide materials, and to provide clinical trial services, including trial conduct, data management, statistical analysis and electronic compilation. At the end of each reporting period, we compare payments made to each service provider to the estimated progress towards completion of the related project. Factors that we consider in preparing these estimates include materials delivered or services provided, milestones achieved, the number of patients enrolled in studies, and other criteria related to the efforts of these vendors. These estimates are subject to change as additional information becomes available. Depending on the timing of payments to vendors and estimated services provided, we record net prepaid or accrued expenses related to these costs.
The estimating process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our relevant personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf or deliveries of materials made to us, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for those services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
● vendors, including research laboratories, in connection with preclinical development activities;
● CROs and investigative sites in connection with preclinical testing and clinical trials; and
● CMOs in connection with the production of drug substance and drug product formulations for use in preclinical testing and clinical trials.
The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period.
Share-based compensation
We measure share-based awards granted to employees, directors and others based on the fair value of the underlying award on the date of the grant. We recognize the corresponding compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, generally the vesting period of the respective award. As of December 31, 2021, we had issued restricted stock and stock options, each with service-based vesting conditions, and recorded share-based compensation expense resulting from those awards as vesting occurred. We would apply the graded-vesting method to all share-based awards with performance-based vesting conditions or to awards with both service-based and performance-based vesting conditions.
For share-based awards granted to consultants and non-employees, we recognize compensation expense over the period during which services are rendered by such consultants and non-employees until completed.
Determination of the fair value of common stock
As prior to our initial public offering there was no public market for our common stock, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our Board as of the date of each share-based award. Based on the fact that most of our activities from inception through mid-2018 related to organizing the company, including identifying management, directors and advisors, business planning, identifying potential product candidates, acquiring or developing intellectual property, conducting a limited amount of research and development, establishing arrangements with third parties to manufacture initial quantities of our product candidates and component materials, and seeking financing, and that our preclinical development had not advanced significantly, the Board determined that the fair value of our common stock had remained relatively constant at its par value during this period. In September 2018, the Board retained an independent third-party appraisal firm to provide an estimate of the fair value of our common
stock. In November 2018, the appraisal firm estimated that, as of June 30, 2018, the fair value of a single share of our common stock was $0.07. In March 2020, the appraisal firm estimated that as of December 31, 2019, it was $0.08 per share and in December 2020, it was estimated to be $3.91 per share as of October 1, 2020.
The valuations were performed in accordance with the Standards of the National Association of Certified Valuators and Analysts and in consideration of guidance from valuation literature, relevant court decisions, Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 820, Internal Revenue Service Revenue Ruling, or RR, 59-60, RR 68-609, and 26 Code of Federal Regulations, or CFR, Part 2, Section 1.409A. Estimates and processes used by the independent appraiser in performing the valuation are highly complex and include both objective and subjective factors. Assumptions underlying these valuations included certain estimates provided by the company’s management to the appraisal firm, which estimates involved inherent uncertainties and application of management’s judgment. Had significantly different assumptions or estimates been used, the fair value of our common stock and our share-based compensation expense could have been materially different. Further, those factors may have changed between the date of the then most recent valuation and the date of the grant.
Factors considered by the appraiser in determining the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date, included:
● our stage of development and business strategy;
● the progress of our research and development programs, including the status and results of preclinical studies and plans for clinical trials for TTX-MC138;
● our capital structure, including, if outstanding at the time of a grant, our convertible promissory notes and the superior rights and preferences of the notes relative to our common stock;
● external market conditions affecting the biopharmaceutical industry and trends within the biopharmaceutical industry;
● our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and results of operations;
● the absence of an active public market for our common stock;
● the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO or sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions; and
● an analysis of IPOs and the market performance of similar companies in the biopharmaceutical industry.
If there is an active public trading market for our common stock, we do not expect it to be necessary for our board to estimate the fair value of our common stock in connection with our accounting for share-based awards that we may grant, because the fair value of our common stock will be determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock. We may, despite any development of an active trading market for our common stock, and pending a sufficient history of the volatility of the price of our own common stock, calculate the volatility component of the valuation using volatility measures for a group of publicly-traded companies we deem comparable for this purpose.
Restricted Stock Awards
The following table sets forth the number of shares of restricted stock we granted from January 11, 2016, through October 7, 2018 (the date of the last grant of restricted stock), the per share purchase prices of such shares, and the estimated fair value per share of the awards on the date of grant:
(1) Cancellations
(2) For restricted stock granted on July 1, 2018, our board of directors determined at that time that the fair value of our common stock was $0.0001 per share as of the grant date. Receipt of an appraisal in November 2018 reporting a higher value at approximately the date of the grant resulted in a stock compensation charge for accounting purposes.
Valuation of derivative liabilities - conversion feature
We previously issued convertible promissory notes that each contained a conversion feature meeting the accounting definition of a derivative instrument as the feature was not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the convertible promissory notes. This is because the conversion feature provided for (i) conversion of the notes at a discount to the price obtained by the company for shares sold in a “Qualified Financing” (as defined) that would trigger the required conversion of the notes as well as (ii) a “cap” on the conversion price notwithstanding the discount. We classified these features of the notes as derivative liabilities, which were initially recorded at their fair value upon issuance of the convertible promissory notes and were subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with changes in fair value recognized in our statements of operations.
In connection with our IPO, all of the outstanding principal and accrued interest under the convertible promissory notes automatically converted into shares of common stock. As a result, subsequent to our IPO, we will no longer have derivative liabilities recorded on our balance sheet and thus will no longer recognize changes in fair value of the derivative liabilities in our statements of operations.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may affect our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Internal control over financial reporting
In preparation of our financial statements to meet the requirements of our IPO, we determined that material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting existed during 2020 and 2021 which remain unremediated. See “Risk factors - We have identified material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting. If we are unable to remediate these material weaknesses, or if we identify additional material weaknesses in the future or otherwise fail to maintain an effective system of internal controls, we may not be able to accurately or timely report our financial condition or results of operations, which may adversely affect our business.”
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (ii) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” with at least $700 million of equity securities held by non-affiliates; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (iv) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering.
In addition, the JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards by delaying adoption of these standards until they would apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date on which we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company and (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of effective dates applicable to public companies.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the proposed aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of our initial public offering is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company after our initial public offering if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies.
Information Technology Risks
Our data and computer systems are subject to threats from malicious software codes and viruses, phishing, ransomware, business email compromise attacks, or other cyber-attacks. In July 2021, we were subject to what we believe was a phishing attack. Although we do not believe this incident had a material impact on our business or financial condition, the number and complexity of these threats continue to increase. See - Part II, Item 1.A. Risk Factors, “We may be unable to adequately protect our information systems from cyberattacks, which could result in the disclosure of confidential or proprietary information, including personal data, damage our reputation, and subject us to significant financial and legal exposure.” The Company has taken and continues to take steps to mitigate the risk of cyberattacks including enhancing its email screening, engaging with computer support firms to provide forensics and training services, among other services, and enhancing security protocols for vendor payments. The Company intends to take additional steps to continue to enhance its cybersecurity defenses. Despite steps the Company has taken or may take in the future, there is no assurance that it will not suffer material and adverse consequences as a result of cyberattacks or other computer-based activities. In addition, there is no assurance that these or other steps we may take will be effective or prevent material adverse effects on our financial condition or results of operations.