ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as assumptions that, if they never materialize or prove incorrect, could cause our results to differ significantly from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this report, particularly in the section entitled “Risk Factors” included under Part I, Item1A.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019 is included in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud communications, video meetings, collaboration, and contact center software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) solutions. We believe that our innovative, cloud-based communication and contact center solutions disrupt the large market for business communications and collaboration by providing flexible and cost-effective solutions that support mobile and distributed workforces. We enable convenient and effective communications for organizations across all their locations and employees, enabling them to be more productive and more responsive.
Our cloud-based business communications and collaboration solutions are designed to be easy to use, providing a user identity across multiple locations and devices, including smartphones, tablets, PCs and desk phones. Our solutions can be deployed rapidly and configured and managed easily. Our cloud-based solutions are location and device independent and better suited to address the needs of modern mobile and global enterprise workforces than are legacy on-premise systems. Through our open Application Programming Interface (API) platform, we enable third-party developers and customers to integrate our solution with leading business applications to customize their own business workflows.
We have a portfolio of cloud-based offerings that are subscription based, made available at different rates varying by the specific functionalities, services, and number of users. We primarily generate revenues from the sale of subscriptions to our offerings. Our subscription plans have monthly, annual, or multi-year contractual terms. We believe that this flexibility in contract duration is important to meet the different needs of our customers. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, subscriptions revenues accounted for 90% or more of our total revenues. The remainder of our revenues has historically been primarily comprised of product revenues from the sale of pre-configured phones and professional services. We do not develop or manufacture physical phones and offer it as a convenience for a total solution to our customers in connection with subscriptions to our services. We rely on third-party providers to develop and manufacture these devices and fulfillment partners to successfully serve our customers.
We continue to invest in our direct inside sales force while also developing indirect sales channels to market our brand and our subscription offerings. Our indirect sales channels who sell our solutions consist of:
•Regional and global network of resellers and distributors;
•Strategic partners who market and sell our solutions, including co-branded solutions. Such partnerships include Avaya, Atos, Unify, and ALE. In November 2021, we entered into a strategic partnership with Mitel. As part of this agreement, we became Mitel's exclusive UCaaS partner.
•Carriers including AT&T, TELUS, BT, Vodafone, Verizon, DT and other regional carriers. In May 2021, we entered into a partnership with Verizon and launched a co-branded service, RingCentral with Verizon, an integrated unified UCaaS solution for enterprise businesses. In June 2021, we entered into a strategic partnership with DT to offer a co-branded version of RingCentral Video (“RCV”) as a stand-alone video solution and recently, we expanded our partnership with DT, to offer customers RingCentral X powered by Telekom, an end-to-end communications and collaboration solution.
Our revenue growth has primarily been driven by our flagship RingCentral MVP and RingCentral customer engagement solutions product offering, which has resulted in an increased number of customers, increased average subscription revenue per customer, and increased retention of our existing customer and user base. We define a “customer” as any party that purchases or subscribes to our products and services directly or indirectly through our channel partners. As of December 31, 2021, we had customers from a range of industries, including financial services, education, healthcare, legal services, real estate, retail, technology, insurance, construction, hospitality, and state and local government, among others. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the vast majority of our total revenues were generated in the U.S. and Canada, although we expect the percentage of our total revenues derived outside of the U.S. and Canada to grow as we continue to expand internationally.
The growth of our business and our future success depend on many factors, including our ability to expand our customer base to larger customers, expand our indirect sales channels, continue to innovate, grow revenues from our existing customer base, expand our distribution channels, and scale internationally.
During the reporting period, we saw contributions from new bookings as more businesses transition to RingCentral in the work-from-anywhere environment. We continue to see more customers opting for RingCentral apps on laptops and mobile devices over traditional desktop phones, which has impacted demand for physical phone devices.
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have widespread, rapidly evolving and unpredictable impacts on global societies, economies, financial markets and business practices. The worldwide spread of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in authorities implementing numerous measures to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business limitations and shutdowns.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we continue to focus on maintaining business continuity, helping our employees, customers and communities, and preparing for the future and the long-term success of our business. For example, to support the health and well-being of our employees, customers, partners and communities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the vast majority of our employees are working remotely and we have shifted some of our customer events to virtual-only experiences, and we have and may deem it advisable to continue to alter, postpone or cancel entirely customer, employee or industry events in the future. The changes we have implemented have not affected and are not expected to affect our ability to maintain operations, including financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
We are continuing to monitor the actual and potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic across our business. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will also depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, actions taken to contain the virus or its impact, including the availability and widespread acceptance of effective vaccines and the speed at which they are administered to the public, the severity of breakthrough cases and COVID-19 variants, impact on our partners, resellers, employees, vendors and customers, and employee or industry events, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. While our revenues and earnings are relatively predictable as a result of our subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods.
Further discussion of the potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business can be found in the section titled “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and financial measures such as total revenues, gross margin, and cash flows from operations, we regularly review a number of key business metrics to evaluate growth trends, measure our performance, and make strategic decisions. We discuss revenues and gross margin under “Results of Operations”, and cash flow from operations and free cash flows under “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” Other key business metrics are discussed below.
Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions
We believe that our Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions (“ARR”) is a leading indicator of our anticipated subscriptions revenues. We believe that trends in revenue are important to understanding the overall health of our business, and we use these trends in order to formulate financial projections and make strategic business decisions. Our ARR equals our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions multiplied by 12. Our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions equals the monthly value of all customer recurring charges at the end of a given month. For example, our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at
December 31, 2021 was $150.0 million. As such, our ARR at December 31, 2021 was $1.8 billion compared to $1.3 billion at December 31, 2020.
RingCentral Office Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions
We calculate our RingCentral Office Annualized Exit Monthly Recurring Subscriptions (“Office ARR”) in the same manner as we calculate our ARR, except that primarily subscriptions from RingCentral Office and customer engagement solutions are included and subscriptions from RingCentral professional and fax are excluded when determining Monthly Recurring Subscriptions for the purposes of calculating this key business metric. We believe that trends in revenue with respect to these products are important to the understanding of the overall health of our business, and we use these trends in order to formulate financial projections and make strategic business decisions. Our Office ARR at December 31, 2021 was $1.7 billion compared to $1.2 billion at December 31, 2020.
Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate
We believe that our Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate provides insight into our ability to retain and grow subscriptions revenue, as well as our customers’ potential long-term value to us. We believe that our ability to retain our customers and expand their use of our solutions over time is a leading indicator of the stability of our revenue base and we use these trends in order to formulate financial projections and make strategic business decisions. We define our Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate as (i) one plus (ii) the quotient of Dollar Net Change divided by Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions.
We define Dollar Net Change as the quotient of (i) the difference of our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the end of a period minus our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the beginning of a period minus our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the end of the period from new customers we added during the period, all divided by (ii) the number of months in the period. We define our Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions as the average of the Monthly Recurring Subscriptions at the beginning and end of the measurement period.
For example, if our Monthly Recurring Subscriptions were $118 at the end of a quarterly period and $100 at the beginning of the period, and $20 at the end of the period from new customers we added during the period, then the Dollar Net Change would be equal to ($0.67), or the amount equal to the difference of $118 minus $100 minus $20, all divided by three months. Our Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions would equal $109, or the sum of $100 plus $118, divided by two. Our Net Monthly Subscription Dollar Retention Rate would then equal 99.4%, or approximately 99%, or one plus the quotient of the Dollar Net Change divided by the Average Monthly Recurring Subscriptions.
Our key business metrics for the five quarterly periods ended December 31, 2021 were as follows (dollars in millions):
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Our revenues for the years presented consisted of subscriptions and other revenues. Our subscriptions revenue primarily includes recurring fixed plan subscription fees, variable usage-based fees for usage in excess of plan limits, one-time fees, recurring license and other fees, derived from sales through our direct and indirect sales channels, including resellers and distributors, strategic partners and carriers. We provide our subscriptions to our customers pursuant to contractual arrangements that range in duration typically from one month to five years. We provide our subscriptions to our customers pursuant to either “click through” online agreements for service terms up to one year or written agreements when the arrangement is expected to be one year or longer. We offer our subscriptions based on the functionalities and services selected by a customer, and generally our subscription arrangements automatically renew for additional periods at the end of the initial subscription term. We believe that this flexibility in contract duration is important to meet the different needs of our customers.
We generally bill our subscription fees in advance. We recognize subscription revenue over the term of the agreement. Amounts billed in excess of revenue recognized for the period are reported as deferred revenue on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
We also generate revenues through sales of our subscriptions and products by resellers, strategic partners, and carriers. When we control the performance of the contractual obligations, we record the revenues on a gross basis and amounts retained by our resellers are recorded as sales and marketing expense. Our assumption of such control is evidenced when, among other things, we are primarily responsible for the delivery of the service or products, have inventory risk, and have discretion in establishing pricing of the arrangement.
“Other revenues” includes product revenues from the sale of pre-configured phones, and professional services. Product revenue is recognized when the product has been delivered to the customer. Professional services revenue is recognized as and when services are delivered.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Our cost of subscriptions revenue primarily consists of fees paid to third-party telecommunications providers, network operations, costs to build out and maintain data centers, including co-location fees for the right to place our servers in data centers owned by third parties, depreciation of servers and equipment, along with related utilities and maintenance costs, amortization of acquired technology related intangible assets, personnel costs associated with customer care and support of the functionality of our platform and data center operations, including share-based compensation expenses, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology.
We define subscriptions gross margins as subscriptions revenue minus the cost of subscriptions revenue expressed as a percentage of subscriptions revenue.
Cost of other revenue is comprised primarily of the cost associated with the purchase of phones, personnel costs for employees and contractors, including share-based compensation expenses, cost of professional services, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology.
Operating Expenses
We classify our operating expenses as research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses.
Our research and development efforts are focused on developing new and expanded features for our solutions, integrations with distributors and other software platforms, and improvements to our backend architecture. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors, including share-based compensation expenses, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology, software tools, and product certification. We expense research and development costs as incurred, except for certain internal-use software development costs that we capitalize. We believe that continued investment in our products is important for our future growth, and we expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, although these expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period depending on the timing of these expenses.
Sales and marketing expenses are the largest component of our operating expenses and consist primarily of personnel costs for employees and contractors directly associated with our sales and marketing activities including share-based compensation expenses, internet advertising fees, television, radio and billboard advertising, public relations, commissions paid to employees, resellers and other third parties, amortization of capitalized sales commissions, trade shows, travel expenses, credit card fees, marketing and promotional activities, amortization of acquired customer relationship intangibles, and allocated costs of facilities and information technology. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we expand our sales and marketing efforts domestically and internationally and continue to build our brand, although these expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period depending on the timing of these expenses.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs, including share-based compensation expenses, for employees and contractors engaged in infrastructure and administrative activities to support the day-to-day operations of our business. Other significant components of general and administrative expenses include professional service fees, allocated costs of facilities and information technology, cost of compliance with certain government-imposed taxes, the costs of legal matters, business acquisition costs, and loss contingencies. We expect our general and administrative expenses to
continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, although these expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our total revenues from period to period, depending on the timing of these expenses.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected consolidated statements of operations data and such data as a percentage of total revenues. The historical results presented below are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any future period (in thousands):
Percentage of Total Revenues*
* Percentages may not add up due to rounding.
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Revenues
Subscriptions revenue. Subscriptions revenue increased by $395.8 million, or 36%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily a combination of the acquisition of new customers and upsells of seats and additional offerings to our existing customer base, from our MVP and contact center solutions. This growth was primarily driven by an increase in sales to our mid-market and enterprise customers as we continue to move up market and increase in sales through our direct and indirect sales channels, including resellers, strategic partners and carriers. Although we expect to continue to add new customers and for existing customers to increase their usage of our product, we will continue to
monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on customer demand, contract duration, churn, payment terms, and credit card declines. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and volatility in the market, including those resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, could also cause variability in our revenue.
Other revenues. Other revenues are primarily comprised of product revenue from the sale of pre-configured phones, and professional services.
Other revenue increased by $15.3 million, or 16%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily due to the increase in product sales and professional services resulting from the overall growth in our business. Due to continuing office closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and evolving hybrid work environments, we continued to see a shift towards using RingCentral apps on laptops and mobile devices over traditional desktop phones which impacted the demand of phones and timing of professional services. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on phone and professional services revenue.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Subscription cost of revenues and gross margin. Cost of subscriptions revenues increased by $109.0 million, or 46%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. The higher cost of subscription revenues were due to an increase in infrastructure support costs of $32.4 million, amortization of acquired intangibles of $30.5 million, third-party costs to support our solution offerings of $24.5 million, and personnel and contractor-related costs of $20.5 million. Personnel and contractor related costs includes share-based compensation expense of $10.9 million. Gross margin remained relatively consistent period over period.
The increase in expenses was primarily driven by investments in our infrastructure and capacity to improve the availability of our subscription offerings, while also supporting the growth of new customers and increased usage of our subscriptions by our existing customer base. We expect subscription gross margin to be within a relatively similar range in the future. However, we continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic carefully and its impact on our customers.
Other cost of revenues and gross margin. Cost of other revenues increased by $15.8 million, or 18%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. This was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs of $8.7 million including share-based compensation expense, cost of product sales of $4.8 million, and professional fees of $2.5 million. Other revenue gross margin fluctuated based on timing of completion of professional services projects and transaction price for product sales.
We continue to monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the severity of breakthrough cases and newer variants and their potential impact, on timing of professional services and transaction price of product sales.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $120.3 million, or 63%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by a $101.3 million increase in personnel and contractor costs, $14.5 million in overhead costs to support our research and development efforts, and $4.4 million in professional fees. The increase in personnel and contractor costs was mainly driven by $53.9 million related to headcount growth and $43.8 million related to share-based compensation expense primarily driven by equity awards granted to new and existing employees.
The increases in research and development headcount and other expense categories were driven by continued investment in current and future software development projects for our applications. Given the continued emphasis and focus on product innovation, we expect research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $270.4 million, or 46%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily due to increases in personnel and contractor costs of $124.2 million, third-party commissions of $94.3 million, amortization of deferred sales commission costs of $27.8 million, advertising and marketing costs of $15.8 million, overhead costs of $6.9 million to support our sales and marketing efforts, and professional fees of $1.4 million. Of the total increase in personnel and contractor costs, $73.7 million was due to higher share-based compensation expense primarily driven by equity awards granted to new and existing employees and $47.0 million attributable to headcount growth.
The increases in sales and marketing headcount and other expense categories were necessary to support our growth strategy to acquire new customers with a focus on larger customers, and to establish brand recognition to achieve greater penetration into the North America and international markets. Additionally, we expect sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to expand our presence in North America and international markets.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $84.2 million, or 42%, during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily due to increases in personnel and contractor costs of $46.7 million, overhead and other costs of $21.9 million, and professional fees of $11.5 million. Of the total increase in personnel and contractor costs, $35.9 million was mainly due to higher share-based compensation expense primarily driven by equity awards granted to new and existing employees and $10.3 million attributable to headcount growth.
We expect general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to make additional investments in processes, systems, and personnel to support our anticipated revenue growth.
Other Income (Expense), Net
nm - not meaningful
Other income (expense), net decreased by $103.1 million during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020. Interest expense was higher by $15.1 million mainly due to increase in the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs from our 2025 and 2026 Notes issued in the first and third quarter of 2020, respectively. Other expense, on a net basis was higher by $88.0 million, primarily due to a net unrealized loss recognized on our long-term investments driven by changes in the investee’s stock price. The unrealized losses recognized on our long-term investments in the current period was $15.6 million compared to a gain of $77.2 million recognized in the respective prior year period.
We expect the gain or loss on our long-term investments to continue to fluctuate due to changes in the investee’s stock price.
We expect interest income to further fluctuate in the future due to interest rate volatility in the current macroeconomic environment and reduction of our investments in money market funds.
Net Loss
Net loss increased by $293.3 million during fiscal year 2021 as compared to fiscal year 2020, mainly due to non-cash items including $168.4 million higher share-based compensation expense primarily driven by equity awards granted to new and existing employees, $92.9 million unrealized net loss recognized from our long-term investments primarily driven by changes in the investee’s stock price, increase in acquisition-related and other costs of $17.7 million, and $15.0 million increase in interest expense from the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs from our convertible senior notes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is a measure of our ability to access sufficient cash flows to meet the short-term and long-term cash requirements of our business operations.
We finance our operations primarily through sales to our customers, which could be billed either monthly or annually one year in advance. For customers with annual or multi-year contracts and those who opt for annual invoicing, we generally invoice only one annual period in advance and revenue is deferred for such advanced billings. We also finance our operations from proceeds from issuance of convertible senior notes, proceeds from issuance of convertible preferred stock, and proceeds from issuance of stock under our stock plans.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $267.2 million and $639.9 million, respectively. During first half of 2021, we fully redeemed our 2023 Notes by paying $343.8 million in cash, of which $333.6 million is reflected as a cash outflow from financing activities. The outstanding capped call transaction relating to the 2023 Notes can be settled for cash proceeds of up to $210 million if settled on its maturity date, which will be an additional source of cash. For additional details, refer to Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We are in compliance with all covenants under the 2026 and 2025 Notes as of December 31, 2021.
In November 2021, we received proceeds, net of issuance costs, from the issuance of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock of $199.4 million.
In December 2021, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program under which we may repurchase up to $100 million of our outstanding shares of Class A Common Stock. Under the program, share repurchases may be made at our discretion from time to time in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions, or any other means. The program does not obligate us to repurchase any specific dollar amount or to acquire any specific number of shares of our Class A Common Stock. The timing and number of any shares repurchased under the program will depend on a variety of factors, including stock price, trading volume, and general business and market conditions. The authorization is effective until December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, no shares were repurchased under this plan.
We believe that our operations, existing liquidity sources as well as capital resources and ability to raise cash through additional financing will satisfy our future cash requirements and obligations for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including revenue growth and costs incurred to support customer growth, acquisitions and expansions, sales and marketing, research and development, increased general and administrative expenses to support the anticipated growth in our operations, and capital equipment required to support our growing headcount and in support of our co-location data center facilities, as well as the extent of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on our business. Our capital expenditures in future periods are expected to grow in line with our business. We continually evaluate our capital needs and may decide to raise additional capital to fund the growth of our business for general corporate purposes through public or private equity offerings or through additional debt financing. In the future, we may also make investments in or acquire businesses or technologies that could require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Access to additional capital may not be available or on favorable terms. The uncertainty created by the changing markets and economic conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic may also impact our customers’ ability to pay on a timely basis, which could negatively impact our operating cash flows.
The table below provides selected cash flow information for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Operating Activities
Cash used in or provided by operating activities is driven by the timing of customer collections, as well as the amount and timing of disbursements to our vendors, the amount of cash we invest in personnel, marketing, and infrastructure costs to support the anticipated growth of our business, payments under strategic arrangements, and amounts attributable to repayment of convertible senior notes.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $152.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash flow from operating activities was driven by timing of cash receipts from customers and carriers, primary offset by cash payments for personnel related costs and to vendors.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $187.3 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This change reflects working capital impacts resulting from the timing of payments and collections, payments under strategic arrangements in prior year, and also redemption of our 2023 Notes related to interest.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of our purchase of intellectual property assets, capital expenditures, internal-use software, and long-term investments. As our business grows, we expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase.
Net cash used in investing activities was $396.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to $302.7 million paid in the three months ended December 31, 2021 to acquire intellectual property from Mitel, investments in
certain debt and equity securities of $11.9 million, and capital expenditures including personnel-related costs associated with development of internal-use software of $72.7 million.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $289.1 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to our acquisition of intellectual property of $286.3 million and investments in certain debt and equity securities of $11.9 million, offset by a decrease in investment in capital expenditures and internal-use software development of $9.1 million.
Net Cash Provided By (Used In) Financing Activities
Our primary financing activities have consisted of raising capital through the issuance of convertible preferred stock, proceeds through the issuance of stock under our stock plans, partially offset by redemption of our convertible senior notes.
Net cash used in financing activities was approximately $127.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to cash paid of $333.6 million for redemption of our 2023 Notes, $21.5 million for net taxes paid in connection with our stock plans, repayment of our financing obligations of $4.2 million, and $3.9 million settlement of our contingent consideration in connection with a prior business acquisition, partially offset by proceeds of $199.4 million from the issuance of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock in the fourth quarter of 2021, and $36.7 million from issuance of stock in connection with our stock plans.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $564.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $437.6 million compared to $127.1 million of net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, leading to a net increase of $564.6 million. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by $1,627.2 million proceeds from the issuance of our 2026 and 2025 Notes, net of issuance costs, partially offset by a $1,086.3 million payment for partial repurchase and redemption of our 2023 Notes and $102.7 million payment for capped calls and transaction costs associated with our 2026 and 2025 Notes. Refer to Note 6, Convertible Senior Notes, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Non-GAAP Free Cash Flow
To supplement our statements of cash flows presented on a GAAP basis, we use non-GAAP measures of cash flows to analyze cash flow generated from our operations. We define free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, as GAAP net cash provided by (used in) operating activities plus cash paid for strategic partnerships and repayments of convertible notes attributable to debt discount, reduced by purchases of property and equipment and capitalized internal-use software. We believe information regarding free cash flow provides useful information to management and investors in understanding the strength of liquidity and available cash. A limitation of the use of free cash flow is that it does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for the period. Free cash flow should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to cash flows from operations, and should be considered alongside our other GAAP-based financial liquidity performance measures, such as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities and our other GAAP financial results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of free cash flow to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, for each of the periods presented (in thousands):
Backlog
We have generally signed new customers contracts with varying length, from month-to-month to multi-year terms for our subscription services. At any point in the contract term, there can be amounts allocated to services that we have not yet contractually performed, which constitute a backlog. Until we meet our performance obligations, we do not recognize them as revenues in our consolidated financial statements. Given the variability in our contract length, we believe that backlog is not a reliable indicator of future revenues and we do not utilize backlog as a key management metric internally.
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue primarily consists of the unearned portion of monthly or annual invoiced fees for our subscriptions, which we recognize as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. For customers with multi-year contracts, we generally invoice for only one monthly or annual subscription period in advance. Therefore, our deferred revenue balance does not capture the full contract value of multi-year contracts. Accordingly, we believe that deferred revenue is not a reliable indicator of future revenues and we do not utilize deferred revenue as a key management metric internally.
Contractual Obligations
The following summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
Purchase obligations represent an estimate of open purchase orders and contractual obligations in the normal course of business for which we have not received the goods or services as of December 31, 2021. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, except for our purchase orders with our inventory suppliers, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. Our purchase orders with our inventory suppliers are non-cancellable. In addition, we have other obligations for goods and services that we enter into in the normal course of business. These obligations, however, are either not enforceable or legally binding, or are subject to change based on our business decisions. The aggregate of these items represents our estimate of purchase obligations.
Indemnification Obligations
Certain of our agreements with sales agents, resellers and customers include provisions for indemnification against liabilities if our products infringe a third-party’s intellectual property rights. To date, we have not incurred any material costs as a result of such indemnification provisions and have not accrued any liabilities related to such obligations in the consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021.
Contingencies
We are and may be in the future subject to certain legal proceedings and from time to time may be involved in a variety of claims, lawsuits, investigations, and proceedings relating to contractual disputes, intellectual property rights, employment matters, regulatory compliance matters, and other matters relating to various claims that arise in the normal course of business. We record a provision for a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred, and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount of loss. Such legal proceedings are inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to be incorrect, it could have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
Refer to Note 8 - Commitment and Contingencies of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by U.S. GAAP and does not require management’s judgment in its application. In other cases, management’s judgment is required in selecting among available alternative accounting standards that provide for different accounting treatment for similar transactions. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenues, costs, and expenses, and affect the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. In many instances, we could reasonably use different accounting estimates, and in some instances changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, our actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by our management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected. A summary of our significant accounting policies is included in Note 1 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, which is incorporated herein by reference. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We derive our revenues from subscriptions, sale of products, and professional services. Subscriptions revenue is generally recognized over the period of the subscription contract. Subscription contracts generally allow the customers to terminate their services at any time during the first 30 to 60 days of the subscription period and are charged for the term of usage. Upon cancellation during the termination period, customers receive a pro-rata refund for any amounts paid. After the end of the termination period, the contract is non-cancellable and the customer is obligated to pay for the remaining term of the contract. For sale of products, revenue is recognized when control is transferred. For professional services, revenue is recognized as and when services are rendered.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements and the anticipated effects on our consolidated financial statements, see Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, “Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.