Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Our Business
RealNetworks invented the streaming media category in 1995 and continues to build on its foundation of digital media expertise and innovation. In recent years, we have leveraged our technical expertise and access to proprietary data sources to develop a new generation of AI-based products and solutions. These products and solutions are designed to help customers be safer and smarter, and for their companies to be more efficient and more successful. The main two products and key investment initiatives in our AI portfolio are SAFR, our AI-based computer vision platform, and KONTXT, our natural language processing-based (NLP) message classification and analysis platform.
SAFR leverages the power of AI to enhance security, safety, convenience, and operational efficiencies with fast and accurate face recognition and additional person- and object-based AI capabilities. KONTXT is based on AI NLP analysis, allowing our customers to analyze and classify multiple billions of messages monthly in real time in order to protect end consumers from spam and fraud. Our focus on AI-based products and our data science resources allows us to be agile, continuously evolving, and rapidly creating new solutions to solve consumers’ problems.
In addition to our AI solutions, our consumer products also feature GameHouse Original Stories, a unique IP portfolio of free-to-play and subscription mobile games, used by millions of players. Our consumer products also include ringback tones, which we sell to consumers through mobile operators, and the renowned RealPlayer, which introduced streaming to the world in 1995 and today provides millions of people worldwide a powerful way to stream, download, store, organize, and experience the rapidly expanding universe of digital media content. We also create video compression and enhancement technology, which we primarily license to OEMs, including manufacturers of mobile devices, smart TVs, and set-top boxes.
Our Segments
We manage our business and report revenue and operating income (loss) in three segments: (1) Consumer Media (2) Mobile Services, and (3) Games.
Within our Consumer Media segment, revenue is derived from the software licensing of our video compression and enhancement, or codec, technologies, including primarily from our prior-generation codec RealMedia Variable Bitrate, or RMVB, as well as our newer codec technology, RealMedia High Definition, or RMHD. We also generate revenue from the sale of our RealPlayer products, including RealPlayer Plus and related products. These products and services are delivered directly to consumers and through partners, such as OEMs and mobile device manufacturers.
Our Mobile Services business generates revenue primarily from the sale of subscription services, which include our intercarrier messaging service and ringback tones, as well as through software licenses for the integration of our RealTimes platform and certain system implementations. We generate a significant portion of our revenue from sales within our Mobile Services business to a few mobile carriers and one service partner. Our Mobile Services segment also includes our AI-based growth initiatives, SAFR and KONTXT.
Our Games business generates revenue primarily through the development, publishing, and distribution of casual games under the GameHouse and Zylom brands. Games are offered via mobile devices, digital downloads, and subscription play. We derive revenue from consumer purchases of in-game virtual goods within our free-to-play games and advertising on mobile games. In addition, we derive revenue from the sale of individual games and subscription offerings.
RealNetworks allocates to its Consumer Media, Mobile Services, and Games reportable segments certain corporate expenses which are directly attributable to supporting these businesses, including, but not limited to, a portion of finance, IT, legal, human resources and headquarters facilities. Remaining expenses, which are not directly attributable to supporting these businesses, are reported as corporate items. These corporate items also include restructuring charges and stock compensation expense.
As described in Note 4. Dispositions, RealNetworks sold its Napster business on December 30, 2020.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 to be a global pandemic. As the virus spread throughout the U.S. and the world, authorities implemented numerous measures to contain the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, business limitations, and shutdowns. In addition to the pandemic's widespread impact on public health and global society, reactions to the pandemic as well as measures taken to contain the virus have caused significant turmoil to the global economy and financial markets. Similar to other companies, from the onset of the pandemic, we implemented measures to support the health and well-being of our employees, customers, partners and communities, including working remotely and operating our business in a fundamentally different way. We reevaluated our operating plans, causing some significant pivots in our growth initiatives, while also reducing costs and reallocating resources.
The COVID-19 pandemic and the resultant economic instability and financial market turmoil added complexity, uncertainty and risk to nearly all aspects of our business. We continue to assess our plans as the pandemic environment evolves and strive to operate our business as efficiently as possible. We are unable to fully predict the impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of variants, such as the delta and omicron variants, will continue to have on our results from operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows for the fiscal year 2022 or beyond, due to the numerous uncertainties, including the duration and severity of the pandemic and ongoing containment measures. We will continue to monitor and evaluate the effects to our businesses and adjust our plans as needed.
Financial Results
As of December 31, 2021, we had $27.1 million in unrestricted cash and cash equivalents compared to $23.9 million as of December 31, 2020. The 2021 increase in cash and cash equivalents from December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the receipt of $20.1 million in net proceeds from the April 2021 underwritten public offering and the $2.0 million received from the release of the Napster escrow in the fourth quarter of 2021. Partially offsetting these increases were ongoing cash used in
operating activities, which totaled $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the $2.5 million cash payment to settle our contingent consideration liability for our January 2019 purchase of Napster.
The following discussion reflects RealNetworks' results from continuing operations. Consolidated results of operations were as follows (dollars in thousands):
2021 compared with 2020
In 2021, our consolidated revenue decreased by $9.9 million, or (15)%. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to decreases in our Games, Mobile Services, and Consumer Media segments of $4.5 million, $3.1 million, and $2.3 million, respectively. See below for further information regarding fluctuations by segment. Gross margin of 76% was unchanged from the prior year.
Operating expenses increased by $8.7 million in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to a higher benefit in 2020 related to the fair value adjustment of the contingent consideration liability in the amount of $7.6 million, and higher stock-based compensation of $2.8 million, partially offset by a $2.0 million decrease in salaries and other people-related costs and a $0.9 million decrease in marketing fees. See Note 5. Fair Value Measurements for additional information on the change in the contingent consideration liability.
Segment Operating Results
Consumer Media
Consumer Media segment results of operations were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Total Consumer Media revenue decreased by $2.3 million, or 18% as compared to the prior year, due to decreased advertising and other revenue of $1.0 million, decreased software license revenues of $0.9 million, and decreased subscription service revenues of $0.4 million.
Software License
For our software license revenues, the $0.9 million decrease was primarily due to the timing of contract renewals and shipments to existing customers.
Subscription Services
For our subscription services revenues, the decrease of $0.4 million was primarily due to further declines in our legacy subscription products, which we expect to continue.
Advertising and Other
For our advertising and other revenues, the decrease of $1.0 million was due to the non-recurring recognition of previously deferred third-party software product distribution revenue in 2020 in the amount of $0.6 million, and $0.4 million related to declining installs.
Cost of revenue decreased by $0.5 million, or 20%. This was primarily due to reductions in salaries and other people related expenses.
Operating expenses decreased by $1.5 million, or 16%, compared to the prior year, primarily due to lower salaries and people related expenses and professional fees of $0.6 million and lower infrastructure costs of $0.2 million. Also contributing to the decrease was $0.3 million lower spend for Scener. Scener was deconsolidated from RealNetworks, Inc. as of June 30, 2021.
Mobile Services
Mobile Services segment results of operations were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Mobile Services revenue declined by $3.1 million, or 12%, and was primarily driven by a decrease of $4.4 million in subscription services revenue, offset by an increase of $1.3 million in software license revenue.
Software license
For our software license revenues, the $1.3 million increase was the result of revenue from sales of our SAFR product.
Subscription service
For our subscription services, the $4.4 million decrease was due primarily to lower revenues from our ringback tones business of $4.3 million, resulting from terminated contracts and lower subscribers.
Cost of revenue decreased by $1.0 million or 15% as compared to the prior year, due primarily to decreases of $0.6 million resulting from terminated ringback tone contracts, and reductions in salaries and benefits of $0.4 million related to headcount reductions.
Operating expenses decreased by $0.5 million or 2% primarily due to decreased salaries, benefits and other people related costs of $1.4 million, lower infrastructure costs of $0.5 million, partially offset by higher professional fees of $1.6 million, driven by AI-based growth initiatives.
Games
Games segment results of operations were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Games revenue decreased by $4.5 million, or 16% as compared to the prior year due to decreases of $2.8 million in product sales, $1.2 million in subscription services revenues, and $0.5 million in advertising revenue.
Subscription Services
Our subscription sales decreased $1.2 million as a result of lower subscribers in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Product sales
Our product sales decreased $2.8 million as a result of lower in-game purchases of $2.1 million and lower sales of games of $0.7 million compared to 2020.
Advertising and other
Our advertising and other revenues decreased $0.5 million as compared to the prior-year primarily as a result of decreases in advertising revenue from free-to-play mobile games.
Cost of revenue decreased by $1.3 million, or 17%, due to lower app store fees and royalties.
Operating expenses decreased by $0.5 million, primarily due to lower marketing fees of $0.9 million, partially offset by higher professional fees of $0.4 million.
Corporate
Corporate segment results of operations were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Operating expenses increased by $11.1 million, primarily due to $7.6 million related to the change in fair value of the contingent consideration liability. See Note 5. Fair Value Measurements for additional information. Also contributing to the increase from the prior year is $2.8 million in higher stock-based compensation expense primarily due to modifications of certain equity awards that will be cash settled.
Consolidated Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist primarily of salaries and related personnel costs including stock-based compensation, consulting fees associated with product development, sales commissions, professional service fees, advertising costs, changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration liability, and restructuring charges. Operating expenses were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses decreased by $1.2 million, or 5%, in the year ended 2021 as compared to 2020 primarily due to a decrease in salaries and other people related costs of $1.9 million, partially offset by higher professional service fees of $0.4 million and higher infrastructure costs of $0.3 million.
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $1.5 million, or 7%, in the year ended 2021, compared with 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher stock-based compensation expense of $2.2 million and higher professional service fees of $1.0 million. These increases were partially offset by lower marketing expenses of $0.8 million, lower salaries and other people related costs of $0.5 million and lower infrastructure related expense of $0.2 million.
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.2 million, or 1%, in the year ended 2021, compared with 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher stock-based compensation and other people related costs of $0.9 million, partially offset by lower infrastructure related expense of $0.5 million.
The fair value adjustments to the contingent consideration liability changed by $7.6 million in the year ended 2021, compared with 2020. This liability was settled in the second quarter of 2021. See Note 5. Fair Value Measurements for additional information.
Restructuring and other charges consist of costs associated with the ongoing reorganization of our business operations and expense re-alignment efforts, including amounts related to our operating leases. For additional details on these charges, see Note 10. Restructuring and Other Charges.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses), net was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Gain (loss) on equity and other investments, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 includes the unrealized loss of $7.0 million on our holdings of Napster shares, as further discussed in Note 4. Dispositions. Also included in the total is our dilution gain of $6.0 million and equity loss recognition of $3.8 million related to Scener for 2021 as further discussed in Note 19. Related Party Transactions
During the second quarter of 2021, the Company received notice from our participating bank that our request for forgiveness of the principal and interest on our PPP loan was approved, and we recognized a non-cash gain of $2.9 million within Other income (expense) on the consolidated statement of operations.
On June 30, 2021, RealNetworks deconsolidated Scener Inc., previously a consolidated subsidiary of RealNetworks, and recognized a non-cash gain of $2.0 million within Other income (expense) on the consolidated statement of operations. The remaining fluctuations in Other income (expense), net primarily relate to foreign exchange gains and losses.
Income Taxes
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized income tax expense from continuing operations of $0.5 million and $0.1 million, respectively, related to U.S. and foreign income taxes.
In general, the amount of tax expense or benefit allocated to continuing operations is determined without regard to the tax effects of other categories of income or loss, such as discontinued operations. However, an exception to the general rule is provided in Topic 740 when there is a pre-tax loss from continuing operations and there are items charged or credited to other categories, including discontinued operations, in the current year. Pursuant to Topic 740, the gain from discontinued operations in 2020 was considered in determining the $0.1 million tax expense allocated to the loss from continuing operations.
The income tax expense from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was largely the result of foreign withholding taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions.
We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered based upon our consideration of many factors, including the current economic climate, our expectations of future taxable income, our ability to project such income, and the appreciation of our investments and other assets. We maintain a partial valuation allowance of $131.5 million for our deferred tax assets due to uncertainty regarding their realization as of December 31, 2021. The net increase in the valuation allowance since December 31, 2020 of $3.2 million was the result of an increase in current year deferred tax assets, for which the Company maintains a valuation allowance.
We generate income in a number of foreign jurisdictions, some of which have higher tax rates and some of which have lower tax rates relative to the U.S. federal statutory rate. Changes to the blend of income between jurisdictions with higher or lower effective tax rates than the U.S. federal statutory rate could affect our effective tax rate. For the year ended December 31, 2021, decreases in tax expense from income generated in foreign jurisdictions with lower tax rates in comparison to the U.S. federal statutory rate were offset by increases in tax expense from income generated in foreign jurisdictions having comparable, or higher tax rates in comparison to the U.S. federal statutory rate.
For each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, RealNetworks had $0.7 million in uncertain tax positions. The unrecognized tax benefits are due to federal research and development tax credit carryforward risks. As of December 31, 2021, there are no unrecognized tax benefits remaining that would affect our effective tax rate if recognized, as the offset would increase the valuation allowance. We do not anticipate that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will significantly change within the next twelve months.
We file numerous consolidated and separate income tax returns in the U.S. including federal, state and local, as well as foreign jurisdictions. With few exceptions, we are no longer subject to U.S. federal income tax examinations for tax years before 2013 or state, local, or foreign income tax examinations for years before 1993. We are currently under audit by various states and foreign jurisdictions for certain tax years subsequent to 1993.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following summarizes working capital, cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash (in thousands):
The 2021 decrease in working capital, excluding cash and cash equivalents from December 31, 2020 was primary due to the $7.0 million decline in the fair value of our investment in Napster. This decline was partially offset by our $2.5 million 2021 cash settlement of the Napster contingent consideration liability. Both of these items are described in Note 5. Fair Value Measurements.
Cash and cash equivalents increased $3.2 million from December 31, 2020 due primarily to the $20.1 million of net proceeds from the April 2021 equity offering and the $2.0 million received from the release of the Napster escrow in the fourth quarter of 2021 described in Note 4. Dispositions. Partially offsetting these increases were ongoing cash used in operating activities, which totaled $15.0 million for the year ended 2021, and the $2.5 million cash payment for settlement of the Napster contingent consideration liability.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately $5.6 million of the $27.1 million of cash and cash equivalents was held by our foreign subsidiaries outside the U.S.
The following summarizes cash flow activity from continuing operations (in thousands):
Cash used in operating activities was $7.0 million higher in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020. Cash used in operations was higher primarily due to our higher operating loss recorded for year 2021 compared to the prior year.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities of $1.3 million was due to the impact of the deconsolidation of Scener in the amount of $0.8 million and $0.5 million due to fixed asset purchases.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $0.4 million was due to fixed asset purchases.
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 provided cash totaling $18.0 million. This cash inflow was due to the net proceeds from the equity offering of $20.1 million and $0.3 million from the issuance of common stock related to exercising of stock options, net of tax payments for shares withheld upon vesting of restricted stock, partially offset by the $2.5 million cash payment for settlement of the Napster contingent consideration liability.
Financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 provided cash totaling $11.0 million. This cash inflow was due to the $10.0 million in cash proceeds from the issuance of Series B Preferred Stock and $2.9 million in proceeds from the PPP loan. As discussed in Note 9. Debt, we received forgiveness of our obligations for the PPP loan in the second quarter of 2021. Additionally, Scener, a former subsidiary of RealNetworks, received $2.1 million in funds from the issuance of SAFE Notes. See Note 5. Fair Value Measurements for more information on the SAFE Notes. These inflows were partially offset by repayment on our revolving credit facility of $3.9 million.
While we currently have no planned significant capital expenditures for 2022 other than those in the ordinary course of business, we do have contractual commitments for future payments related to office leases. See Note 15. Leases for additional details.
RealNetworks is a party to a Loan Agreement with a third-party financial institution which matures August 1, 2022, as discussed in Note 9. Debt. Under the Agreement, as amended, borrowings may not exceed $6.5 million and are reduced by a $1.0 million standby letter of credit entered into with the bank in connection with certain lease agreements. The borrowing base for the Revolver is comprised of eligible accounts receivable and direct to consumer deposits. The Loan Agreement contains customary covenants, including financial covenants, minimum EBITDA levels to be updated annually, and maintaining a minimum balance of unrestricted cash at the bank. We are in the process of negotiating the customary covenants for 2022, and we do not expect the resulting revisions to have a material effect on the Loan Agreement. At December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding draws on the revolving line of credit.
During the second quarter of 2021, we settled the contingent consideration associated with the Napster interests acquired by RealNetworks in January 2019. The payment included cash of $2.5 million and the transfer of 47.8 million ordinary shares of Napster Group, valued at the December 2020 Napster sale closing date.
In April 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 8,250,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $2.70 per share. The aggregate gross proceeds from the offering were $22.3 million. Of these proceeds, we received $20.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and legal and other fees. The proceeds are expected to be used for general corporate purposes and working capital.
In February 2020, we entered into a Series B Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement with Mr. Glaser, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of RealNetworks, pursuant to which Mr. Glaser invested approximately $10.0 million in RealNetworks in exchange for the issuance to him of 8,064,516 shares of Series B Preferred Stock. The Series B Preferred Stock is non-voting and is convertible into common stock on a one-to-one basis, provided, however, that no conversion is permitted in the event that such conversion would cause Mr. Glaser’s beneficial ownership of our common stock to exceed the 38.5% threshold set forth in our Second Amended and Restated Shareholder Rights Plan dated November 30, 2018. The Series B Preferred Stock has no liquidation preference and no preferred dividend.
In the near term, we expect to see continued net negative cash flow from operating activities. We believe that our unrestricted current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. Notwithstanding this availability of cash, management has considered and will continue to evaluate implementation of a variety of cash conservation measures.
For our anticipated cash needs for working capital and capital expenditures beyond the next 12 months, we may seek to raise additional funds through public or private equity financing, or through other sources such as a new, or the renewal of our
existing, credit facility. Such sources of funding may or may not be available to us at commercially reasonable terms. The sale of additional equity securities could result in dilution to our shareholders. In addition, in the future, we may enter into cash or stock acquisition transactions or other strategic transactions that could reduce cash available to fund our operations or result in dilution to shareholders.
We have contractual obligations for Long-term lease liabilities, which are recorded on our balance sheet. For details on future minimum lease payments please refer to Note 15. Leases. Please also refer to Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies for details on legal matters. For income tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions, we cannot make a reasonably reliable estimate of the amount and period of any related future payments. As of December 31, 2021, we had $0.7 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits for uncertain tax positions.
We do not maintain accruals associated with certain guarantees, as discussed in Note 17. Guarantees; those guarantee obligations constitute off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. Our critical accounting policies and estimates are as follows:
•Revenue recognition;
•Valuation of definite-lived assets, right-of-use operating lease assets, and goodwill; and
•Accounting for income taxes.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue from contracts with customers as control of the promised good or service is transferred. Please refer to Note 3. Revenue Recognition for further details regarding our recognition policies.
Valuation of Definite-Lived Assets, Right-of-Use Operating Lease Assets, and Goodwill.
We review definite-lived assets and right-of-use operating lease assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of these assets is measured by comparison of their carrying amount to future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate. If definite-lived assets or right-of-use operating lease assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized equals the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds their fair market value.
We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, in our fourth quarter, or more frequently if circumstances indicate reporting unit carrying values may exceed their fair values. As part of this test, we first perform a qualitative assessment to determine if the fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not less than the reporting unit's carrying amount including goodwill. If this assessment indicates impairment is more likely than not, we then compare the carrying value of the reporting unit to the estimated fair value of the reporting unit. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds the estimated fair value, we then calculate the implied estimated fair value of goodwill for the reporting unit and compare it to the carrying amount of goodwill for the reporting unit. If the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds the implied estimated fair value, an impairment charge to current operations is recorded to reduce the carrying value to implied estimated value.
The impairment analysis of definite-lived assets, right-of-use operating lease assets, and goodwill may be based upon estimates and assumptions relating to our future revenue, cash flows, operating expenses, costs of capital and capital purchases. These estimates and assumptions are complex and subject to a significant degree of judgment with respect to certain factors including, but not limited to, the cash flows of our long-term operating plans, market and interest rate risk, and risk-commensurate discount rates and cost of capital. Significant or sustained declines in future revenue or cash flows, or adverse changes in our business climate, among other factors, and their resulting impact on the estimates and assumptions relating to the value of our definite-lived, right-of-use lease, and goodwill assets could result in the need to perform an impairment analysis in future periods which could result in a significant impairment. While we believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable, due to their complexity and subjectivity, these estimates and assumptions could vary from period to period. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the estimate of future cash flows and related fair values of these assets and result in significant impairments, which could have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations. For further discussion, please see the risk factor entitled, "Any impairment to our goodwill, definite-lived, and right-of-use operating lease assets could result in a material charge to our earnings" under Item 1A Risk Factors.
Accounting for Income Taxes.
We must make assumptions, judgments and estimates to determine the current and deferred provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance to be recorded against deferred tax assets. Our judgments, assumptions, and estimates relative to the current provision for income tax take into account current tax laws, our interpretation
of current tax laws and possible outcomes of future audits conducted by foreign and domestic tax authorities. Changes in tax law or our interpretation of tax laws and future tax audits could materially impact the amounts provided for income taxes in our consolidated financial statements.
Each reporting period we must periodically assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future sources of taxable income, and to the extent that recovery is not more likely than not, a valuation allowance must be established. The establishment of a valuation allowance and increases to such an allowance result in either increases to income tax expense or reduction of income tax benefit in the statement of operations and comprehensive income. In certain instances, changes in the valuation allowance may be allocated directly to the related components of shareholders' equity on the consolidated balance sheet. Factors we consider in making such an assessment include, but are not limited to, past performance and our expectation of future taxable income, macroeconomic conditions and issues facing our industry, existing contracts, our ability to project future results and any appreciation of our investments and other assets.
As of December 31, 2021, approximately $5.6 million of the $27.1 million of cash and cash equivalents are held by our foreign subsidiaries outside the U.S. We have reevaluated our historical assertion that undistributed foreign earnings were indefinitely reinvested and for which deferred taxes were not provided. As a result of the enactment of the Tax Act and as of December 31, 2021, we are no longer indefinitely reinvesting substantially all of the Company's foreign earnings outside of the U.S. As a result of this change, we have recorded deferred taxes of $1.0 million as of December 31, 2021 to reflect local country and foreign withholding taxes associated with a future repatriation of such foreign earnings.
.