Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Plan of Operation
The Company, through its subsidiaries, SilverLight Aviation, LLC and Silverlight Electric Vehicle Inc. is actively engaged in the design, development, manufacturing, distribution and marketing of reverse trikes (as of May 2021) and gyrocopters.
To continue operations for the next 12 months we will have a cash need of approximately $500,000. The Company expects that our current cash on hand will meet the expected needs going forward. Should we not be able to fulfill our cash needs through the increase of revenue we will need to raise money through outside investors through convertible notes, debt or similar instrument(s), the Company has no committed external source of funds, and there is no guarantee we would be able to raise such funds. The Company plans to pay off current liabilities through sales and increasing revenue through sales of Company services and or products, or through financing activities as mentioned above.
Results from Operations - For the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020
The following discussion reflects consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the stand-alone financial disclosures of SLA LLC for the year ended December 31, 2020. Since the Company had no operational activities for the periods included herein, we have included SLA LLC to properly reflect all operational activities for the periods reported here within.
Revenue
The Company had sales of $608,524 for the year ended December 31, 2021and SLA LLC has sales of $773,764 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to fewer gyrocopter sales during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Operating Expenses
The Company had $429,839 in operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $162,994 for the year ended December 31, 2020 for SLA LLC. The increase was primarily to the increased activity related to hiring of officers and professional fees.
Loss From Operations
As a result of the foregoing, loss from operations was $280,194 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with loss from operations of $28,886, for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in our overall loss from operations was a result of an increase in administrative costs.
Net Income (Loss)
For the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company had net loss of approximately $213,996 compared to a net loss of $33,047 for SLA LLC for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $180,949. The decrease is primarily due to an increase in administrative costs .
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, The Company had $2,409,333 and SLA had $244,069 in Total Assets, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has yet to achieve profitable operations, and while the Company hopes to achieve profitable operations in the future, if not it may need to raise capital from stockholders or other sources to sustain operations and to ultimately achieve viable operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s principal sources of liquidity have been cash provided by operating activities, as well as its ability to raise capital. The Company’s operating results for future periods are subject to numerous uncertainties and it is uncertain if the Company will be able to become profitable and continue growth for the foreseeable future. If management is not able to increase revenue and/or manage operating expenses, the Company may not be able to maintain profitability. The Company’s ability to continue in existence is dependent on the the Company’s ability to achieve profitable operations.
To continue operations for the next 12 months we will have a cash need of approximately $500,000. Should we not be able to fulfill our cash needs through the increase of revenue we will need to raise money through outside investors through convertible notes, debt or similar instrument(s), the Company has no committed external source of funds, and there is no guarantee we would be able to raise such funds. the Company plans to pay off current liabilities through sales and increasing revenue through sales of Company services and or products, or through financing activities as mentioned above.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, $1,216,232 net cash used in operating activities was primarily attributable to loss from operations, financed by an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, $54,930 net cash used by operating activities was primarily attributable to loss from operations .
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $2,095,481 as compared to $77,953 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was due to the investment by the company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $2,409,333 in Total Assets, primarily consisting of $484,230 in cash, $884,738 in inventory and Other Assets of $1,040,365. The Company had Total Liabilities of $2,427,823 as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has yet to achieve profitable operations, and while the Company hopes to achieve profitable operations in the future, if not it may need to raise capital from stockholders or other sources to sustain operations and to ultimately achieve viable operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company’s principal sources of liquidity have been cash provided by operating activities, as well as its ability to raise capital. The Company’s operating results for future periods are subject to numerous uncertainties and it is uncertain if the Company will be able to become profitable and continue growth for the foreseeable future. If management is not able to increase revenue and/or manage operating expenses, the Company may not be able to maintain profitability. The Company’s ability to continue in existence is dependent on the Company’s ability to achieve profitable operations.
Our cash flows for the period ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are summarized below:
Advances from Officer
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company borrowed $52,905, in a series of payments, from the Chief Executive Officer in exchange for services provided.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities of the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements. Estimates are used for, but not limited to, contingencies and taxes. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. The following critical accounting policies are impacted significantly by judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Loss Contingencies
The Company is subject to various loss contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business. The Company considers the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as its ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when management concludes that it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. The Company regularly evaluates current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets (future tax benefits) and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the book carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. The deferred tax assets and liabilities represent the expected future tax return consequences of those differences, which are expected to be either deductible or taxable when the assets and liabilities are recovered or settled.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements for discussion of Recent Accounting Pronouncements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are not currently a party to, or otherwise involved with, any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
In May 2014, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers: Topic 606, or ASU 2014-09. ASU 2014-09 establishes the principles for recognizing revenue and develops a common revenue standard for U.S. GAAP. The standard outlines a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. In applying the new revenue recognition model to contracts with customers, an entity: (1) identifies the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identifies the performance obligations in the contract(s); (3) determines the transaction price; (4) allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract(s); and (5) recognizes revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The accounting standards update applies to all contracts with customers except those that are within the scope of other topics in the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. The accounting standards update also requires significantly expanded quantitative and qualitative disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. This guidance is effective for fiscal years and interim periods within those years beginning after December 15, 2017. The Company adopted ASU 2014-09 effective January 1, 2018. The adoption of this standard had no material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Purchase of Significant Equipment
We have not previously, nor do we intend to purchase any significant equipment during the next twelve months.