ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involves risks and uncertainties. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” for a discussion of forward-looking statements and important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements. All information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar. Unless otherwise stated, references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to our fiscal years ended December 31 and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing therapies for the local treatment of solid tumors. We are currently conducting a Phase 3 registrational trial for our lead product candidate RenovoGem™. Our therapy platform, RenovoRx Trans-Arterial Micro-Perfusion, or RenovoTAMP™, utilizes approved chemotherapeutics with validated mechanisms of action and well-established safety and side effect profiles, with the goal of increasing their efficacy, improving their safety, and widening their therapeutic window by combining such chemotherapeutics with our proprietary drug delivery system. RenovoTAMP combines our patented FDA cleared delivery system, RenovoCath®, with small molecule chemotherapeutic agents that can be forced across the vessel wall using pressure, targeting these anti-cancer drugs locally to the solid tumors. While we anticipate investigating other chemotherapeutic agents for intra-arterial delivery via RenovoTAMP, our clinical work to date has focused on gemcitabine, which is a generic small molecule drug. Our first product candidate, RenovoGem, is a drug /device combination consisting of intra-arterial gemcitabine and RenovoCath. FDA has determined that RenovoGem will be regulated as, and if approved we expect will be reimbursed as, a new oncology drug product. We have secured FDA Orphan Drug Designation for RenovoGem in two indications: pancreatic cancer and cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer, or CCA). We have completed our RR1 Phase 1/2 and RR2 observational registry studies, with 20 and 25 patients respectively, in locally advanced pancreatic cancer, or LAPC. These studies demonstrated a median overall survival of 27.9 months in patients pre-treated with radiation followed by treatment with RenovoGem. Based on previous large randomized clinical trials, the expected survival of LAPC patients is 12 - 15 months in patients receiving only intravenous (IV) systemic chemotherapy or IV chemotherapy plus radiation (which are both considered standard of care). Unlike the randomized trials that established these standard-of-care results, our RR1 and RR2 clinical trials did not prospectively control the standard of care therapy received prior to administration of RenovoGem. Based on an FDA safety review of our Phase 1/2 study, FDA allowed us to proceed to evaluate RenovoGem within our Phase 3 registrational clinical trial. As of March 15, 2022, our Phase 3 trial had achieved approximately 50% of the target enrollment under the current SAP. The SAP includes a planned interim analysis when a total of 65 deaths have occurred in the study. We expect to conduct the interim analysis between the fourth quarter of 2022 and the first quarter of 2023; however, given that it is predicated on the number of deaths in the study, it is difficult to predict the exact timing. We intend to evaluate RenovoGem in a second indication in a Phase 2 trial in extrahepatic (or outside the liver) cholangiocarcinoma (or eCCA), cancer that occurs in the bile ducts that lead out of the liver and join with the gallbladder. We have now completed our evaluation of the different approaches to treat this patient population and are in the process of refining our clinical protocol. We plan to meet with FDA during the second or third quarter of 2022 to discuss our trial design. If FDA does not object to our study protocol, we anticipate launching the eCCA trial in the second half of 2022. In addition, we may evaluate RenovoGem in other indications, potentially including locally advanced lung cancer, locally advanced uterine tumors, and glioblastoma (an aggressive type of cancer that can occur in the brain or spinal cord). To date, we are focused on developing drug/device candidates with gemcitabine, but in the future, we may develop other product candidates with other chemotherapeutic agents for intra-arterial delivery via our RenovoTAMP therapy platform.
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to developing our cancer therapy platform and product candidates, raising capital and organizing and staffing our company. Through December 31, 2021, we have received an aggregate of $35.0 million to finance our operations comprising of the following:
● $12.5 million net proceeds through the issuance of convertible preferred stock, including beneficial conversion features and warrants;
● $5.0 million in gross proceeds through the issuance of convertible notes;
● $0.1 million loan pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, which was forgiven in February 2021;
● $14.6 million in net offering proceeds upon completion of our IPO in August 2021, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. We received $16.7 million in gross proceeds and paid underwriting discounts and commissions of $1.3 million and incurred additional offering expenses of $0.8 million;
● $2.7 million from the exercise of common stock units in connection with our IPO; and
● $0.1 million from the exercise of common stock options.
We have incurred significant operating losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $15.2 million. We had net losses of $6.3 million and $3.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $21.3 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses, increasing operating losses and negative cash flows for the foreseeable future. We do not expect to generate revenues from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more product candidates. We expect that our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing research and development activities, particularly as we:
● Advance clinical development of RenovoGem and our platform technology by continuing to enroll patients in our ongoing TIGeR-PaC Phase 3 clinical trial, expanding the number of clinical trials including our planned clinical trial in HCCA, and advancing RenovoGem through preclinical and clinical development in additional indications;
● Hire additional research, development, and engineering personnel;
● Maintain, expand, enforce, defend, and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● Expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company.
In addition to the variables described above, if and when any of our product candidates successfully complete development, we will incur substantial additional costs associated with establishing a sales, marketing, medical affairs and distribution infrastructure to commercialize products for which we may obtain marketing approval, regulatory filings, marketing approval, and post-marketing requirements, in addition to other commercial costs. We cannot reasonably estimate these costs at this time.
As a result, we will need significant additional funding to support our continuing operations. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity issuances, debt financings and collaborations, licenses or other similar arrangements. We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or debt, the ownership interests of our stockholders will be diluted and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities, these securities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts and additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds through collaboration arrangements or other strategic transactions in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies or future revenue streams or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate development or future commercialization efforts.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the disease known as COVID-19, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, COVID-19, including recent variants, has spread globally. In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The ongoing COVID-19 global and national health emergency has caused significant disruption in the international and U.S. economies and financial markets. The spread of COVID-19, and its variants, has caused illness, quarantines, cancellation of events and travel, business and school shutdowns, reduction in business activity and financial transactions, labor shortages, supply chain interruptions and overall economic and financial market instability.
In response to public health directives and orders and to help minimize the risk of the virus to employees, we have taken precautionary measures, including implementing hybrid work policies for certain employees. The COVID-19 global pandemic also has negatively affected, and we expect will continue to negatively affect, our clinical studies. For example, we have faced challenges in conducting our clinical trials, including recruiting subjects and accommodating patient visits. Additionally, our service providers and their operations may be disrupted, temporarily closed or experience worker or supply shortages, which could result in additional disruptions or delays in shipments of purchased materials or the continued development of our product candidates. To date, we have not suffered material supply chain disruptions.
We are not able to estimate the duration of the pandemic and the potential impact on our business. As the COVID-19 global pandemic continues to evolve, it could result in significant long-term disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to raise additional capital when needed and on acceptable terms, if at all, which could negatively affect our liquidity. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our clinical development and regulatory efforts will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the continued outbreak, travel restrictions, quarantines and social distancing requirements in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the virus. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products for several years, if at all. If our development efforts for our current or future product candidates are successful and result in marketing approval or collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from collaboration or license agreements that we may enter into with third parties.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of costs related to the research and development of our platform technology. Clinical trial costs are a significant component of research and development expenses and include costs associated with third-party contractors. We outsource a substantial portion of our clinical trial activities, utilizing the service of third-party clinical trial sites and contract research organizations to assist us with the execution of our clinical trials. In addition, we have FDA 510(k) clearance for the RenovoCath delivery device, which comprises part of the RenovoGem product. Accordingly, we are able to charge our clinical trial sites for the RenovoCath delivery device. To date, payments from clinical trial sites in consideration for RenovoCath delivery devices have been adequate to cover our direct manufacturing costs. Any payments we receive from the clinical trial sites as consideration for use of the RenovoCath delivery device offset our research and development expenses. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates and enroll subjects in our ongoing clinical trial, initiate future clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. It is difficult to predict with any certainty the duration and costs of completing our current or future clinical trials of our product candidates or if, when or to what extent we will achieve regulatory approval and generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and other development of our product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment, timing and extent of future clinical trials, development of new product candidates and significant and changing government regulation. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Our research and development expenses include:
● expenses incurred under agreements with clinical trial sites, contract research organizations, and consultants and third-party vendors for work performed under our clinical trials;
● costs of acquiring and developing clinical trial materials;
● personnel costs, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation for employees engaged in preclinical and clinical research and development;
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements;
● third-party vendor costs related to manufacturing materials and testing;
● costs related to preclinical studies and pilot testing;
● travel expenses; and
● allocated general and administrative expenses which includes facilities and other indirect administrative expenses to support research and development activities.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials and preclinical studies, are recognized based on evaluation of progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as subject enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by third party vendors.
Due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and work-from-home policies and other operational limitations mandated by federal, state, and local governments as a result of the pandemic, certain of our research and development activities have been delayed and may be further delayed until such operational limitations are lifted.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions, professional services and associated costs related to accounting, tax, audit, legal, intellectual property and other matters, consulting costs, conferences, travel and allocated expenses for rent, insurance and other general overhead costs. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, and Nasdaq listing standards and increased expenses in the areas of insurance, professional services and investor relations. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future. General and administrative expenses are expensed as incurred.
Other Income (Expenses), Net
Interest Income (Expenses) Net
Interest expense consists of charges relating to the amortization of the debt discount and debt issuance costs as well as interest on amounts outstanding on our convertible notes. In March 2020, we completed the offering of $3.0 million of convertible notes, the 2020 Convertible Notes, that provided for the automatic conversion into shares of our common stock and warrants at the closing of our IPO at a 20% discount to the public offering price of the units. In April 2021, we completed the offering of $2.0 million of convertible notes, the 2021 Convertible Notes, that provided for the automatic conversion into shares of our common stock and warrants at the closing of our IPO at a 12.5% discount to the public offering price of the units.
Interest income is earned from cash deposited in our money market account.
Other Income (Expenses), Net
Other income, net primarily represents the mark-to-market adjustment on the derivative liability resulting from the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes. Upon the completion of our IPO in August 2021, the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes were converted into units consisting of (a) one share of common stock and (b) one five-year warrant to purchase one share of common stock at an exercise price equal to $10.80 per share.
Gain on Loan Extinguishment
The gain (loss) on loan extinguishment represents the loss from the conversion and settlement of our 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes of $0.1 million as well as the gain on loan extinguishment from the forgiveness and cancellation of our PPP loan of $0.1 million.
Income Tax Expense
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recorded based on the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial statement and income tax basis of existing assets and liabilities. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recorded net and classified as noncurrent on the balance sheets. A valuation allowance is provided against our deferred income tax assets when their realization is more likely than not.
We are subject to income taxes in the federal and state jurisdictions. Tax regulations within each jurisdiction are subject to the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and require significant judgment to apply. In accordance with the authoritative guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, we recognize tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions when it is more likely than not that a tax position will not be sustained upon examination and settlement with various taxing authorities. Liabilities for uncertain tax positions are measured based upon the largest amount of benefit that is more-likely-than-not (greater than 50%) of being realized upon settlement. Our policy is to recognize interest and/or penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted. The CARES Act includes several significant provisions for corporations, including the usage of net operating losses, interest deductions and payroll benefits. Corporate taxpayers may carryback net operating losses, or NOLs, originating during 2018 through 2020 for up to five years.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the significant components of our results of operations for the periods presented (in thousands):
Research and Development
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.7 million, compared to $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to clinical development expenses incurred for the ongoing Phase 3 trial of $0.2 million and clinical consulting to support the trial of $0.2 million, partially offset by software enhancement costs of $0.1 million. Payments for use of RenovoCath delivery devices remained relatively unchanged and represent the cash payment made by clinical trial sites for the devices used in the Phase 3 clinical trial. To date, payments received from clinical trial sites for the devices have been adequate to cover our direct costs of manufacturing the RenovoCath delivery devices and offset research and development expense. Preclinical research and development expenses increased by $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the preceding year, and represent costs associated with establishing a secondary manufacturer for RenovoCath devices of $0.2 million, an increase of $0.3 million in allocated general and administrative support costs for personnel, facility and office supply costs, offset by $0.1 million in the costs of supplies and manufacturing costs of RenovoCath devices. Regulatory and employee and related benefits expenses remained relatively unchanged from the prior year. We expect research and development costs to increase during the next year.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses (in thousands):
General and administrative expenses were $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.8 million, compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher employee and related benefits costs of $0.4 million, related to salaries and benefit expenses. Legal fees increased $0.1 million during fiscal year 2021, primarily due to our transition to being a publicly traded company. Professional services expenses increased during the year, primarily in connection with preparing for our IPO in August 2021 including continuing post-IPO support of $1.1 million, Directors and Officers Liability Insurance expense of $0.5 million, partially offset by an increase of $0.3 million in the allocation of general and administrative expenses to research and development. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in the next fiscal year.
Interest (Expense) Income, Net (in thousands)
Interest (expense) income, net was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $0.2 million, compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in interest (expense) income, net was primarily due to the issuance of the 2021 Convertible Notes. Interest expense includes both the stated interest on the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes of 5% per annum, or $0.1 million, and the amortization of the discount and debt issuance costs associated with the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes of $0.7 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to the stated interest on the 2020 Convertible Notes of 5% per annum, or $0.1 million, as well as the amortization of the debt discount and debt issuance costs of $0.5 million in fiscal year 2020. We do not expect to incur additional interest expense in the next fiscal year due to the conversion of the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes in fiscal year 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net (in thousands)
Other income, net was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and represents the mark-to-market adjustment on the derivative liabilities resulting from the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes. There was no other income, net for December 31, 2020.
On March 1, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to the 2020 Convertible Notes which extended the maturity date of the 2020 Convertible Notes from March 31, 2021 to October 30, 2021 and provided for the conversion of the 2020 Convertible Notes into shares of the Company’s common stock upon a Qualified Financing that is an IPO. No other terms to the 2020 Convertible Notes were amended. This amendment was accounted for as a troubled debt restructuring pursuant to FASB ASC Topic 470-60, “Troubled Debt Restructurings by Debtors.” As the future undiscounted cash flows of the 2020 Convertible Notes were greater than their carrying amount, the carrying amount was not adjusted and no gain was recognized as a result of the modification of terms. We do not expect to incur additional income or expense in the next fiscal year due to the conversion of the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes in fiscal year 2021.
Gain on Loan Extinguishment (in thousands)
The gain on loan extinguishment of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 represents a loss of $0.1 million on the automatic conversion of the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes upon completion of our IPO, offset by the forgiveness and cancellation of our PPP loan of $0.1 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our net losses were $6.3 million and $3.8 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $21.3 million. We expect to incur additional losses and increased operating expenses in future periods. Since our inception, our primary sources of liquidity have been the issuance of convertible preferred stock, convertible notes and common stock, including in our IPO, and from the exercise of warrants.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $15.2 million in cash and cash equivalents. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $5.9 million of cash in operations. Our primary requirements for liquidity have been to fund our clinical trial activity and general corporate and working capital needs. In August 2021, we completed our IPO for aggregate gross proceeds of $16.7 million. We paid underwriting discounts and commissions of $1.3 million, and incurred expenses of $0.8 million in connection with the offering. As a result, the net offering proceeds to us, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses, were $14.6 million. In February 2021, we received notification and confirmation from Silicon Valley Bank that our PPP loan of $0.1 million, had been forgiven in its entirety and automatically cancelled by the U.S. Small Business Administration.
Based on our operating plans, we expect that our current cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to fund our operating, investing and financing cash flow needs for at least the next twelve months and into 2023, assuming our programs advance as currently contemplated. Management regularly reviews our available liquidity relative to our operating budget and forecast to monitor the sufficiency of our working capital and anticipates drawing upon available sources of new capital when appropriate, including equity and debt instruments, to support our product development activities. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our clinical trials or other operations. If any of these events occur, our ability to achieve our operational goals would be adversely affected. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those described in “Risk Factors.” Depending on the severity and direct impact of these factors on us, we may be unable to secure additional financing to meet our operating requirements on commercially acceptable terms favorable to us, or at all.
Sources of Liquidity
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, and investments as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan through at least the next twelve months.
Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We do not have any products that have achieved regulatory marketing approval and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if ever.
We have financed our operations primarily through the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock and convertible debt. Through the date of this report, we have raised an aggregate of $35.0 million from private placements of our convertible preferred stock, convertible debt securities, the issuance of securities in our August 2021 IPO, and the exercise of warrants and common stock options. This amount also includes a loan under the PPP, which was forgiven in February 2021.
Cash Flows
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations including research and development and general and administrative expenses. We will continue to incur operating losses in the future and expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will continue to increase as we continue our research and development efforts with respect to clinical development of our product candidates and further develop our platform. We expect that we will use a substantial portion of the net proceeds of the IPO, in combination with our existing cash and cash equivalents, for these purposes and for the increased expenses associated with being a public company. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflected a net loss of $6.3 million and a net change in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.4 million, offset by non-cash charges of $0.7 million consisting primarily of amortization of a debt discount, gain/loss on loan/convertible debt extinguishments and stock-based compensation expense. Net cash used in operating activities for year ended December 31, 2020 reflected a net loss of $3.8 million and non-cash charges of $0.5 million representing amortization of debt discount and stock-based compensation expense.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of capital expenditures made for leasehold improvements to our new office space. There were no investment activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $19.3 million, consisting of net proceeds of $14.6 million from the issuance of common stock in our IPO, $2.0 million from the issuance of convertible notes and $2.8 million from the exercise of warrants and stock options. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3.2 million, consisting of $3.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes and $0.2 million in proceeds from the PPP loan and the exercise of the Series A-1 warrants and stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
As of the date of this report, we have no contractual obligations or other commitments. In August 2021, the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes, including accrued interest, of $5.3 million were converted to common shares upon the completion of our IPO. In February 2021, the Company received notification and confirmation from Silicon Valley Bank that its PPP loan of $0.1 million, had been forgiven in its entirety and automatically cancelled by the U.S. Small Business Administration. There have been no other significant changes in our contractual obligations or other commitments as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The accompanying management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements and the related disclosures, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these audited financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts in our audited financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected. While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are most important to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results because they require us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain.
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of our financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments that could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations. Specifically, critical accounting estimates have the following attributes: (i) we are required to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate; and (ii) different estimates we could reasonably have used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, would have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
Clinical Trial Expenses
We make payments in connection with our Phase 3 clinical trial under contracts with clinical trial sites and contract research organizations that support conducting and managing clinical trials. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation and vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Generally, these agreements set forth the scope of work to be performed at a fixed fee, unit price or on a time and materials basis. A portion of the obligation to make payments under these contracts depends on factors such as the successful enrollment or treatment of patients or the completion of other clinical trial milestones.
Expenses related to clinical trials are accrued based on estimates and/or representations from service providers regarding work performed, including actual level of patient enrollment, completion of patient studies and progress of the clinical trials. Other incidental costs related to patient enrollment or treatment are accrued when reasonably certain. If the amounts we are obligated to pay under clinical trial agreements are modified (for instance, as a result of changes in the clinical trial protocol or scope of work to be performed), the accruals are adjusted accordingly. Revisions to contractual payment obligations are charged to expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become reasonably certain.
Stock-Based Compensation
We estimate the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which incorporates various assumptions including those related to the fair value of our common stock, volatility, expected term, and risk-free interest rate. Compensation related to service-based awards is recognized starting on the grant date on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, which is generally four years, see Note 9, Equity Inventive Plan - Stock-Based Compensation and Common Stock Warrants.
Determining the grant date fair value of options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires management to make assumptions and judgments. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model change significantly, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously. The assumptions and estimates are as follows:
Fair Value of Common Stock-Given the absence of a public trading market, pre-IPO, our Board considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors included but were not limited to: (i) contemporaneous third-party valuations of common stock; (ii) the prices for preferred stock sold to outside investors; (iii) the rights and preferences of preferred stock relative to common stock; (iv) the lack of marketability of our common stock; (v) developments in the business; and (vi) the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO or sale of the business, given prevailing market conditions. The methodology to determine the fair value of our common stock included estimating the fair value of the enterprise using the “backsolve” method, which is a market approach that assigns an implied enterprise value by accounting for all share class rights and preferences based on the latest round of financing. The total equity value implied was then applied in the context of an option pricing model to determine the value of each class of our shares.
For grants issued post-IPO, we rely on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant to determine the fair value of our common stock, as shares of our common stock are traded in the public market.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We determine the expected term using the simplified method for pre-IPO awards. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For stock-based awards granted post-IPO, the expected term equals the average for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in the Company’s industry that are either similar in size, stage, or financial leverage.
Expected Volatility-Given the absence of a public trading market, the expected volatility was estimated by taking the average historic price volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in our industry that are either similar in size, stage, or financial leverage, over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is calculated using the average of the published interest rates of U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with maturities that are commensurate with the expected term.
Dividend Rate-The dividend yield assumption is zero as we have no plans to make dividend payments.
Convertible Instruments and Embedded Derivatives
We evaluate all of our agreements to determine whether such instruments have derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives. We account for certain redemption features that are associated with the terms of convertible notes as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to their fair value at the end of each reporting period. For derivative financial instruments that are accounted for as liabilities, the derivative instrument is initially recorded at its fair value and is then re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in other income (expenses), net in the statements of operations. Derivative instrument liabilities are classified in the balance sheets as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. As of December 31, 2020, our derivative financial instruments were related to the 2020 and 2021 Convertible Notes, which contained certain redemptive features. On August 30, 2021, we completed our IPO which triggered the automatic conversion of all outstanding Convertible Notes and accrued interest into shares of common stock.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, as amended, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, companies have extended transition periods available for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have elected this exemption to delay adopting new or revised accounting standards. We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) December 31, 2026, (2) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, (3) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, or (4) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period. An emerging growth company may take advantage of specified reduced reporting requirements and is relieved of certain other significant requirements that are otherwise generally applicable to public companies. As an emerging growth company,
● we may present only two years of audited financial statements, plus unaudited condensed financial statements for any interim period, and related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations;
● we may avail ourselves of the exemption from the requirement to obtain an attestation and report from our auditors on the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting pursuant to the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
● we may provide reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements; and
● we do not require stockholder non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements.
We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in future filings. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different than you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the proposed aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of this offering is less than $700.0 million and our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (1) the market value of our stock held by nonaffiliates is less than $250.0 million or (2) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, like emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.