Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is intended to assist in understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations and financial condition. Historical results may not be indicative of future performance. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Such statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this report. In this discussion, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures. An explanation of these non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are included in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented in compliance with GAAP.
Overview
We are a civil infrastructure company that specializes in the building and maintenance of transportation networks. Our operations leverage a highly-skilled workforce, strategically located HMA plants, substantial construction assets and select material deposits. We provide construction products and services to both public and private infrastructure projects, with an emphasis on highways, roads, bridges, airports and commercial and residential sites in the southeastern United States.
Our public projects are funded by federal, state and local governments and include roads, highways, bridges, airports and other forms of infrastructure. Public transportation infrastructure projects historically have been a relatively stable portion of state and federal budgets and represent a significant share of the United States construction market. Federal funds are allocated on a state-by-state basis, and each state is required to match a portion of the federal funds that it receives. Federal highway spending uses funds predominantly from the Highway Trust Fund, which derives its revenues from fuel taxes and other user fees.
In addition to public infrastructure projects, we provide a wide range of large site work construction and HMA paving services to private construction customers, including commercial and residential developers and local businesses.
Fiscal 2022 Developments
Inflationary and Supply Chain Trends
During the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022, we continued to experience an upward trend in several inflation-sensitive inputs necessary for us to provide our products and services, including upward pressure on wages and increases in the cost of raw materials used to produce HMA and other items that are critical to our business, including fuel, concrete and steel. In addition, we experienced some disruptions from various participants in our supply chain, including subcontractors, materials suppliers and equipment manufacturers, who provide the raw materials, equipment, vehicles, construction supplies and other services we require in order to manufacture HMA and perform our construction projects. To date, we have been able to mitigate some of the effects of inflation, supply chain disruptions and labor constraints on our business by increasing prices for our products and including the anticipated cost increases in the construction projects we bid. However, we are limited in our ability to pass through increased costs for projects already in our backlog and, under those circumstances, may be unable to recoup losses or diminished profit margins by passing these costs through to our customers.
Business Acquisitions
We completed five acquisitions during the fiscal year, through which we added six HMA plants and a permitted plant site located in South Carolina and Florida. As a result of these acquisitions, we entered into several new markets, while also establishing our first platform company in South Carolina and adding a diverse fleet of trucks and construction equipment to support our operations. For more information about our acquisitions during fiscal 2022, see Note 4 - Business Acquisitions to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Credit Agreement
On June 30, 2022, we entered into the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement provides for (i) a Term Loan in an initial aggregate principal amount of $250.0 million, the full amount of which was drawn at closing, (ii) a Revolving Credit Facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of $325.0 million, and (iii) a Delayed Draw Term Loan facility in an initial aggregate principal amount of $50.0 million. Among other things, the proceeds of the Term Loan were used to refinance our indebtedness under our prior credit facility. For further discussion regarding the Credit Agreement, see Note 11 - Debt to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Captive Insurance Company
On October 1, 2021, Construction Partners Risk Management, Inc. (the "Captive"), a captive insurance company and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, commenced operations. The purpose of the Captive is to provide general liability, automobile liability and workers’ compensation insurance coverage to the Company and its subsidiaries.
Seasonality
The activity of our business fluctuates due to seasonality because our business is primarily conducted outdoors. Therefore, seasonal changes and other weather-related conditions, in particular extended snowy, rainy or cold weather in the winter, spring or fall and major weather events, such as hurricanes, tornadoes, tropical storms and heavy snows, can adversely affect our business and operations through a decline in both the use of our products and the demand for our services. In addition, construction materials production and shipment levels follow activity in the construction industry, which typically occurs in the spring, summer and fall. Warmer and drier weather during our third and fourth fiscal quarters typically result in higher activity and revenues during those quarters. Our first and second fiscal quarters typically have lower levels of activity due to adverse weather conditions. Our third fiscal quarter varies greatly
with spring rains and wide temperature variations. A cool, wet spring increases drying time on projects, which can delay sales in the third fiscal quarter, while a warm, dry spring may facilitate earlier project commencement dates.
How We Assess Performance of Our Business
Revenues
We derive our revenues predominantly by providing construction products and services for both public and private infrastructure projects, with an emphasis on highways, roads, bridges, airports and commercial and residential sites. Our projects represent a mix of federal, state, municipal and private customers. We also derive revenues from the sale of HMA, aggregates, and liquid asphalt cement to customers. We recognize revenues derived from projects as we satisfy our performance obligations over time (formerly known as the percentage-of-completion method), measured by the relationship of total cost incurred compared to total estimated contract costs (cost-to-cost input method). Changes in job performance, job conditions and estimated profitability, including those arising from contract penalty provisions and final contract settlements, may result in revisions to estimated costs and income, and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Revenues derived from the sale of HMA, aggregates, and liquid asphalt cement are recognized when the risks associated with ownership have passed to the customer.
Gross Profit
Gross profit represents revenues less cost of revenues. Cost of revenues consists of all direct and indirect costs associated with construction contracts, including raw materials, labor, equipment costs, depreciation, lease expenses, subcontract costs and other expenses at our HMA plants, aggregates mining facilities, and liquid asphalt cement terminal. Our cost of revenues is directly affected by fluctuations in commodity prices, primarily liquid asphalt and diesel fuel. From time to time, when appropriate, we limit our exposure to changes in commodity prices by entering into forward purchase commitments. In addition, our public infrastructure contracts often provide for price adjustments based on fluctuations in certain commodity-related product costs. These price adjustment provisions are in place for most of our public infrastructure contracts, and we seek to include similar provisions in our private contracts.
Depreciation, Depletion, Accretion and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are initially recorded at cost or, if acquired as a business combination, at fair value. Depreciation on property, plant and equipment is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Amortization expense is the periodic expense related to leasehold improvements, intangible assets and unfavorable contract liabilities. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the life of the underlying asset or the remaining lease term. Our intangible assets were recognized as a result of certain acquisitions and are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Our unfavorable contract liabilities were recognized as a result of certain acquisitions and are amortized as the associated projects progress. Mineral reserves are depleted in accordance with the units-of-production method as aggregates are extracted, using the initial allocation of cost based on proven and probable reserves.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include costs related to our operational offices that are not allocated to direct contract costs and expenses related to our corporate offices. These expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel costs for our administration, finance and accounting, legal, information systems, human resources and certain managerial employees. General and administrative expenses also include acquisition expenses, audit, consulting and professional fees, stock-based compensation expense, travel, insurance, office space rental costs, property taxes and other corporate and overhead expenses.
Gain on Sale of Equipment, Net
In the normal course of business, we sell construction equipment for various reasons, including when the cost of maintaining the asset exceeds the cost of replacing it. The gain or loss on the sale of equipment reflects the difference between the carrying value at the date of disposal and the net consideration received from the sale of equipment during the period.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net primarily represents interest incurred on our long-term debt, such as the Term Loan and the Revolving Credit Facility, as well as the changes in fair values of interest swap agreements and amortization of deferred debt issuance costs. These amounts are partially offset by interest income earned on short-term investments of cash balances in excess of our current operating needs.
Other Key Performance Indicators - Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin, and Adjusted Net Income
Adjusted EBITDA represents net income before, as applicable from time to time, (i) interest expense, net, (ii) provision (benefit) for income taxes, (iii) depreciation, depletion, accretion and amortization, (iv) equity-based compensation expense, (v) loss on the extinguishment of debt, (vi) certain management fees and expenses and (vii) nonrecurring legal settlement costs and associated legal expenses unrelated to the Company’s core operations. Adjusted EBITDA Margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenues for each period. Adjusted net income represents net income before nonrecurring legal settlement costs and associated legal expenses unrelated to the Company’s core operations. These metrics are supplemental measures of our operating performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. These measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to net income or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of our operating performance. We present Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and Adjusted net income because management uses these measures as key performance indicators, and we believe that securities analysts, investors and others use these measures to evaluate companies in our industry. Our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and Adjusted net income may not be comparable to similarly named measures reported by other companies. Potential differences may include differences in capital structures, tax positions and the age and book depreciation of intangible and tangible assets.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted EBITDA and the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the periods presented (in thousands, except percentages):
(1)Reflects fees and reimbursement of certain out-of-pocket expenses under a management services agreement with SunTx Capital Partners (see Note 17 - Related Parties to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report).
(2)Reflects $3.2 million legal settlement and associated legal expenses in April 2021 unrelated to the Company's core operations.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to adjusted net income for the periods presented (in thousands):
(1)Reflects $3.2 million legal settlement and associated legal expenses in April 2021 unrelated to the Company's core operations.
Results of Operations - Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended September 30, 2021
The following table sets forth selected financial data for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2022 (“fiscal 2022”) and September 30, 2021 (“fiscal 2021”) (in thousands, except percentages). Refer to the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021, filed with the SEC on November 29, 2021, for a discussion of results for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2020 ("fiscal 2020") and a comparison of our financial results in fiscal 2021 to those of fiscal 2020.
Revenues. Revenues for fiscal 2022 increased $391.0 million, or 42.9%, to $1,301.7 million from $910.7 million for fiscal 2021. The increase included $170.4 million of revenues attributable to acquisitions completed during or subsequent to fiscal 2021 and an increase of approximately $220.6 million of revenues in our remaining markets from contract work and sales of HMA and aggregates to third parties. The 24.2% increase in revenue in our existing markets was due to strong demand in both public and private work.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for fiscal 2022 increased $19.4 million, or 16.1%, to $139.3 million from $119.9 million for fiscal 2021. The increase in gross profit was primarily the result of the 42.9% increase in revenues for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The lower gross profit margin was due to (i) increases in the costs of raw materials, fuel, labor and trucking and (ii) supply chain disruptions resulting in project delays and the use of alternative suppliers and vendors.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses for fiscal 2022 increased $15.7 million, or 17.1%, to $107.6 million from $91.9 million for fiscal 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was primarily the result of (i) a $4.5 million increase in equity-based compensation expense, (ii) an $11.1 million increase attributable to general and administrative expenses associated with the operations of businesses acquired subsequent to September 30, 2021, and (iii) a $5.1 million increase in various other expenses, primarily driven by professional fees related to business acquisitions, information technology expenses and increased accounting and consulting fees. These increases were partially offset by a $4.4 million decrease in legal expenses associated with a legal settlement and associated legal fees in April 2021 unrelated to the Company's core operations.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net for fiscal 2022 increased $5.3 million, or 220.3%, to $7.7 million compared to $2.4 million for fiscal 2021. The increase in interest expense, net was primarily due to an increase in the average principal debt balance outstanding and higher interest rates during fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our effective tax rate decreased to 24.4% for fiscal 2022, from 29.3% for fiscal 2021. Our higher effective tax rate for fiscal 2021 was primarily due to the unfavorable impact of a non-deductible legal settlement.
Net Income. Net income increased $1.2 million, or 5.9%, to $21.4 million for fiscal 2022 compared to $20.2 million for fiscal 2021. The increase in net income was primarily a result of higher gross profit, partially offset by an increase in general and administrative expenses and interest expense, net, all as described above.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin were $111.2 million and 8.5%, respectively, for fiscal 2022, compared to $90.6 million and 9.9%, respectively, for fiscal 2021. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA primarily resulted from an increase in gross profit and depreciation, depletion, accretion and amortization, partially offset by higher general and administrative expenses and interest expense, net, all as described above. The lower Adjusted EBITDA Margin was primarily the result of lower gross profit margins, as described above. For a description of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, as well as a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, see “How We Assess Performance of Our Business.”
Adjusted Net Income. Adjusted net income decreased $2.6 million to $21.4 million for fiscal 2022, compared to adjusted net income of $24.0 million for fiscal 2021. The decrease in adjusted net income was primarily a result of higher general and administrative expenses and interest expense, net, substantially offset by higher gross profit, all as described above.
Inflation and Price Changes
As described above under the heading “2022 Fiscal Year Developments - Inflationary and Supply Chain Trends,” we continue to experience an upward trend in several inflation-sensitive inputs necessary for us to provide our products and services, including upward pressure on wages and increases in the cost of raw materials used to produce HMA and other items that are critical to our business. Inflation had an immaterial impact on our results of operations for fiscal 2021 due to relatively low inflation in the United States during that period and our ability to recover increasing costs by obtaining higher prices for our products, including sale price escalator clauses in most of our public infrastructure sector contracts. For more information, see the discussion under the heading “Inflation Risk” included in