Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to ROC Energy Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 2, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations (other than searching for an initial business combination after our initial public offering) nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from September 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below, and, subsequent to the initial public offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest earned on investments held after the initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from September 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $235,380, which consists of operating costs of $252,254, offset by interest income on investments held in the trust account of $16,874.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 6, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 18,000,000 Units at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $180,000,000. An additional $1,800,000 was funded by our sponsor which resulted in a total balance in the trust account of $181,800,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 715,000 private units at a price of $10.00 per private unit to the sponsor generating gross proceeds of $7,150,000
On December 9, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option, resulting in an additional 2,700,000 units issued for an aggregate amount of $27,000,000. In connection with the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 81,000 private units at $10.00 per private unit, generating total proceeds of $27,810,000. A total of $27,270,000 was deposited into the trust account, bringing the aggregate proceeds held in the trust account to $209,070,000.
Following the initial public offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private units, a total of $181,800,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $4,012,520 in initial public offering related costs, including $3,600,000 of underwriting fees and $412,520 of other costs. In connection with the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 81,000 private units at $10.00 per private unit, generating total proceeds of $27,810,000. A total of $27,270,000 was deposited into the trust account, including an additional $540,000 of underwriting fees, bringing the aggregate proceeds held in the trust account to $209,070,000.
For the period from September 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $13,000. Net loss of $235,380 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $16,874 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $239,254 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and investments held in the Trust Account of $209,086,874. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,361,137 of cash held outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private units.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until December 6, 2022, twelve months from the closing of its Initial Public Offering, to consummate a business combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a business combination by this time. Additionally, the Company may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company through the Company’s liquidation date or one year from the issuance of these financial statements. If a business combination is not consummated by the liquidation date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should a business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after December 6, 2022. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate any business combination by December 6, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred
to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We entered into an agreement, commencing on December 1, 2021, through the earlier of our consummation of an initial business combination and its liquidation, to pay Fifth Partners, an affiliate of the sponsor, a total of $13,000 per month for general and administrative services including office space, utilities and secretarial support.
The Company had granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of initial public offering to purchase up to 2,700,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions.
On December 9, 2021, the underwriter’s elected to fully exercise the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 2,700,000 public shares at a price of $10.00 per public share.
We engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with the initial business combination to assist in holding meetings with the stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce the us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing securities in connection with the initial business combination, assist in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist with press releases and public filings in connection with the initial business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of the initial business combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable). In addition, we will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee in an amount equal to 1.0% of the total consideration payable to the target in the initial business combination if EarlyBirdCapital introduces the target business with whom we complete the initial business combination; provided that the foregoing fee will not be paid prior to the date that is 60 days from the effective date of the Registration Statement, unless such payment would not be deemed underwriters’ compensation in connection with the initial public offering pursuant to FINRA Rule 5110.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified in temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The Company’s Public Shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the Public Shares are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the common stock subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis. Early adoption is permitted, but no earlier than fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2020, including interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 effective September 2, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have a material impact on the Company’s financial statement.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.