ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on February 13, 2019. We were formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities, which we refer to herein as our “Business Combination.” We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering (as defined below) and the sale of the Private Units (as defined below), our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in a Business Combination:
● may significantly reduce the equity interest of our stockholders;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if we issue preferred shares with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
● will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after a business combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand; and
● our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, which is described below, and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account (as defined below). We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $402,542, which was comprised of operational costs of $415,858, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $13,316.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,965, which was comprised of operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On August 10, 2021, we completed our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) of 11,500,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of common stock included in the Units sold, the “Public Shares”), which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 1,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we completed the sale of 461,500 units (the “Private Units”) at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit in a private placement to certain of the holders of the Company’s shares prior to the Initial Public Offering (the “Initial Stockholders”), generating gross proceeds of $4,615,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $116,725,000 was placed in a trust account located in the United States (the “Trust Account”). We incurred $1,646,673 of transaction costs, consisting of $1,150,000 of underwriting fees and $496,673 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $463,981. Net loss of $402,542 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $13,316. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $48,123 of cash for operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $1,740. Net loss of $1,965 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities which provided $225 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we held marketable securities in the Trust Account of $116,738,316 (including approximately $13,316 of interest income) consisting of money market funds, which primarily invest in U.S. Treasury securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $802,606. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Initial Stockholders and certain of our officers and directors (or their affiliates) may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
Pursuant to a business combination marketing agreement entered into on August 5, 2021, we have engaged Roth Capital Partners, LLC (“Roth”) and Craig-Hallum Capital Group LLC (“Craig-Hallum”), the underwriters in the Initial Public Offering, as advisors in connection with our Business Combination to assist us in the transaction structuring and negotiation of a definitive purchase agreement with respect to the Business Combination, hold meetings with our stockholders to discuss the Business Combination and the target’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors to purchase our securities in connection with the Business Combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination, and assist us with financial analysis, presentations, press releases and filings related to the Business Combination. We will pay Roth and Craig-Hallum a fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 4.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, or $5,175,000. Roth and Craig-Hallum will not be entitled to such fee unless we consummate a Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.