ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware November 5, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our stock in an initial business combination:
● may significantly reduce the equity interest of our stockholders;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of common stock if we issue preferred shares with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
● will likely cause a change in control if a substantial number of our shares of common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and most likely will also result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our securities.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after a business combination are insufficient to pay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we have made all principal and interest payments when due if the debt security contains covenants that required the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves and we breach any such covenant without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand; and
● our inability to obtain additional financing, if necessary, if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain additional financing while such security is outstanding.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $166,644, which consists of operating costs.
For the period from November 5, 2020 (Inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,000, which consists of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On December 3, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 11,500,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 1,500,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $115,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 461,500 Private Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit in a private placement to certain of our Initial Stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $4,615,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $116,725,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $1,625,220 in transaction costs, consisting of $1,150,000 of underwriting fees and $475,220 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $390,885. Net loss of $166,644 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $224,241.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $116,725,000. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest income from the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $898,895 of cash held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the Initial Stockholders, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes an initial business combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest. As of December 31, 2021, there are no Working Capital Loans outstanding.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than as described below.
We have engaged Roth and Craig-Hallum, the underwriters in the Initial Public Offering, as advisors in connection with our initial business combination to assist in the transaction structuring and negotiation of a definitive purchase agreement with respect to the initial business combination, hold meetings with the stockholders to discuss the initial business combination and the target’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors to purchase our securities in connection with the initial business combination, and assist with financial analysis, presentations, press releases and filings related to the initial business combination. We will pay Roth and Craig-Hallum a fee for such services upon the consummation of an initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 4.5% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering (or $5,175,000 in the aggregate). As a result, Roth and Craig-Hallum will not be entitled to such fee unless the Company consummates an initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We have two types of common stock - redeemable common stock and non-redeemable common stock. We calculate our earnings per share to allocate net loss pro rata to redeemable and non-redeemable common stock. This presentation contemplates an initial business combination as the most likely outcome, in which case, both classes of common stock share pro rata in our income (loss). Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the redeemable and non-redeemable common stock, we first considered the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares. This is calculated using the total net income (loss) less any dividends paid. For the purposes of calculating net income (loss) per share, any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the redeemable common stock subject to redemption was considered to be dividends paid to the holders of the redeemable common stock. Subsequent to calculating the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares, we split the amount to be allocated pro rata between redeemable and non-redeemable common stock for the year ended December 31, 2021.