Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Position
The following discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial position should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes, which are contained in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
The discussion of the comparison of our 2020 and 2019 results was previously disclosed within the Management’s Discussion & Analysis in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 19, 2021, and has been omitted from this section pursuant to Instruction 1 to Item 303(b) of Regulation S-K.
Company Background and Strategy
Rogers Corporation designs, develops, manufactures and sells high-performance and high-reliability engineered materials and components to meet our customers’ demanding challenges. We operate two strategic operating segments: Advanced Electronics Solutions (AES) and Elastomeric Material Solutions (EMS). The remaining operations, which represent our non-core businesses, are reported in our Other operating segment. We have a history of innovation and have established Innovation Centers for our research and development (R&D) activities in Chandler, Arizona, Burlington, Massachusetts, Eschenbach, Germany and Suzhou, China. We are headquartered in Chandler, Arizona.
Our growth strategy is based upon the following principles: (1) market-driven organization, (2) innovation leadership, (3) synergistic mergers and acquisitions, and (4) operational excellence. As a market-driven organization, we are focused on growth drivers, including advanced mobility and advanced connectivity. More specifically, in addition to the impact of COVID-19 discussed below, the key medium- to long-term trends currently affecting our business include the increasing electrification of vehicles, including electric and hybrid electric vehicles (EV/HEV), and increasing use of advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) in the automotive industry and the growth of 5G smartphones in the portable electronics industry. In addition to our focus on advanced mobility and advanced connectivity in the automotive, portable electronics and telecommunications industries, we sell into a variety of other markets including general industrial, aerospace and defense, mass transit, clean energy and connected devices.
Our sales and marketing approach is based on addressing these trends, while our strategy focuses on factors for success as a manufacturer of engineered materials and components: performance, reliability, service, cost, efficiency, innovation and technology. We have expanded our capabilities through organic investment and acquisitions and strive to ensure high quality solutions for our customers. We continue to review and re-align our manufacturing and engineering footprint in an effort to maintain a leading competitive position globally. We have established or expanded our capabilities in various locations in support of our customers’ growth initiatives.
We seek to enhance our operational and financial performance by investing in research and development, manufacturing and materials efficiencies, and new product initiatives that respond to the needs of our customers. We strive to evaluate operational and strategic alternatives to improve our business structure and align our business with the changing needs of our customers and major industry trends affecting our business.
If we are able to successfully execute on our growth strategy, we see an opportunity to double our annual revenues over the next five years. This robust outlook is supported by our participation in a number of fast-growing markets and by our strong competitive positions in these markets. Advanced mobility markets, which are comprised of EV/HEV and ADAS, are expected to grow at the fastest rate. Third-party analysis projects that the EV/HEV market will grow at compound annual growth rate of more than 25% over the next five years and ADAS at a rate of more than 15% over that time period. Within the EV/HEV market, we believe our advanced battery cell pads, ceramic substrates and power interconnects provide multiple content opportunities to capitalize on this growth. In each of these areas we have secured a number of design wins and have a strong pipeline, which provides confidence in our growth outlook. In the ADAS market, we continue to build on our current position with new design wins, including those for next-generation automotive radar systems. Other markets with a strong growth trajectory include aerospace and defense, clean energy and portable electronics. These markets are projected to grow at high single digit rates and we expect that they will contribute to our growth strategy’s aim of doubling revenues over the next five years.
To support our revenue growth opportunity during the five-year strategic planning period, we have initiated a manufacturing expansion plan, which includes expanding capacity at existing Rogers’ manufacturing facilities, relocating existing manufacturing capabilities to enhance operational efficiency and adding new manufacturing facilities. This expansion plan will require a significant increase in capital spending together with an associated increase in operating expenses, as compared to historic capital spending and operating expenses over the previous five years. During the five-year strategic planning period, we also will have significant capital expenditures associated with implementing our enterprise resource planning system.
Proposed Merger with DuPont
On November 1, 2021, we entered into a definitive merger agreement to be acquired by DuPont de Nemours, Inc. (DuPont) in an all-cash transaction at a price of $277.00 per share of the Company’s capital stock. The merger agreement provides for the acquisition of Rogers Corporation by DuPont through the merger of Cardinalis Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of DuPont, with and into Rogers Corporation, with Rogers Corporation surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of DuPont. Company shareholders approved the merger agreement at a special shareholder meeting held on January 25, 2022. The merger is subject to receipt of regulatory approvals and satisfaction of other customary conditions. The merger is expected to close by the end of the second quarter of 2022.
Executive Summary
The following key highlights and factors should be considered when reviewing our results of operations, financial position and liquidity:
•In 2021 as compared to 2020, our net sales increased by 16.2% to $932.9 million, our gross margin increased 100 basis points to 37.4% from 36.4%, and operating income as a percentage of net sales increased 420 basis points to 12.6% from 8.4%.
•In early February 2021, there was a fire at our UTIS manufacturing facility in Ansan, South Korea. This facility manufactures eSorba® polyurethane foams used in portable electronics and display applications. Operations in South Korea will be disrupted into the first half of 2023. We recognized net expense of $6.2 million in 2021 related to the financial impacts from the fire, which consisted of write-offs of fixed assets and inventory destroyed and/or damaged in the fire, professional services, costs incurred due to obligations under our manufacturing facility lease agreement, lease impairments, compensation and benefits for certain of our UTIS employees and third-party property claims, partially offset by the recognition of certain anticipated insurance recoveries.
•On October 8, 2021, we acquired Silicone Engineering Ltd. (Silicone Engineering), a leading European manufacturer of silicone material solutions based in Blackburn, England, for a combined purchase price of $172.3 million for the company, net of cash acquired, and its facility. Substantially all of our $190.0 million in borrowings under our existing credit facility in October 2021 were used to fund the transaction, with the remaining amounts being used for general corporate purposes. We incurred transaction costs of $3.9 million related to this acquisition.
•Our 2021 net sales and gross margin were tempered by global supply chain disruptions, which we expect to continue into 2022.
•We recognized $3.1 million and $12.3 million of restructuring charges in 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the manufacturing footprint optimization plans involving certain Europe and Asia manufacturing locations, primarily impacting our AES operating segment.
•In 2021, we incurred $6.9 million of expenses related to the merger with DuPont mainly associated with professional services expense and retention awards.
•We incurred incremental direct costs of $1.9 million and $4.9 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, selected operations data expressed as a percentage of net sales:
Net Sales and Gross Margin
Net sales increased by 16.2% in 2021 compared to 2020. Our AES and EMS operating segments had net sales increases of 16.5% and 15.2%, respectively. The increase in net sales was primarily due to higher net sales in the EV/HEV, clean energy, aerospace and defense and ADAS markets in our AES operating segment and higher net sales in the general industrial, EV/HEV, consumer and automotive markets in our EMS operating segment. The increase was partially offset by lower net sales in the portable electronics and mass transit markets in our EMS operating segment. Additionally, our EMS operating segment net sales increased by $8.3 million, or 1.0%, reflecting the impact from our acquisition of Silicone Engineering. Net sales benefited from favorable foreign currency impacts of $22.3 million, or 2.8%, due to the appreciation in value of the euro and Chinese renminbi relative to the U.S. dollar.
Gross margin as a percentage of net sales increased 100 basis points to 37.4% in 2021 compared to 36.4% in 2020. Gross margin in 2021 was favorably impacted by higher volume, favorable absorption of fixed overhead costs and lower inventory reserve provisions in our AES and EMS operating segments, as well as favorable productivity improvements in our AES operating segment and favorable product mix in our EMS operating segment. This was partially offset by higher commodity and raw material costs, higher fixed overhead expenses, and higher freight, duty and tariff expenses in our AES and EMS operating segments, as well as unfavorable product mix in our AES operating segment and unfavorable productivity performance due to raw material shortages and unfavorable yield performance in our EMS operating segment. The higher freight, duty and tariff expenses were primarily due to the recognition in the second quarter of 2020 of a $3.3 million benefit from Chinese duty tax recoveries.
UTIS net sales were significantly impacted by a fire at our manufacturing facility in Ansan, South Korea in February 2021. The impacts to our EMS operating segment net sales and gross margin in the first half of 2021 were partially mitigated by our ability to sell our undamaged finished goods inventory.
In 2021, our net sales were tempered by global supply chain disruptions, primarily related to semiconductor chip and other key component and raw material shortages, as well as regional power outages in China, and their impacts on customer demand, partially offset by the favorable impacts of commercial actions taken earlier in 2021. Further, supply constraints on raw material and labor availability moderated production levels, creating operational inefficiencies, which negatively impacted our gross margin. The global supply chain disruptions experienced in the 2021 and their impacts to our net sales and gross margin are expected to continue into 2022. We plan to mitigate any inflationary impacts through a combination of pricing actions and operating efficiencies.
We incurred incremental direct costs associated with the temporary additional benefits established under our dependent care, premium pay and sick pay programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as additional safety supplies. These costs impacted our gross margin by $1.7 million and $4.5 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses increased 6.0% in 2021 from 2020, primarily due to a $17.7 million increase in total compensation and benefits, an $11.1 million increase in professional services expense, a $5.3 million increase in software expenses, a $1.2 million increase in recruiting/relocation/training expenses, a $0.4 million increase in advertising costs and a $0.3 million increase in utility expenses. This was partially offset by a $27.9 million decrease in other intangible assets amortization expense.
The decrease in amortization expense in 2021 from 2020 was due to the acceleration of amortization expense related to our DSP customer relationships and trademarks and trade names definite-lived other intangible assets, which were both accelerated to be fully amortized by December 31, 2020 due to an adjustment to their remaining useful lives. We recognized amortization expense for our DSP definite-lived other intangible assets of $0.3 million and $29.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. For additional information, refer to “Note 6 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
The increase in total compensation and benefits is primarily due to higher incentive compensation expenses year-over-year, including a $1.4 million impact in 2021 for retention awards issued in connection with the DuPont merger. The increase in professional services expense is primarily due to $5.5 million of expenses incurred related to the merger with DuPont and $3.0 million of expenses incurred related to our acquisition of Silicone Engineering.
Research and Development Expenses
R&D expenses increased 2.0% in 2021 from 2020, primarily due to increases in laboratory expenses, depreciation and total compensation and benefits, partially offset by decreases in professional services.
Restructuring and Impairment Charges and Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net
We recognized $3.1 million and $12.3 million of restructuring charges 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the manufacturing footprint optimization plans involving certain Europe and Asia manufacturing locations, primarily impacting our AES operating segment.
We recognized $0.5 million and $0.6 million of impairment charges in 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily related to certain AES operating segment fixed assets in Belgium.
With respect to other operating (income) expense, net, we recognized expense of $5.3 million, primarily related to the financial impacts from a fire at our UTIS manufacturing facility in Ansan, South Korea in the first quarter of 2021, which impacted our EMS operating segment. This impact consisted of write-offs of fixed assets and inventory destroyed and/or damaged in the fire, professional services, costs incurred due to obligations under our manufacturing facility lease agreement, lease impairments, compensation and benefits for certain of our UTIS employees and third-party property claims, partially offset by the recognition of certain anticipated insurance recoveries. There may be other potential costs that cannot be reasonably foreseen or estimated at this time and we continue to evaluate information as it becomes available. For additional information, refer to “Note 15 - Supplemental Financial Information” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Equity Income in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures
As of December 31, 2021, we had two unconsolidated joint ventures, each 50% owned: Rogers INOAC Corporation (RIC) and Rogers INOAC Suzhou Corporation (RIS). Equity income in those unconsolidated joint ventures increased 44.2% in 2021 from
2020 due to higher net sales, driven by strong sales in the portable electronics and general industrial markets, and improved operational performance for RIC, primarily due to higher utilization of production capacity.
Pension Settlement Charges and Other Income (Expense), Net
In 2021 and 2020, we recorded $0.5 million and $0.1 million of pre-tax settlement charges in connection with further settlement efforts related to the termination of the Rogers Corporation Defined Benefit Pension Plan (following its merger with the Hourly Employees Pension Plan of Arlon LLC, Microwave Material and Silicone Technologies Divisions, Bear, Delaware (collectively, the Merged Plan)). For additional information, refer to “Note 11 - Pension Benefits, Other Postretirement Benefits and Employee Savings and Investment Plan” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Other income (expense), net improved to a net income of $5.1 million in 2021 compared to a net income of $3.5 million in 2020 due to favorable impacts from our foreign currency transactions, copper derivative contracts and net periodic benefit credits from our defined benefit plans, partially offset by unfavorable impacts from our foreign currency derivative contracts.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, decreased by 64.5% in 2021 from 2020, primarily due to a lower weighted-average outstanding balance for our borrowings under our revolving credit facility as well as a $2.4 million acceleration of interest expense in 2020 as a result of the termination of the interest rate swap. We expect interest expense, net to increase in 2022 due a higher weighted-average outstanding balance for our borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective income tax rate for 2021 was 14.4% compared to 27.1% for 2020. The decrease from 2020 was primarily due to the beneficial impact of increased reversals of unrecognized tax positions in China.
Operating Segment Net Sales and Operating Income
Advanced Electronics Solutions
Our AES operating segment net sales increased by 16.5% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily driven by higher net sales in the EV/HEV, clean energy, aerospace and defense and ADAS markets. Net sales were benefited from favorable foreign currency fluctuations of $13.4 million, or 2.9%, due to the appreciation in value of the euro and Chinese renminbi relative to the U.S. dollar.
Operating income increased by 56.8% in 2021 from 2020. The increase in operating income was primarily due to higher volume, favorable absorption of fixed overhead costs, favorable productivity improvements and a lower inventory reserves provision, in addition to a $8.9 million decrease in restructuring charges. This was partially offset by higher commodity costs, unfavorable product mix, higher freight, duties and tariffs expenses and higher fixed overhead expenses. The higher freight, duty and tariff expenses were primarily due to the recognition in the second quarter of 2020 of a $3.3 million benefit from Chinese duty tax recoveries. As a percentage of net sales, operating income in 2021 was 9.4%, an approximately 240 basis point increase as compared to 7.0% in 2020.
Additionally, we incurred restructuring charges and related expenses associated with our manufacturing footprint optimization plans involving certain Europe and Asia manufacturing locations. We recognized $3.0 million and $11.9 million of restructuring charges and related expenses pertaining to these restructuring projects, in 2021 and 2020, respectively. For additional information, refer to “Note 15 - Supplemental Financial Information” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
In 2021, our AES operating segment net sales were tempered by global supply chain disruptions, primarily related to semiconductor chip and other key component and raw material shortages, as well as regional power outages in China, and their
impacts on customer demand, partially offset by the favorable impacts of commercial actions taken earlier in 2021. Further, supply constraints on raw material and labor availability moderated production levels, creating operational inefficiencies, which negatively impacted our AES operating segment gross margin. The global supply chain disruptions experienced in 2021 and their impacts to our AES operating segment net sales and gross margin are expected to continue into 2022.
Our AES operating segment incurred incremental direct costs associated with the temporary additional benefits established under our dependent care, premium pay and sick pay programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as additional safety supplies. These costs impacted our AES operating segment operating income by $1.1 million and $2.9 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Elastomeric Material Solutions
Our EMS operating segment net sales increased by 15.2% in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily driven by higher net sales in the general industrial, EV/HEV, consumer and automotive markets, partially offset by lower net sales in the portable electronics and mass transit markets. Additionally, EMS net sales increased by $8.3 million in net sales, or 2.5%, reflecting the impact from our acquisition of Silicone Engineering. Net sales benefited from favorable foreign currency fluctuations of $8.4 million, or 2.5%, due to the appreciation in value of the Chinese renminbi and euro relative to the U.S. dollar.
Operating income increased by 94.9% in 2021 from 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $27.6 million decrease in other intangible assets amortization expense. The increase in operating income was also due to higher volume, favorable absorption of fixed overhead costs, favorable product mix and a lower inventory reserves provision. This was partially offset by unfavorable yield performance, higher freight, duties and tariffs expenses, higher fixed overhead expenses, as well as higher raw material costs and unfavorable productivity performance due to raw material shortages. As a percentage of net sales, operating income in 2021 was 15.9%, an approximately 650 basis point increase as compared to 9.4% in 2020.
The decrease in other intangible assets amortization expense in 2021 from 2020 was due to the acceleration of amortization expense related to our DSP customer relationships and trademarks and trade names definite-lived other intangible assets, which were both accelerated to be fully amortized by December 31, 2020 due to an adjustment to their remaining useful lives. We recognized amortization expense for our DSP definite-lived other intangible assets of $0.3 million and $29.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. For additional information, refer to “Note 6 - Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Additionally, we recognized expense of $6.2 million related to the financial impacts from a fire at our UTIS manufacturing facility in Ansan, South Korea in 2021. This impact consisted of write-offs of fixed assets and inventory destroyed and/or damaged in the fire, professional services, costs incurred due to obligations under our manufacturing facility lease agreement, compensation and benefits for certain of our UTIS employees, partially offset by the recognition of certain anticipated insurance recoveries. There may be other potential costs that cannot be reasonably foreseen or estimated at this time and we continue to evaluate information as it becomes available. For additional information, refer to “Note 15 - Supplemental Financial Information” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
UTIS net sales were significantly impacted by a fire at our manufacturing facility in Ansan, South Korea in February 2021. The impacts to our EMS operating segment net sales and gross margin in the first half of 2021 were partially mitigated by our ability to sell our undamaged finished goods inventory.
In 2021, our EMS operating segment net sales were tempered by global supply chain disruptions, primarily related to semiconductor chip and other key component and raw material shortages, as well as regional power outages in China, and their impacts on customer demand, partially offset by the favorable impacts of commercial actions taken earlier in 2021. Further, supply constraints on raw material and labor availability moderated production levels, creating operational inefficiencies, which negatively impacted our gross margin. The global supply chain disruptions experienced in the 2021 and their impacts to our net sales and gross margin are expected to continue into 2022.
Our EMS operating segment incurred incremental direct costs associated with the temporary additional benefits established under our dependent care, premium pay and sick pay programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as additional safety supplies. These costs impacted our EMS operating segment operating income by $0.8 million and $1.9 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Other
Net sales in our Other operating segment increased by 30.0% in 2021 from 2020. The increase in net sales was primarily due to higher demand in the automotive market. Net sales were favorably impacted by foreign currency fluctuations of $0.6 million, or 3.7%, due to the appreciation in value of the Chinese renminbi relative to the U.S. dollar.
Our Other operating segment operating income increased by 54.3% in 2021 from 2020. The increase in operating income was primarily driven by higher volume and favorable absorption of fixed overhead costs, partially offset by higher fixed overhead expenses and higher freight expenses. As a percentage of net sales, operating income in 2021 was 33.9%, an approximately 530 basis point increase as compared to 28.6% in 2020.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Financial Position
We believe that our existing sources of liquidity and cash flows that are expected to be generated from our operations, together with our available credit facilities, will be sufficient to fund our operations, currently planned capital expenditures, R&D efforts and our debt service commitments, for at least the next 12 months. Our merger agreement with DuPont does not restrict these currently planned capital expenditures. We regularly review and evaluate the adequacy of our cash flows, borrowing facilities and banking relationships, seeking to ensure that we have the appropriate access to cash to fund both our near-term operating needs and our long-term strategic initiatives. The following table illustrates the location of our cash and cash equivalents by our three major geographic areas:
Approximately $155.7 million of our cash and cash equivalents were held by non-U.S. subsidiaries as of December 31, 2021. We did not make any changes in 2021 to our position on the permanent reinvestment of our historical earnings from foreign operations. With the exception of certain of our Chinese subsidiaries, where a substantial portion of our Asia cash and cash equivalents are held, we continue to assert that historical foreign earnings are indefinitely reinvested.
Net working capital was $420.1 million and $362.7 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Significant changes in our statement of financial position accounts from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 were as follows:
•Accounts receivable, net increased 21.3% to $163.1 million as of December 31, 2021, from $134.4 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher net sales at the end of 2021 compared to the end of 2020, as well as $5.7 million related to our acquisition of Silicone Engineering and the recognition of $5.4 million in UTIS fire insurance receivables for anticipated recoveries related to property damage claims.
•Inventories increased 30.3% to $133.4 million as of December 31, 2021, from $102.4 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily driven by raw material cost increases as well as the ramp up of raw material purchases and production efforts to meet anticipated demand, as well as a decrease in inventory reserves and the $2.5 million related to our acquisition of Silicone Engineering.
•Borrowings under revolving credit facility increased $190.0 million as of December 31, 2021, from $25.0 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase reflects $190.0 million in borrowings under our revolving credit facility in October 2021, substantially all of which was used to fund our acquisition of Silicone Engineering Ltd., with the remaining amount used
for general corporate purposes. This was partially offset by $25.0 million of discretionary principal payments on our revolving credit facility during the first part of 2021. For additional information regarding this facility, as well as the Fourth Amended Credit Agreement, refer to “Note 9 - Debt” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
In 2021, cash and cash equivalents increased $40.5 million, primarily due to $190.0 million in borrowings under our revolving credit facility and cash flows generated by operations, partially offset by $71.1 million in capital expenditures, $25.0 million of principal payments made on our outstanding borrowings on our revolving credit facility, as well as $2.9 million in tax payments related to net share settlement of equity awards.
In 2020, cash and cash equivalents increased $24.9 million, primarily due to $150.0 million in borrowings under our revolving credit facility and cash flows generated by operations, partially offset by $248.0 million of principal payments made on our outstanding borrowings on our revolving credit facility, $40.4 million in capital expenditures, as well as $5.4 million in tax payments related to net share settlement of equity awards.
In 2022, we expect capital spending to be in the range of approximately $155.0 million to $165.0 million, of which we are contractually committed to $39.9 million as of December 31, 2021. We plan to fund our capital spending in 2022 with cash from operations and cash on-hand, as well as our existing revolving credit facility, if necessary.
There are no contractual obligations requiring material cash requirements in 2022 and beyond, excluding those already noted, including those related our outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility, our operating and finance lease obligations and our pension benefit and other postretirement benefit obligations, which are discussed in Note 9 - Debt, Note 10 - Leases and Note 11 - Pension Benefits, Other Postretirement Benefits and Employee Savings and Investment Plan, to Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, respectively.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are, in the opinion of management, reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our results of operations or financial position.
Restriction on Payment of Dividends
The Fourth Amended Credit Agreement generally permits us to pay cash dividends to our shareholders, provided that (i) no default or event of default has occurred and is continuing or would result from the dividend payment and (ii) our total net leverage ratio does not exceed 2.75 to 1.00. If our total net leverage ratio exceeds 2.75 to 1.00, we may nonetheless make up to $20.0 million in restricted payments, including cash dividends, during the fiscal year, provided that no default or event of default has occurred and is continuing or would result from the payments. Our total net leverage ratio did not exceed 2.75 to 1.00 as of December 31, 2021. For additional information regarding the Fourth Amended Credit Agreement, refer to “Note 9 - Debt” to “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Under the terms of the merger agreement with DuPont, we are restricted from paying any dividends or other distributions to our shareholders, or making any material modifications to our dividend policy, without the prior approval of DuPont.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, which require management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances and believe that appropriate reserves have been established using on reasonable methodologies and appropriate assumptions based on facts and circumstances that are known; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Certain accounting policies may require a choice between acceptable accounting methods or may require substantial judgment or estimation in their application. A summary of our critical accounting estimates is presented below:
Product Liabilities
We endeavor to maintain insurance coverage with reasonable deductible levels to protect us from potential exposures to product liability claims. Any liability associated with such claims is based on management’s best estimate of the potential claim value, while insurance receivables associated with related claims are not recorded until verified by the insurance carrier.
For asbestos-related claims, we recognize projected asbestos liabilities and related insurance receivables, with any difference between the liability and related insurance receivable recognized as an expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Our estimates of asbestos-related contingent liabilities and related insurance receivables are based on a claim projection analysis and an insurance usage analysis prepared annually by third parties. The claim projection analysis contains numerous assumptions, including number of claims that might be received, the type and severity of the disease alleged by each claimant, the long latency period associated with asbestos exposure, dismissal rates, average indemnity costs, average defense costs, costs of medical treatment, the financial resources of other companies that are co-defendants in claims, uncertainties surrounding the litigation process from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and from case to case, and the impact of potential changes in legislative or judicial standards, including potential tort reform. Furthermore, any predictions with respect to these assumptions are subject to even greater uncertainty as the projection period lengthens. The insurance usage analysis considers, among other things, applicable deductibles, retentions and policy limits, the solvency and historical payment experience of various insurance carriers, the likelihood of recovery as estimated by external legal counsel and existing insurance settlements.
The liability projection period covers all current and future indemnity and defense costs through 2064, which represents the expected end of our asbestos liability exposure with no further ongoing claims expected beyond that date. This conclusion was based on our history and experience with the claims data, the diminished volatility and consistency of observable claims data, the period of time that has elapsed since we stopped manufacturing products that contained encapsulated asbestos and an expected downward trend in claims due to the average age of our claimants, which is approaching the average life expectancy.
Our accrued asbestos liabilities may not approximate our actual asbestos-related indemnity and defense costs, and our accrued insurance recoveries may not be realized. We believe it is reasonably possible that we may incur additional charges for our asbestos liabilities and defense costs in the future that could exceed existing reserves and insurance recoveries. We plan to continue to vigorously defend ourselves and believe we have substantial unutilized insurance coverage to mitigate future costs related to this matter.
We review our asbestos-related projections annually in the fourth quarter of each year unless facts and circumstances materially change during the year, at which time we would analyze these projections. We believe the assumptions made on the potential exposure and expected insurance coverage are reasonable at the present time, but are subject to uncertainty based on the actual future outcome of our asbestos litigation.
As of December 31, 2021, the estimated liabilities and estimated insurance recoveries for all current and future indemnity and defense costs projected through 2064 were $68.3 million and $62.6 million, respectively.
Business Combination Purchase Price Allocation
The application of the acquisition method requires the allocation of the purchase price amongst the acquisition date fair values of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Fair values are determined using the income approach, market approach and/or cost approach depending on the nature of the asset or liability being valued and the reliability of available information. The income approach estimates fair value by discounting associated lifetime expected future cash flows to their present value and relies on significant assumptions regarding future revenues, expenses, working capital levels and discount rates. The market approach estimates fair value by analyzing recent actual market transactions for similar assets or liabilities. The cost approach estimates fair value based on the expected cost to replace or reproduce the asset or liability and relies on assumptions regarding the occurrence and extent of any physical, functional and/or economic obsolescence.
Customer relationships were valued using the multi-period excess earnings method (MPEEM) of the income approach. Significant assumptions used in the valuation include projected revenues and gross margins, customer attrition rate and an appropriate discount rate. No residual value was assigned to the acquired customer relationships. The customer relationships are amortized on an economic useful life basis commensurate with future anticipated cash flows. The total weighted average amortization period for the Silicone Engineering customer relationship definite-lived intangible asset is 9.5 years.