Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As a result of the closing of the Merger, which was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. GAAP as discussed in Note 3-Reverse Recapitalization, the financial statements of A Place for Rover, Inc., a Delaware corporation and our wholly owned subsidiary, are now the financial statements of Rover. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021 and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans, estimates and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “Rover,” “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Rover Group, Inc., a Delaware corporation, together with its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
We believe in the unconditional love of pets, and Rover exists to make it possible for everyone to experience this love in their lives. Rover was founded to give pet parents an alternative to relying on friends and family, neighbors, and kennels for pet care; it is the world’s largest online marketplace for pet care based on gross booking value, or GBV, which represents the dollar value of bookings on our platform in a period and is inclusive of pet care provider earnings, service fees, add-ons, taxes and alterations that occurred during that period. Our online marketplace aims to match pet parents with pet lovers who are dedicated to providing excellent pet care while earning extra income. Our simple and easy-to-use platform enables pet parents to easily discover and book the right pet care providers for them and their pets, communicate with providers and write and read reviews. Our platform enables pet care providers to list on our marketplace with low startup costs, schedule bookings, communicate with pet parents, set the prices charged for their services, and receive payment.
We connect pet parents with caring pet care providers who offer overnight services, including boarding and in-home pet sitting, as well as daytime services, including doggy daycare, dog walking, and drop-in visits. Through December 31, 2021, over three million unique pet parents and more than 660,000 pet care providers across North America, the United Kingdom and Europe have booked a service on Rover, enabling millions of moments of joy and play for people and pets.
This scale matters. Because each pet’s needs are unique, pet care providers, unlike service providers in many other marketplaces, are not interchangeable. We have carefully designed our technology and data algorithms to leverage our growing scale to best meet the unique needs and preferences of pets, parents, and providers. With our leading scale, we can offer pet parents and pet care providers the benefits of density and diversity in a local marketplace. We believe we are well positioned to build on this advantage over time. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our GBV was approximately 11x the size of the next closest online marketplace for pet care, up from approximately 7x for the year ended December 31, 2020 based on that marketplace’s publicly available gross booking data. For information about how we calculate GBV, see “-Key Business Metrics.”
We generate substantially all of our revenue from our pet care marketplace platform that connects pet care providers and pet parents. We collect services fees from both providers and pet parents. As more providers accept and complete bookings, we earn more revenue. We also earn revenue from ancillary sources such as background checks, affiliate advertising deals, and the Rover Store.
We have made focused and substantial investments in support of our mission. For example, to continually launch new features on our platform we have invested heavily in product development and have completed two strategic acquisitions. We have also invested in sales and marketing to grow the user base of the platform across the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and seven countries in Western Europe (Spain, France, Norway, Sweden, Netherlands, Italy, and Germany). For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, approximately 4%, 5%, and 5% of our revenue, respectively, was generated from offerings outside of the United States.
Notwithstanding the impact of COVID-19, we are continuing to invest in the future through product development and marketing efforts. We also continue to explore and test new service lines that we may launch at a future date. Our strategy is to create a marketplace that operates at a hyper-local level while leveraging our trusted brand. Even as we invest in the business, we also remain focused on finding ways to operate more efficiently.
Financial Highlights
Highlights from fiscal year 2021 compared with fiscal year 2020 included the following, which are discussed in more detail below under “-Key Business Metrics,” “-Results of Operations,” “-Non-GAAP Measures,” and “-Liquidity and Capital Resources”:
•Revenue increased approximately 125% to $109.8 million, compared to $48.8 million.
•GBV increased approximately 124% to $521.9 million, compared to $233.2 million. For further information about how we calculate GBV, see “-Key Business Metrics.”
•Net loss increased approximately 11% to $64.0 million, compared to $57.5 million, which, unlike 2020, included a non-cash expense related to the change in fair value of earnout and warrant liabilities from the Merger of $43.9 million. As a percentage of revenue, net loss was (58%) in 2021 as compared to (118%) in 2020.
•Adjusted EBITDA increased to $12.4 million, compared to $(25.0) million. For information about how we calculate Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, the limitations of the use of such measure, and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, see “-Non-GAAP Measures.”
•Cash and cash equivalents increased approximately 245% to $278.9 million, compared to $80.8 million.
•Net cash provided by operating activities increased to $14.3 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $57.0 million.
Given the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business during 2020, highlights from fiscal year 2021 compared with fiscal year 2019 are shown below, as we believe this supplemental comparison is more meaningful to investors:
•Revenue increased approximately 16% to $109.8 million, compared to $95.1 million.
•GBV increased approximately 20% to $521.9 million, compared to $436.4 million.
•Net loss increased approximately 24% to $64.0 million, compared to $51.7 million, which, unlike 2019, included a non-cash expense related to the change in fair value of earnout and warrant liabilities from the Merger of $43.9 million. As a percentage of revenue, net loss was (58%) in 2021 as compared to (54%) in 2019.
•Adjusted EBITDA increased to $12.4 million, compared to ($35.2) million.
•Net cash provided by operating activities increased to $14.3 million, compared to net cash used in operating activities of $24.7 million.
With the redemption of all of our outstanding warrants in January 2022 and the conversion of our earnout liabilities to equity as of December 31, 2021, our future results of operations will not be materially impacted by a non-cash expense related to the mark-to-market of these liabilities. For more information, see “-Factors Affecting Our Performance-Earnout and Derivative Warrant Liabilities.” Due to paying off our outstanding debt and terminating all outstanding loans and credit agreements during 2021, as of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding debt, which will substantially reduce all interest expenses for the near term. While we expect revenue to increase for the year ending December 31, 2022 driven by increased bookings as the pandemic restrictions continue to ease, resulting in further recovery in travel and more workers returning to the office, related expenses will also increase in absolute dollars due to continued investments in our business and higher wage trends.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic, which has persisted longer than we had originally anticipated, continues to impact communities globally, including in the markets we serve in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and Western Europe, which in turn creates a level of uncertainty over the near and medium term and impacts our business. Since the outbreak began in March 2020, authorities have implemented numerous restrictive measures to try to contain the virus, such as travel bans and restrictions, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders, and business shutdowns. These restrictive measures, along with pet owners and pet care providers being infected with COVID-19, have not only negatively impacted consumer and business spending habits, including a significant decline in demand for pet services during 2020, the first half of 2021, and with each subsequent variant wave, but they have also adversely impacted, and may continue to impact, our workforce and operations. Although the broad availability of vaccines in 2021 resulted in the most severe of these measures being eased in many U.S. geographic regions and recent announcements by certain state and local governments indicate that remaining measures will be lifted in their regions in response to the declining case numbers from the Omicron wave, some measures to contain the COVID-19 outbreak may remain in place, or be reinstated, for a significant period of time if those geographic regions experience a resurgence of COVID-19 infections, as well as new variants of the virus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants. As a result of the pandemic, we experienced an unfavorable impact on our revenue, results of operations and cash flows during 2020, 2021, and with each subsequent variant wave.
Beginning mid-March 2020, we rapidly experienced the impact of COVID-19, and in April, bookings were down 82% and GBV was down 88% relative to the prior year, and the cancellation rate increased to 80%, approximately nine times the 9% rate in 2019. This combined effect continued throughout 2020, as pet parents faced ongoing uncertainty about COVID-19 restrictions. By June 2020, our business had experienced some recovery as travel and work restrictions decreased, resulting in a lesser decrease in bookings of 53% and a decrease in GBV of 55% year over year. Although this modest recovery continued into the fourth quarter 2020, increasing government restrictions in the fourth quarter put downward pressure on our business,
resulting in December 2020 bookings being down 52% and GBV down 54% relative to 2019, and with cancellation rates increasing to 17% compared to 10.5% in the fourth quarter of 2019.
The COVID-19 pandemic event and economic conditions were significant in relation to our ability to fund business operations. In response to the impact of COVID-19, we implemented a number of cost-cutting measures to minimize cash outlays, including turning off substantially all paid acquisition marketing activities and reducing other expenses, and implemented a restructuring plan in April 2020 whereby approximately 50% of our employees were terminated or placed on standby. In connection with this restructuring, we incurred severance-related and legal costs of $3.8 million, and modified the terms of stock options previously awarded to impacted employees. See Note 15-Stock-Based Compensation and Note 18-Restructuring. Though these decisions were painful, we believe our leaner cost structure positions us for strong financial performance. While we prepared our business for the potential of an extended economic shutdown, recovery began sooner than we expected during 2021.
With the phased rollout of effective vaccine options during the three months ended March 31, 2021, our business saw noticeable recovery starting in March 2021 and continuing in the three months ended June 30, September 30, and December 31, 2021, with a 67%, 309%, 176% and 193% increase of GBV year over year, respectively. As our business recovered during 2021 and our financial position strengthened as result of the Merger, we increased our hiring and marketing activities.
Although we have seen signs of demand improving as COVID-19 case counts trended down, particularly compared to the demand levels during the first year of the pandemic, demand levels continue to be negatively affected by the impact of variants and changes in case counts, especially with pet owners and pet care providers being infected with COVID-19. Despite achieving record quarterly highs for new and repeat bookings during the third quarter of 2021 during the Delta wave and achieving record high GBV during the fourth quarter of 2021 during the end of the Delta wave and beginning of the Omicron wave, the effect and extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business in the near and medium-term continues to be uncertain and difficult to predict. Of particular importance is the pandemic’s impact on travel and the return of workers to their offices, as well as the increasing adoption of hybrid work accommodations that blend office and remote environments, which could continue to result in fewer bookings and higher than average cancellation rates if the pandemic continues to depress travel or office attendance compared to pre-pandemic levels. Prior to the pandemic in 2019, our cancellation rate was 9% of GBV. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our cancellation rate increased to 21% of GBV as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the three months ended December 31, 2021, our cancellation rate was 16% of GBV, driven by the Omicron variant of COVID-19 and its negative impact on our pet parents and pet care providers. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our cancellation rate was 14% of GBV. Our cancellation rate has remained elevated in early 2022 compared to pre-pandemic rates due to the continued impact of the Omicron wave, which also negatively impacted demand and revenue. Because revenue is recognized when a service starts, a change in cancellation rate does not impact recognized revenue.
Despite ongoing pandemic depression on new and repeat bookings, we experienced record GBV and booking volumes starting in the three months ended June 30, 2021 driven by pandemic-created and secular tailwinds. We have seen continued recovery in our business from the initial economic effects of the pandemic and increases in revenue and GBV over pre-pandemic periods and our bookings recovery from the pandemic continues to trend ahead of the United States air travel recovery from the pandemic. We believe we are benefiting from an increase in pet ownership during the pandemic, increases in spend per pet, and the ongoing shift to online pet care options. When we look further into the future, we believe that COVID-19 has created a number of tailwinds to accelerate progress towards our mission. For example, while demand for pet care decreased under travel restrictions, shelter-in-place orders, and work from home requirements beginning in March 2020, leading to a negative impact on our revenue for 2020, 2021, and with each subsequent variant wave, pet adoptions simultaneously skyrocketed. Twenty percent of respondents to a Nielsen survey in July 2020 said they adopted one or more dogs or cats between March and June 2020, compared to fewer than 5% of respondents over the corresponding period in 2019. New and experienced pet parents, having spent more time at home bonding with their pets, may be less comfortable leaving them home alone or in a kennel in the future. The financial pressure of COVID-19 has also negatively impacted traditional commercial providers and may expand the number of people looking to earn extra income.
Although we believe that demand for pet care services offered through our platform will continue to rebound as people increasingly return to normalized travel and work activity, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including new variants or sub-variants or changed travel and work behaviors resulting from the pandemic, may continue to affect our financial results in 2022 and beyond. The extent to which the pandemic continues to impact our business, operating results and financial position will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, difficult to predict and beyond our knowledge and control, including but not limited to the duration and spread of the pandemic, its severity, new variants, the actions to contain the virus
or treat its impact, the extent of the business disruption and financial impacts, and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operating conditions can resume.
Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may experience materially adverse impacts to our business, operating results and financial position as a result of its economic impact, including any recession that has occurred or may occur in the future. However, there are no existing conditions or events that raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern. For additional discussion of COVID-19-related risks, see “Risk Factors.”
We have taken action to promote the health and safety of our employees during the COVID-19 pandemic, and we quickly transitioned the vast majority of our employees to work remotely in March 2020. We’ve enabled voluntary office access to our office locations and continue to make adjustments in response to the guidelines issued by health authorities. We currently expect our office re-openings to be a gradual process over many months in 2022 and that ultimately our offices will continue to be a primary location for work, learning and collaboration. We may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine is in the best interests of our employees and our customers.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we use the following key business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. In addition to the comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, the narrative below also reflects supplemental comparisons between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019, and the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2019. Given the impact of COVID-19 on our business in the fourth quarter of 2020, we believe this supplemental comparison is more meaningful to investors.
Bookings
We define a booking as a single arrangement, prior to cancellation, between a pet parent and pet care provider, which can be for a single night or multiple nights for our overnight services, or for a single walk/day/drop-in or multiple walks/days/drop-ins for our daytime services. We believe that the number of bookings is a useful indicator of the scale of our marketplace. We define new bookings as the total number of first-time bookings that new users, which Rover refers to as pet parents, book on our platform in a period. We define repeat bookings as the total number of bookings from pet parents who have had a previous booking on Rover. Bookings grow as pet parents increase their repeat activity on the platform, and as we attract new pet parents to the platform.
Our bookings are impacted by seasonal trends. We typically experience stronger bookings during the months of June, July, and August, and November and December, which in a typical year coincides with high travel demand related to summer vacation and holiday travel. Over the course of the year, we historically experience seasonally high bookings during the third quarter, which then step down slightly during the fourth quarter, and then stay approximately flat during the first quarter before ramping again in the second quarter as summer travel commences. This seasonality impacts bookings, GBV, revenue, marketing and service operations expenses. Bookings can also be impacted by the timing of holidays and other events.
Despite the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on travel and demand for pet services, we had 4.2 million bookings in the year ended December 31, 2021, a 75% increase from 2.4 million bookings in the year ended December 31, 2020, and flat from 4.2 million bookings in the year ended December 31, 2019. For additional information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, see “-Impact of COVID-19.”
New bookings in the year ended December 31, 2021 were 804,000, a 147% increase from the year ended December 31, 2020. The improvement was driven by improved travel dynamics from 2020’s COVID-induced downturn and increased pet ownership between the two periods. New bookings in the year ended December 31, 2021 were up 21% from 663,000 in the year ended December 31, 2019 and the distribution of these customers across services roughly mirrored our normal historical mix.
We had 3.4 million repeat bookings in the year ended December 31, 2021, a 64% increase from the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by strong initial repeat behavior from 2021 cohorts, continued strength from late 2020 cohorts, offset by performance of pre-pandemic cohorts which, while trailing historical performance, still showed steady recovery during the year. Repeat bookings for the year ended December 31, 2021 were down 4% from 3.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019, as the pre-pandemic cohorts still trail historical performance, and we have not seen the full annual repeat performance of the 2021 cohorts yet.
Despite the impact of the Omicron wave in December 2021, in the three months ended December 31, 2021, we had 1.2 million bookings, a 117% increase from 0.6 million bookings in the three months ended December 31, 2020 and a 10% increase from 1.1 million bookings in the three months ended December 31, 2019. In the three months ended December 31, 2020, we had a 49% decrease from the bookings in the three months ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
New bookings in the three months ended December 31, 2021 were 215,000, a 156% increase from the three months ended December 31, 2020. This improvement was driven by improved travel dynamics from 2020’s COVID-induced downturn and increased pet ownership between the two periods. New bookings in the three months ended December 31, 2021 were up 30% from 165,000 in the three months ended December 31, 2019 and the distribution of these customers across services roughly mirrored our normal historical mix.
We had over 998,000 repeat bookings in the three months ended December 31, 2021, a 110% increase from the three months ended December 31, 2020 driven by strong initial repeat behavior from 2021 cohorts and continued strength from late 2020 cohorts, offset by performance of pre-pandemic cohorts which, while trailing historical performance, still showed steady recovery during the quarter. Repeat bookings for the three months ended December 31, 2021 were up 6% from 941,000 in the three months ended December 31, 2019.
We have continued to see strength in our word-of-mouth organic growth of new pet parents. In the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 we cut marketing expense by 87% compared to the first quarter, but new bookings were down only 34%. Strength in organic acquisition trends continued as the business recovered. In the year ended December 31, 2021, marketing expense increased by 22% and new bookings increased 147% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Momentum in new customer acquisition drove our ratio of repeat customers to new customers down slightly for the three months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2019.
Gross Booking Value
Gross Booking Value, or GBV, represents the dollar value of bookings on our platform in a period and is inclusive of pet care provider earnings, service fees, add-ons, taxes and alterations that occurred during that period. We believe that GBV is a useful indicator of the level of spending on and growth of our platform. Growth in GBV represents increasing activity on our platform from repeat and new pet parents and may differ slightly from bookings growth depending on the mix of daytime and overnight services for each period. GBV can also be impacted by cancellation rates which have been higher during the COVID-19
pandemic. See “-Impact of COVID-19.” While bookings historically peak during the third quarter, GBV historically tends to peak in the fourth quarter due to higher average booking values associated with longer duration stays.
In 2020, GBV declined from prior year levels as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decline began in the three months ended March 31, 2020 and was most severe in the three months ended June 30, 2020, with GBV declining 71% from the prior year period. With easing of COVID restrictions during the third and fourth quarters, our business subsequently improved in the six months ended December 31, 2020 with a smaller decline of 51% compared to the prior year period. As vaccines started being rolled out over the first half of 2021, our business saw noticeable improvement. In the three months ended June 30, 2021, our GBV was $134.1 million, a 309% increase from $32.8 million in the same prior year period in 2020, driven by a 220% increase in bookings, and a 28% increase in the average booking value, or ABV. In the three months ended September 30, 2021, our GBV was $157.1 million, a 176% increase from the same prior year period, driven by a 118% increase in bookings, and a 27% increase in the ABV. In the three months ended December 31, 2021, our GBV was $166 million, a 193% increase from the same prior year period, driven by a 117% increase in bookings and a 35% increase in the ABV. GBV in the three months ended December 31, 2021 grew 44% over the same period in 2019, despite elevated cancellation rates and a slowdown in demand in December due to the Omicron variant of COVID-19.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, our GBV was $521.9 million, a 124% increase from the $233.2 million in GBV from the year ended December 31, 2020, and a 20% increase from the $436.4 million in GBV from the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in our GBV was primarily due to the continued recovery in U.S. domestic travel demand, as international markets remained slower to recover. In 2020, we had a 47% decrease from GBV in 2019, primarily due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For additional information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, see “-Impact of COVID-19.”
We have also seen less of an impact on our business in less densely populated and restricted areas during COVID. In December 2020, GBV in the most dense and restricted areas was down 65% relative to the same period in 2019, while GBV in the least dense and restricted areas was only down 47%. As the COVID-19 vaccine became more widely available, performance recovered throughout 2021, despite being impacted by the Delta and Omicron variants. By December 2021, GBV in the most dense and restricted areas was up 28% relative to the same period in 2019, while GBV in the least dense and restricted areas was up 45%. GBV growth relative to 2019 slowed in August and September as the Delta variant surged in the United States. GBV growth slowed again in December and this slowing continued into 2022 as the Omicron variant drove lower incremental demand for our services, as illustrated in the following chart.
We expect ongoing volatility in these trends and fluctuations from month to month as the continued impact from COVID-19 is not linear across geographies, as many countries, states and cities have continued to enact and/or lift new lockdowns and
prohibitions on travel, as administration rates of COVID-19 vaccines and boosters have slowed, as novel strains of the COVID-19 virus have appeared, and as COVID-19 may again materially adversely affect our business and financial results.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for Rover, but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below. See Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.”
Growth of our Base of Pet Parents
Our objective is to attract new pet parents to our platform and to successfully convert them into repeat bookers. We believe that we have a significant opportunity to expand our pet parent base given the size of the market in which we operate. Through December 31, 2021, more than three million unique pet parents have booked a service on our platform. We attract pet parents to our platform through word of mouth and from a variety of paid marketing channels, such as paid search, social media, video, and other online and offline channels. When assessing the efficiency and effectiveness of our marketing spend, we monitor the payback period on pet parent acquisition, which we target at one to two quarters in non-COVID-19 periods. The payback period represents the number of months it takes a cohort of pet parents of our services to generate a cumulative contribution profit that equals or exceeds estimated advertising expenses attributed to the acquisition of the specific cohort in the quarter it was acquired. We define contribution profit as the cumulative pet provider and pet parent fees from a cohort, less variable costs of credit card fees, refunds and claims. We may choose to extend our target payback period to invest in new markets. In addition, the payback period can be longer for fourth quarter cohorts due to higher advertising rates and less repeat behavior in the first quarter.
Over time, as individual markets mature, the strength of word-of-mouth customer acquisition has increased and our marketing spend as a percentage of GBV has decreased. For example, in the year ended December 31, 2021, 50% of new pet parents in our ten largest, most mature cities were acquired via word-of-mouth, compared to 41% in all other cities. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we had cut advertising expenses in the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020, with a near-total reduction in video and social channel advertising expenses, which drove more share of acquisition via word-of-mouth. As we began to ramp advertising spend back up in the second quarter of 2021, we saw the word-of-mouth mix in the other cities decrease towards levels seen prior to the pandemic.
The chart below demonstrates the growth of organic acquisition and decline in marketing expense as a percentage of GBV over time as markets scale.
Repeat Booking Activity
Our aim when we attract a new pet parent is to generate a long lifetime of bookings from that pet parent. We monitor the absolute number of repeat bookings and the percentage of total bookings that are from repeat customers. We define a repeat customer as any customer that has an incremental booking beyond their first. The chart below demonstrates the growth in cumulative average total bookings for each January cohort, which ultimately increases pet parent lifetime values. Cohorts are defined as the specific month in which pet parents first make a booking on Rover. January cohorts have been sampled for the illustrative demonstration below. The chart below includes bookings through 2019 for the January 2013 through January 2019 cohorts, prior to the impact of COVID-19. Our January 2020 cohort had a strong start, and then slowed due to the pandemic. However, based on recent bookings performance, our January 2021 cohort is on pace to be our best ever compared to previous years’ January cohorts. This cohort’s performance was not as impacted by COVID-19 variant waves as cohorts in the second half of 2021. The linearization of each cohort demonstrates the growth and stickiness of our marketplace.
The growth in average bookings per pet parent is driven both by higher rebooking rates and higher frequency. We have demonstrated strong growth in the percentage of a cohort that rebooks in Year 1. The chart below demonstrates the percentage of re-bookers in the 12 months following an initial booking. Our rebooking rate has grown from 41% in Year 1 for our January 2013 cohort, to 62% in Year 1 for our January 2019 cohort, our latest cohort without the impact of COVID-19 as seen in the chart below. In the three months ended December 31, 2021, repeat bookings increased 110% to 1.0 million from the three months ended December 31, 2020 as our business recovered. However, repeat bookings as a percentage of total bookings declined to 82% from 85% as we experienced relatively greater strength in new bookings. While our momentum in new customer acquisitions drove the ratio of repeat customers to new customers down, we believe this ratio highlights the future potential of our existing customer base to return as the marketplace continues to scale and that this ratio will climb back towards a historical norm. Our rebooking rate has grown from 62% in Year 1 for our January 2019 cohort, to 64% in Year 1 for our January 2021 cohort, as seen in the chart below.
The historical increase in repeat bookings has been driven by improvements in our marketplace as we have increased the diversity and quality of providers available. We have also improved our algorithms and ultimately our ability to better match a pet parent with a pet care provider. This in turn improves a pet parent’s experience. While we believe there will be continued improvement in our rebooking rate in our mature markets, we expect that we will continue to serve a number of pet parents that use our platform only for a one-off booking. We also expect future improvements in our rebooking rate in mature markets to be partially offset by lower rebooking rates as we invest to grow more nascent markets. Our improving ability to match pet parents with pet care providers is a continued advantage relative to other platforms, because while marketing investment can attract pet parents to a platform, if they do not find a match or if they have a bad experience, they will not return.
In addition, pet parents that rebook continue to book services over time at an increasing frequency, as seen in the chart below. This increase is a result of improvements in our platform and data algorithms which enhance the customer experience,
increasing pet care provider density as we continue to scale our platform, as well as the introduction of new service offerings, namely daytime services in the fourth quarter of 2015. The number of bookings per repeat customer has grown from 3.7 in Year 1 for our January 2013 cohort, to 7.2 in Year 1 for our January 2019 cohort, our latest cohort without the impact of COVID-19. With the vaccine adoption and travel recovery continuing throughout the year ended December 31, 2021, early signs of improvement have already appeared from the booking performance of 2021 cohorts. Following their initial month of joining, the number of bookings per repeat customer has grown from 7.2 after the first 12 months for our January 2019 cohort, to 7.6 after the first 12 months for our January 2021 cohort. Our goal is to continue to increase bookings by enabling delivery of reliable and convenient services to pet parents, improving the Rover experience, and converting more pet parents into repeat bookers.
Repeat bookings decreased on an absolute basis in 2020, but increased as a percentage of total bookings due to the decline in our new bookings and overall business resulting from COVID-19. Because of the restrictions put in place on a local geographic basis by local governments the behavior from new and existing customers was depressed. However, as the travel industry recovers, we believe our existing customer base will continue to return resulting in an increase in the percentage of bookings from repeat customers, though repeat bookings from these customers may not recover to pre-COVID-19 levels entirely.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, repeat bookings increased 64% to 3.4 million from the prior year period as our business recovered. However, repeat bookings as a percentage of total bookings declined to 81% from 86% as we experienced significant strength in new bookings. While our momentum in new customer acquisitions drove the ratio of repeat customers to new customers down, we believe this ratio highlights the future potential of our existing customer base to return as the marketplace continues to scale and that this ratio will climb back towards a historical norm, though repeat bookings from these customers may not recover to pre-COVID-19 levels entirely.
We may see a change in the percentage of bookings from repeat customers over time. A change in our ability to attract pet parents to our platform or changes in pet parent behavior could have a significant negative impact on our GBV, revenue and operating results.
Investing in Growth
We plan to invest both in new markets and new service offerings. We believe that we can further expand our services to new markets within North America and Europe by carefully targeting locations with high expected demand. We carefully evaluate market demand in specific urban, suburban, and rural areas. This will allow us to better serve both pet parents and pet care providers. We also believe there is an opportunity to expand our services outside of our existing geographic locations into other countries and regions where there is an attractive spend per pet to address. As we invest in new markets, we may extend our marketing payback target in order to accelerate growth in each new market. Our strategy is to continue to evaluate business acquisitions that can accelerate our growth and operating leverage. The timing of acquisitions and related integration will impact our financial results. In addition, we believe that expanding our offerings may help us to better provide more value to our pet parents, improve the ability to attract additional pet parents through additional marketing and advertising spend, and increase the engagement and value of our existing pet parents.
Availability of Rover Care Providers
We attract pet care providers to our platform primarily by word-of-mouth. To serve our pet parents in any given market, we need density of providers so that pet parents have options at all price points within an acceptable distance from their home. During certain peak periods, such as holidays, we have faced supply constraints in some markets.
In addition, pet care providers have in the past, and may continue to, attempt to or successfully source bookings from us and then complete the transaction off of our platform, and we cannot prevent this activity entirely. While we can use our matching algorithm to identify pet care providers that are attempting to disintermediate Rover by booking transactions off the platform and reduce the chance that those pet care providers are featured to pet parents, we cannot prevent this activity entirely.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had 250,000 active pet care providers who were able to successfully source a booking on our platform, up 33% from the same period in 2020 and down 11% from the same period in 2019. A change in our ability to attract providers to our platform, enable them to generate income and dissuade them from sourcing bookings off our platform could negatively impact our ability to serve pet parents and, in turn, have a significant negative impact on our GBV, revenue and operating results.
Service Booking Mix
Pet care providers set the price for the services offered on our platform. Overnight services are generally at a higher price point than daytime services. Typically, the first booking on our platform has the highest GBV, as pet parents tend to start with us with a specific need in mind, such as a seven-day trip, that is beyond what they can ask of friends, family, or neighbors. Subsequent bookings tend to be for less total nights or walks as pet parents use our platform for shorter more frequent trips or start using daytime services. As the mix of overnight and daytime services change, and as the number of nights or daytime services in an average booking changes, the ABV will fluctuate.
For example, in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic we saw a shift towards daytime services and shorter duration bookings, which both have lower ABV. ABV was $94, $98, $98, and $101 in the first, second, third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively, compared to $103, $108, $101, and $104 in 2019. ABV was $101, $125, $124, and $137 in the first, second, third and fourth quarters of 2021, respectively, as the booking mix shifted back towards overnight services, and providers started increasing their pricing on the platform, likely in response to rising inflation in the United States.
We collect the full GBV at the time the booking is made and recognize revenue at the time that the pet care service begins. We transfer fees earned by pet care providers upon completion of the service. In the case of overnight stays, the average period between booking and service is impacted by seasonality, as pet parents tend to book farther in advance of expected travel dates in the summer and holidays, and by COVID-19, due to pet parents booking less in advance, and closer to their travel dates given uncertainty surrounding pandemic-related restrictions and other impacts.
Earnout and Derivative Warrant Liabilities
On July 30, 2021, Caravel consummated the Merger with Legacy Rover and Merger Sub. Pursuant to the Merger, Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Rover, the separate corporate existence of Merger Sub ceased, and Legacy Rover continued as the surviving corporation in the Merger and as a wholly owned subsidiary of Caravel, which was later renamed Rover Group, Inc. The Merger was accounted for as a reverse capitalization under GAAP because Legacy Rover has been determined to be the accounting acquirer under Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 805, Business Combinations. Under this method of accounting, Caravel was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the financial statements of the Company will represent a continuation of the financial statements of Legacy Rover with the Merger treated as the equivalent of Legacy Rover issuing stock for the net assets of Caravel, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Caravel are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Operations prior to the Merger are those of Legacy Rover. See Note 3-Reverse Recapitalization.
At the closing of the Merger, Legacy Rover stockholders were entitled to receive up to 19,734,183 shares (the “Rover Earnout Shares”) of our Class A common stock subject to the occurrence of certain stock price-based triggers. The triggers with respect to all but 2,192,687 Rover Earnout Shares were met as of September 29, 2021, and 17,540,964 Rover Earnout Shares were issued on October 6, 2021.
In addition, Caravel’s sponsor subjected 2,461,627 shares (the “Sponsor Earnout Shares” and, together with the Rover Earnout Shares, the “Earnout Shares”) to vesting and potential forfeiture tied to the same stock-price-based triggers as the Rover Earnout Shares. All but 492,325 of the Sponsor Earnout Shares vested on September 29, 2021.
The Earnout Shares were accounted for as liability classified instruments. The Earnout Shares were measured at closing, and subsequently measured at each reporting date until settled, or they met the criteria for equity classification. Changes in the fair value were recorded as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations. The aggregate fair value of the Earnout Shares on the closing date of the Merger was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model and was determined to be $228.1 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a change in fair value of contingent earnout liability of $(46.0) million. Prior to December 31, 2021, the Sponsor Earnout Shares and Rover Earnout Shares were reclassified to equity. See Note 1-Organization and Description of Business and Note 7-Fair Value.
At the closing of the Merger, we assumed 2,574,164 private placement warrants (the “Private Warrants”) and 5,500,000 public warrants (the “Public Warrants” and, together with the Private Warrants, the “Warrants”). Each whole warrant entitled the holder to purchase one share of our Class A Common Stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustments. The Warrants became exercisable at any time from December 11, 2021 and terminate on July 30, 2026.
The Warrants are accounted for as liability classified instruments and we concluded that they do not meet the criteria to be classified within stockholders’ equity (deficit). The Warrants were measured at the Merger closing, and are subsequently measured at each reporting date until settled. Changes in the fair value were recorded as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations. The aggregate fair value of the Warrants on the closing date of the Merger was estimated using a Black-Scholes model and was determined to be $22.0 million.
On December 13, 2021, the Company announced that, pursuant to the terms of the Warrant Agreement, it would redeem all of the outstanding Warrants that remained outstanding at 5:00 p.m. New York City time on January 12, 2022 based on the terms in the Warrant Agreement. On January 12, 2022, any Warrants that remained unexercised became void and no longer exercisable, and the holders of those Warrants were entitled to receive only the redemption price of $0.10 per Warrant. In connection with the redemption, holders of Warrants had the option to exercise the Warrants on a “cashless” basis to receive 0.2558 shares of Class A common stock per Warrant in lieu of receiving the redemption price.
In connection with the redemption, during December 2021 and January 2022, 5,425,349 Public Warrants and 2,574,164 Private Warrants, representing approximately 98.6% of the Public Warrants and 100% of the Private Warrants, respectively, were exercised on a cashless basis in exchange for an aggregate of 2,046,220 shares of Class A common stock that were issued in January 2022. A total of 74,631 Public Warrants remained unexercised after January 12, 2022 and the broker protect period and we redeemed those unexercised Public Warrants for an aggregate redemption price of $7,463.10. As of January 20, 2022, we had no Warrants outstanding. Upon each exercise of such Warrants to Class A Common Stock, the related carrying amount of the Warrant liability was reclassified to stockholders’ equity. In January 2022, a $4.6 million gain in change in fair value was recorded in the statement of operations, and $15.4 million of the carrying amount of the warrant liability was reclassified to stockholder’s equity.
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Earnout Liabilities, Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Derivative Warrant Liabilities, Note 7-Fair Value, Note 14-Stock Warrants and Note 19-Subsequent Even for further information.
Public Company Costs
As a result of the Merger, we became the successor to an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company, which requires us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We have incurred, and expect to continue to incur, additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums, which are substantial, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue principally from fees paid by pet care providers and pet parents for use of our platform, net of discounts, promotions, sales tax paid on behalf of pet parents, and incentives. We also derive revenue from fees paid by pet care providers
for background checks in order to be listed on our platform. We recognize revenue related to the facilitation of the connection between pet care providers and pet parents at the start of a booking.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue (Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Shown Separately)
Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) includes fees paid to payment processors for credit card and other payment transactions, server hosting costs, internal-use software amortization, third-party costs for background checks for pet care providers, claim costs paid out under the Rover Guarantee program and other direct and indirect costs arising as a result of bookings that take place on our platform. We expect our cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) to vary from period-to-period on an absolute dollar basis, but correlate as a percentage of revenue with the exception of internal-use software amortization depending on the timing and pace of recovery of the travel and pet care services market.
Operations and Support
Operations and support expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation and other personnel-related costs associated with our operations and support team, and third-party costs related to outsourced support providers. This team assists with onboarding new pet service providers, quality reviews of pet care provider profiles, fraud monitoring and prevention across our marketplace, and community support provided via phone, email, and chat to our pet parents and pet service providers. This support includes assistance and responding to pet parents’ and pet care providers’ inquiries regarding the general use of our platform or how to make or modify a booking through our platform. We allocate a portion of overhead costs, which includes lease expense, utilities and information technology expense to operations and support expense based on headcount. Notwithstanding the decrease in operations and support expenses as a result of the restructuring discussed below, we expect that operations and support expense will increase on an absolute dollar basis for the foreseeable future to the extent that we continue to see growth on our platform. Although we will continue to make strategic investments in these areas to ensure we are providing the best customer service possible, we expect these expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term due to better leverage in our operations and increased scale of our marketplace.
Marketing
Marketing expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense and other personnel-related costs associated with our marketing team. These expenses also include digital marketing, brand marketing, public relations, broadcast television, marketing partnerships and other promotions. Digital marketing primarily consists of targeted promotional campaigns through electronic channels, such as social media, search engine marketing and optimization, affiliate programs and display advertising which are focused on pet parent acquisition and brand marketing. In 2020, we significantly curtailed our discretionary marketing spending in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in addition to reducing headcount to our marketing team as part of our restructuring plan. Beginning in the second quarter of 2021, we have steadily increased discretionary marketing spending as demand has returned in connection with the vaccine rollout and easing of COVID-19 restrictions. We intend to invest in marketing in the near and medium term to drive new customer acquisition which will likely cause marketing expense to increase as a percentage of revenue relative to recent periods.
Product Development
Product development expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense and other headcount related costs for employees in engineering, design and product management, as well as the maintenance and support costs for technology infrastructure, primarily related to non-revenue generating systems. In 2020, we reduced the headcount in our product development team as part of our restructuring plan. In 2021, we increased the headcount as we invest in our product and engineering efforts. We expect that our product development expense will increase on an absolute dollar basis and will vary from period-to-period as a percentage of revenue for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in product development activities relating to ongoing improvements and maintenance of our technology platform. We expect these expenses to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term due to better leverage in our operations.
The costs incurred in the preliminary stages of website and software development related to the platform are expensed as incurred. Once an application has reached the development stage, internal and external costs, if direct and incremental and deemed by management to be significant, are capitalized as internal-use software and amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. Maintenance and enhancement costs, including those costs in the post-implementation stages, are
typically expensed as incurred, unless such costs relate to substantial upgrades and enhancements to the website or software that result in added functionality, in which case the costs are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives. Amortization expense related to capitalized internal-use software is included in cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately).
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include payroll, employee benefits, stock-based compensation expense and other personnel-related costs for employees in corporate functions, as well as management, accounting, legal, corporate insurance and other expenses used to run the business. In 2020, we reduced the headcount in our general and administrative functions as part of our restructuring plan. In 2021, we increased headcount, professional services, insurance and software to support the growth of our business and our requirements as a newly public company. We expect to incur additional general and administrative expense to support operating as a public company and the overall expected growth in our business. While these expenses may vary from period-to-period as a percentage of revenue, we expect them to decrease as a percentage of revenue over the longer term.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses include depreciation of our property and equipment, leasehold improvements and amortization of our intangible assets. Amortization related to our internal-use software is included in cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately).
Restructuring
In response to the impact of COVID-19, we implemented a number of measures to minimize cash outlays, including implementation of a restructuring plan in April 2020 whereby approximately 50% of employees were terminated or put on standby. In connection with this restructuring, we incurred severance-related and legal costs, and modified the terms of stock options previously awarded to impacted employees.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and short- and long-term investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our borrowing arrangements, including our unsecured letter of credit, and the amortization of debt discounts and deferred financing costs.
Loss from Impairment of DogHero Investment
Consists of our write-down of our investment in DogHero, a pet care marketplace based in Brazil.
Change in Fair Value of Earnout Liabilities
Consists of the change in fair value of our contingent earnout liability. See “-Factors Affecting Our Performance-Earnout and Derivative Warrant Liabilities.”
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Warrant Liabilities
Consists of the change in fair value of our Class A common stock warrant liabilities. See “-Factors Affecting Our Performance-Earnout and Derivative Warrant Liabilities.”
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of realized and unrealized gains and losses on foreign currency transactions and realized gains and losses on sales of our securities.
Results of Operations
Given the remaining uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, financial performance for prior and current periods may not be indicative of future performance.
Comparisons for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
________________
(1)Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
________________
(1)Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense.
Revenue
Revenue increased $61.0 million, or 125%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily due to a 75% increase in the number of bookings on our platform and a 28% increase in ABV. Demand for overnight and daytime pet care is primarily linked to pet parents traveling or working outside of the home, both of which were negatively impacted by the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and the various state and local restrictions that followed during the year ended December 31, 2020. As individuals became more comfortable with traveling again and local restrictions eased, more pet parents began to travel relative to the prior year resulting in an increasing ABV as overnight services normalized as a proportion of service mix during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in ABV was also due to increasing prices set by pet care providers, a higher mix of new bookings as compared to repeat bookings, and the increase to the service fees we charge new pet parents acquired since January 2021. We expect revenue to increase for the year ending December 31, 2022 driven by increased bookings as the pandemic restrictions continue to ease, resulting in further recovery in travel and more workers returning to the office. However, we cannot predict the impact of COVID variants and the longer term impact of the pandemic on consumer behavior. See “-Impact of COVID-19.”
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue (Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Shown Separately). Cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) increased $6.7 million, or 34%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) was the result of a 125% increase in revenue as the business continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase includes a $6.4 million increase in merchant fees, a $1.5 million increase in customer claim costs related to the Rover Guarantee program, and a $0.4 million increase in technology platform costs. In aggregate, these cost increases represent a 100% growth for those items. These increases were driven by changes in demand for our platform as illustrated by the 124% increase in GBV and related platform activity. These increases were partially offset by a net decrease of $2.3 million in the amortization of internal-use software as we accelerated $2.6 million of amortization associated with the discontinuation of the Rover Now service in 2020 versus only $0.3 million from the discontinuation of grooming services in the fourth quarter 2021. We expect cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to increased bookings as the pandemic restrictions continue to ease, resulting in further recovery in travel and more workers returning to the office.
Operations and Support. Operations and support expenses increased $2.6 million, or 21%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was the result of a $0.3 million increase in personnel-related costs for the operations and support team as well as a $1.9 million increase in third-party costs related to outsourced support providers in response to changes in demand for our platform as illustrated by the 75% increase in the number of bookings and related platform activity as the business continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase was also driven by a $0.8 million increase in the allocation of overhead costs due to a 97% increase in headcount, and a $0.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to the vesting of restricted stock units in 2021. These increases were partially offset by a $0.5 million decrease in severance expense related to the reduction in force in the first quarter of 2020. We expect operations and support expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to increased bookings as the pandemic restrictions continue to ease, as well as higher wages for operations and support team and outsourced support providers.
Marketing. Marketing expenses increased $3.6 million, or 22%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in marketing expenses was the result of a $4.9 million increase in advertising spend as we strategically invested in new customer acquisition as demand for pet care services continued to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, and a $0.4 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to the vesting of restricted stock units in 2021. These increases were partially offset by a $0.8 million decrease in personnel costs due to an overall decline in the average number of employees, and a $0.4 million decrease in severance expense related to the reduction in force in the first quarter of 2020. We expect marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 as we increase advertising to attract more pet parents as travel restrictions ease, and increase personnel expense due to increased headcount and wage inflation.
Product Development. Product development expenses increased $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $2.1 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to the vesting of restricted stock units in 2021. This increase was almost entirely offset by a $1.3 million decrease in severance expense related to the reduction in force in the first quarter of 2020 and a $0.5 million decrease in other personnel costs due to an overall decline in the average number of employees. We expect product development expenses
to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to increased personnel expense resulting from increased headcount and wage inflation as we continue hiring to support innovation and maintenance of the marketplace.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased $13.7 million, or 63%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was due to a $5.4 million increase of professional services related to the Merger and our secondary offering of Class A Common Stock in November 2021, a $3.6 million increase in personnel costs due to a 52% increase in headcount as we invest in and support operating as a public company as well as the expected growth in our business, a $3.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to the vesting of restricted stock units in 2021, a $1.5 million increase of insurance expense related to the expansion of our directors and officers insurance policy, and a $0.7 million increase in SEC reporting expenses related to public filings associated with becoming a public company. These increases were partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in severance expense related to the reduction in force in the first quarter of 2020, and a $0.6 million decrease in overhead allocations. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to additional annual public company expenses and increased personnel expense resulting from increased headcount and wage inflation.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization decreased $1.6 million, or 18%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in depreciation and amortization expenses was due to a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense as a result of certain intangible assets related to the DogVacay and Barking Dog Ventures acquisitions reaching the end of their useful lives. We expect depreciation and amortization to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to investments in technology equipment for our employees as we continue to increase headcount.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Income. Interest income decreased $0.4 million, or 90%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in longer term investments as we shifted to a more conservative strategy in 2020 and the first half of 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect interest income to increase in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to a higher average cash and investments balance.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $0.2 million, or 6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily the result of the debt outstanding for a shorter period of time in 2021 as compared to 2020 due to the repayment of all of our outstanding debt during 2021. We expect interest expense to decrease in absolute dollars for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to our current lack of debt.
Loss on Impairment of DogHero Investment. The $2.1 million decrease was due to the write-down of our investment in DogHero, a pet care marketplace based in Brazil, for the year ended December 31, 2020. As this was a one-time write-down during 2020, we will not have this impairment expense in future periods.
Change in Fair Value of Earnout Liabilities. Change in fair value of liabilities related to the Earnout Shares increased $46.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized a loss on the contingent earnout liability of $46.0 million due to the change in the fair value of our Class A Common Stock after consummation of the Merger. As the Earnout Shares were reclassified to equity as of December 31, 2021, we will no longer have to account for the Earnout Shares as a liability or report any change in fair value as a non-cash expense. As a result, we will not have this expense in future periods. See “Factors Affecting Our Performance-Earnout and Derivative Warrant Liabilities.”
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Warrant Liabilities. Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities increased $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We recognized a $2.1 million gain due to the change in the fair value of our Warrants during the respective period the Warrants were outstanding. Due to the cashless exercise of certain of the previously outstanding warrants during December 2021 and January 2022 and the subsequent issuance of Class A Common Stock in January 2022, we will no longer have to account for the Warrants as a liability or report any change in fair value as a non-cash expense after January 2022. As a result, we will recognize a change in fair value related to the derivative warrant liabilities during 2022, but it will not recur in future years. See “Factors Affecting Our Performance-Earnout and Derivative Warrant Liabilities.”
Other Income (Expense), Net. The $0.5 million decrease in other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of income received in 2020 from the sale of certain class
action settlement rights and the sale of longer term investments. Additionally, the dollar weakened year over year resulting in an increase in foreign currency expense in 2021.
Benefit From Income Taxes. Benefit from income taxes increased by $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by the tax law change enacted increasing the general UK tax rate from 19% to 25% effective April 1, 2023. We expect benefit from income taxes to decrease and become an expense for the year ending December 31, 2022 due to the one-time tax benefit in 2021 of the UK tax rate change and our European subsidiaries being limited risk service providers.
Comparisons for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
________________
(1)Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense as follows:
The following table sets forth the components of our consolidated statements of operations for each of the periods presented as a percentage of revenue:
________________
(1)Costs and expenses include stock-based compensation expense.
Revenue
The decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a 43% decrease in the number of bookings on our platform and a 7% decrease in the ABV due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Demand for overnight and daytime pet care is primarily linked to pet parents traveling or working outside of the home, which have declined in 2020 as a result of widespread stay at home orders by local governments. As result of this COVID-19 impact, ABV decreased due to an increase in mix towards daytime services, which have lower GBV than overnight services, as well as a reduction in the average number of nights per stay for overnight services.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue (Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization Shown Separately). The decrease in cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of a 49% decrease in revenue due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The decrease includes a $5.0 million decrease in merchant fees, a $1.4 million decrease in pet care provider background check costs, a $1.3 million decrease in customer claim costs related to the Rover Guarantee, and a $0.9 million decrease in technology platform costs. The decreases were partially offset by a $4.6 million increase in amortization expense for internal-use software, including a $2.6 million acceleration of internal-use software related to the discontinuation of our on-demand service and a $0.4 million increase in Rover Store costs.
Operations and Support. The decrease in operations and support expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to a decrease in personnel-related costs for the operations and support team as well as a decrease in third-party costs related to outsourced support providers in response to changes in demand for our platform as illustrated by the 43% decrease in the number of bookings on our platform due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the reduced need for pet care provider onboarding and general platform user support activities. The decrease consisted of a $4.7 million decrease in personnel costs as a result of the reduction in force, a $2.2 million decrease of third-party customer service provider costs, a $0.7 million decrease in allocation of overhead costs and $0.4 million of other decreases primarily as a result of the discontinuation of our on-demand services. These reductions were partially offset by $0.5 million of severance costs related to the reduction in our workforce in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Marketing. The decrease in marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of a $30.4 million reduction in discretionary customer acquisition expenses, a $1.4 million reduction of professional services costs, and a $2.1 million reduction in personnel costs as a result of the reduction in force. These reductions were made to reduce cash outlays due to a 43% reduction in the number of bookings on our platform as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The decreases were offset by $0.3 million of severance costs related to the reduction in our workforce.
Product Development. Product development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were up slightly from the year ended December 31, 2019 and was the result of a $1.5 million increase in allocated overhead costs and $1.5 million of severance costs associated with the reduction in our workforce. These costs were offset by a $2.1 million decrease in personnel expenses as a result of the reduction in our workforce, a $0.4 million reduction in third party contractor costs, and a $0.2 million reduction in expenses associated with product development.
General and Administrative. The decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of $2.0 million of personnel cost reductions as a result of the reduction in force, a $1.4 million decrease in professional services, a $0.2 million reduction in facilities and other overhead costs, a $0.2 million decrease in state and local taxes, and a $0.1 million decrease in bank fees. These decreases were partially offset by $0.6 million of severance costs due to the reduction in our workforce and a $0.3 million increase in insurance costs due to rate increases.
Depreciation and Amortization. The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was due to a $3.0 million increase in the depreciation expense for property, plant, and equipment as a result of office expansion to support our previously anticipated headcount growth. This increase was
partially offset by a $2.5 million decrease of intangible asset amortization expense as a result of certain intangible assets related to the DogVacay acquisition reaching the end of their useful lives.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest Income. The $2.3 million decrease in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily related to a decline in interest rates year over year as well as a decrease in short-term investments.
Interest Expense. The $2.9 million increase in interest expense for year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of the addition of a $11.4 million principal amount of revolving borrowings and $15.0 million of term borrowings under the credit facility, and $30.0 million under the subordinated credit facility in March 2020. In addition, in April 2020, we were approved for and received a $8.1 million PPP Loan.
Loss on Impairment of DogHero Investment. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of a $2.1 million write-down of our investment in DogHero, a pet care marketplace based in Brazil.
Other Income (Expense), Net. The $1.3 million decrease in other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was the result of $0.4 million of foreign currency exchange losses recorded in 2019 primarily related to the transfer of intangible assets from our European entities to our U.S. entity, $0.5 million of one-time expenses recognized in 2019 related to early exits from excess office spaces, and a $0.2 million increase in 2020 in other income primarily related to a settlement received from a class action lawsuit.
Benefit From Income Taxes. Benefit from income taxes decreased by $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 driven by the conversion of the European subsidiaries to limited risk service providers.
Non-GAAP Measures
We collect and analyze operating and financial data to evaluate the health of our business and assess our performance. In addition to revenue, net income (loss), loss from operations, and other results under GAAP, we use non-GAAP financial measures, including Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA margin, Non-GAAP Operations and Support Expense, Non-GAAP Marketing Expense, Non-GAAP Product Development Expense and Non-GAAP General and Administrative Expense (collectively, the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”), to evaluate the health of our business, measure our operating performance, identify trends, prepare financial forecasts and make strategic decisions. We provide a reconciliation below of the Non-GAAP Financial Measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
We believe that these Non-GAAP Financial Measures, when taken together with their corresponding comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure, provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating performance by excluding certain gains, losses and charges of a non-cash nature or that occur relatively infrequently and/or that may not be indicative of our recurring core business, results of operations, or outlook. By presenting these Non-GAAP Financial Measures, we provide a basis for comparison of our business operations between periods by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance, and we believe that investors’ understanding of our performance is enhanced by our presenting these Non-GAAP Financial Measures, as they provide a reasonable basis for comparing our ongoing results of operations and those of other companies.
We use the Non-GAAP Financial Measures for financial and operational decision-making and as a means to evaluate period-to-period comparisons. We consider the Non-GAAP Financial Measures to be important measures because they help illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis.
We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these Non-GAAP Financial Measures in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting, and analyzing future periods. These Non-GAAP Financial Measures also facilitate management’s internal comparisons to our historical performance. We believe these Non-GAAP Financial Measures are useful to investors both because (1) they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making and in assessing the health of our business and our operating performance and (2) they are used by our institutional investors and the analyst community to help them analyze the health of our business.
Accordingly, we believe that these Non-GAAP Financial Measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management team and board of directors.
The Non-GAAP Financial Measures have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. Examples of these limitations include:
•these measures do not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•these measures do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain restructuring and merger and acquisition-related charges, part of which may be settled in cash;
•these measures exclude stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, a significant recurring expense in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•these measures exclude significant expenses and income that are required by GAAP to be recorded in our financial statements;
•these measures are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgments by management about which expense and income are excluded or included in determining these Non-GAAP Financial Measures; and
•our calculation of these Non-GAAP Financial Measures may differ from similarly titled non-GAAP measures, if any, reported by our peer companies, or our peer companies may use other measures to calculate their financial performance, and therefore our use of the Non-GAAP Financial Measures may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
In order to compensate for these limitations, management presents the Non-GAAP Financial Measures in connection with GAAP results. In addition, such financial information is unaudited and does not conform to SEC Regulation S-X and as a result such information may be presented differently in our future filings with the SEC. For example, due to Warrant and Earnout Shares liabilities resulting from the Merger, we now exclude change in fair value, net from net loss in our Adjusted EBITDA calculation, which had not been done in periods prior to the quarter ended September 30, 2021 and will have less impact on the calculations for future periods due to their reclassification to equity as of December 31, 2021 for the Earnout Shares and in January 2022 for the Warrants. Moreover, the year ended December 31, 2020 calculations exclude an impairment loss not reflected in other years and the year ended December 31, 2021 calculations exclude expenses related to a secondary offering not reflected in other years.
The Non-GAAP Financial Measures are supplemental measures of our performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. These Non-GAAP Financial Measures should not be considered as substitutes for GAAP financial measures such as net income (loss), operating expenses or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP. Also, in the future we may incur expenses or charges such as those being adjusted in the calculation of these Non-GAAP Financial Measures. Our presentation of these Non-GAAP Financial Measures should not be construed as an inference that future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss excluding depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation expense, interest expense, interest income, change in fair value, net, other income (expense), net, income tax expense or benefit, and non-routine items such as restructuring, investment impairment, certain merger and acquisition-related costs and transaction expenses. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA for a period by revenue for the same period.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA from net loss, along with Adjusted EBITDA margin, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
________________
(1)Depreciation and amortization include amortization expense related to capitalized internal use software, which is recognized as cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) in the consolidated statements of operations.
(2)Stock-based compensation expense includes equity granted to employees as well as for professional services to non-employees.
(3)Change in fair value, net includes the mark-to-market adjustments related to the Earnout Shares and Warrant liabilities.
(4)Restructuring expense include costs for severance-related and legal costs incurred during the implementation of our restructuring plan.
(5)Merger and acquisition-related costs include accounting, legal, consulting and travel related expenses incurred in connection with the merger and business combinations.
(6)Transaction-related expenses include costs related to our secondary offering in the fourth quarter of 2021.
(7)Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA was $12.4 million, an improvement of $37.4 million compared to ($25.0) million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This improvement was primarily due to a 75% increase in total bookings and an increase in ABV, as our marketplace scaled and pet parents traveled more. This improvement of marketplace performance led to a $61.0 million improvement in revenue, which became the main driver of our improvement in Adjusted EBITDA. Over the long term, we expect Adjusted EBITDA to be positive and increase over time as a result of continued growth in bookings on our platform and operational efficiency gains. However, in the near term, there remains some uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For additional information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, see “-Impact of COVID-19.”
In 2020, Adjusted EBITDA was ($25.0) million, an improvement of $10.2 million compared to ($35.2) million in 2019, primarily due to the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on transactions on our marketplace and the subsequent cost-cutting actions to reduce our cash burn by turning off substantially all paid acquisition marketing activities and implementing a reduction in force of approximately 40% of our employees and moving approximately 10% of our employees to standby or furlough.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA from net loss, along with Adjusted EBITDA margin, for each of the last eight fiscal quarters ended December 31, 2021:
________________
(1)Depreciation and amortization include amortization expense related to capitalized internal use software, which is recognized as cost of revenue (exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown separately) in the consolidated statements of operations.
(2)Stock-based compensation expense includes equity granted to employees as well as for professional services to non-employees.
(3)Change in fair value, net includes the mark-to-market adjustments related to the Earnout Shares and Warrant liabilities.
(4)Restructuring expense include costs for severance-related and legal costs incurred during the implementation of our restructuring plan.
(5)Merger and acquisition-related costs include accounting, legal, consulting and travel related expenses incurred in connection with the merger and business combinations.
(6)Transaction-related expenses include costs related to our secondary offering in the fourth quarter of 2021.
(7)Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue.
In the three months ended December 31, 2021, Adjusted EBITDA was $7.6 million, an improvement of $10.7 million compared to ($3.1) million in the three months ended December 31, 2020. This improvement was primarily due to a 117% increase in total bookings and an increase in ABV, as our marketplace scaled and pet parents traveled more. This improvement of marketplace performance led to a $24.8 million improvement in revenue, which became the main driver of our improvement in Adjusted EBITDA. Over the long term, we expect Adjusted EBITDA to be positive and increase over time as a result of continued growth in bookings on our platform and operational efficiency gains. However, in the near term, there remains some uncertainty due to the COVID-19 pandemic. For additional information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, see “-Impact of COVID-19.”
Non-GAAP Operating Expenses
We calculate Non-GAAP Operations and Support Expense, Non-GAAP Marketing Expense, Non-GAAP Product Development Expense and Non-GAAP General and Administrative Expense by excluding the non-cash expenses arising from the grant of stock-based awards. These non-GAAP operating expenses are also presented as a percentage of revenue, which is calculated by dividing the specific non-GAAP operating expense for a period by revenue for the same period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents. As of December 31, 2021, we had $278.9 million of cash and cash equivalents and $4.3 million in long-term investments. This represents an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $198.1 million from December 31, 2020 due to the $235.6 million of net proceeds from the Merger after the repayment of outstanding debt. See Note 3-Reverse Recapitalization. Additionally, these amounts do not include funds of $26.0 million held by our payment processor that we record separately on our balance sheet in accounts receivable. Cash and cash equivalents balances consist of operating cash on deposit with financial institutions and money market fund investments. To increase the returns on our cash and cash equivalents, we have opened investment accounts with financial institutions to invest in investments such as fixed income securities, which include U.S. government agency securities, municipal securities, treasury bills and certificates of deposit, and investment grade corporate securities.
As a result of the terminations of our credit facilities and Paycheck Protection Program Promissory Note and Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021 as discussed in Note 10-Debt, we no longer have any outstanding debt or existing credit agreements.
Since inception, we have incurred operating losses and, until 2021, negative operating cash flows, and have financed our operations through the sale of equity securities, the incurrence of debt, and the cash proceeds from the Merger. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred operating losses of $17.2 million, but generated positive operating cash flows of $14.3 million. As we continue to invest in growing our business and service offerings, we expect that operating losses could continue for the foreseeable future, and negative operating cash flows could return. As a result, we may require additional capital resources.
Based upon our current operating plans, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, combined with any cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to fund our operations through December 31, 2022 and our foreseeable cash needs for the longer term. However, these forecasts involve substantial risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have
based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to our ability to grow our revenues and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and other factors described in “Risk Factors.”
We will continually evaluate opportunities to enhance our long-term liquidity for any long-term funding not provided by operating cash flows and cash and cash equivalents, which could include selling additional equity or debt securities, or obtaining credit facilities, for strategic reasons or to further strengthen our financial position. In addition, we will, from time to time, consider the acquisition of, or investment in, complementary businesses, products, services, and technologies, which might affect our liquidity requirements or cause us to secure financing, or issue additional equity or debt securities. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would be dilutive to our stockholders. If additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Capital Resources
We continue to invest in the development and expansion of our operations. Ongoing investments include, but are not limited to, technology and platform enhancements, research of new service offerings and adjacent opportunities, as well as investments in marketing and advertising and personnel to support our growth and newly public company status.
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021 primarily relate to lease obligations. See Note 11-Commitments and Contingencies for a discussion of our lease obligations and other commitments. We anticipate long-term cash uses may also include strategic acquisitions or investments.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated.
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $14.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The most significant component of our cash provided by operations was a net loss of $64.0 million, which included non-cash expense related to the change in fair value of earnout and warrant liabilities of $43.9 million, depreciation and amortization totaling $14.7 million, stock-based compensation of $11.1 million and $2.1 million of non-cash operating lease costs. In addition, a cash inflow of $6.1 million was attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities as a result of an increase of $27.4 million in deferred revenue, pet parent deposits, and pet service provider liabilities due to increased payments received from customers in advance of revenue recognition, offset by a $23.0 million increase in accounts receivable due to an increase in funds held with a new payment processor.
Net cash used in operating activities was $57.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The most significant component of our cash used was a net loss of $57.5 million. This included non-cash expense related to stock-based compensation of $5.5 million, an impairment of $2.1 million related to our investment in Dog Hero and depreciation and amortization totaling to $18.7 million. In addition, a cash outflow totaling $26.5 million was attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily as a result of a decrease of $20.6 million in deferred revenue, pet parent deposits, and pet service provider liabilities
due to decreased bookings along with revenue recognized from amounts billed and collected in prior periods, and a decrease of $4.4 million in accounts payable as a result of timing of payments to vendors.
Net cash used in operating activities was $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The most significant component of our cash used was a net loss of $51.7 million. This included non-cash expense related to stock-based compensation of $4.1 million and depreciation and amortization totaling to $13.6 million. This was partially offset by a cash inflow totaling $9.6 million attributable to changes in operating assets and liabilities, primarily as a result of an increase of $5.4 million of deferred rent included in other noncurrent liabilities, and a $6.0 million increase in deferred revenue, pet parent deposits and pet service provider liabilities due to increased payments received from customers in advance of revenue recognition.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $11.5 million, which was primarily driven by our investment in internal-use software of $6.3 million associated with new product development and technology enhancements, purchase of available-for-sale securities of $4.3 million, and the purchase of property and equipment of $0.9 million for computers and peripheral equipment to support the 51% increase in total headcount.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $31.4 million, which was primarily due to net short-term investment cash inflows of $36.2 million, offset by investment in internal-use software of $6.8 million and purchases of property and equipment of $0.9 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $14.7 million, which was primarily due to net short-term investment cash inflows of $48.0 million, offset by purchases of property and equipment of $16.4 million, investment in internal-use software of $11.9 million, and an equity investment in DogHero Ltd. of $5.0 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $195.2 million, which primarily consisted of $235.5 million of net proceeds related to the Merger, partially offset by $38.1 million of repayment of borrowings on our credit facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $38.6 million, which was primarily due to net proceeds from borrowings under our credit facilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $0.8 million, which consisted of proceeds from exercise of common stock options.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the accounting policies below are most critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which we adopted as of January 1, 2019 on a modified retrospective basis. We generate substantially all of our revenue from facilitating the connection between pet care providers and pet parents. We consider both pet parents and pet care providers to be our customers. We charge a fixed percentage service fee for each arrangement of pet-related services between the pet parent and the pet service provider on our platform, or a booking. The fixed percentage service fees are established at the time a pet parent or pet provider joined the platform and do not vary based on the volume of transactions. A booking defines the explicit fee from which we earn our fixed service fee. Our single performance obligation is identified as the facilitation of the connection between pet care provider and pet parent through our platform, which occurs upon the completion of a booking. Revenue is recognized at a point in time when the performance obligation is satisfied upon completion of a booking and the related underlying pet-related services have begun.
We evaluate the presentation of revenue on a gross or net basis based on whether or not we are the principal in the transaction (gross) or whether we arrange for other parties to provide the service to the pet parent and are an agent (net) in the transaction. We determined that we do not control the right to use the pet-related services provided by the pet service provider to the pet parent. Accordingly, we concluded that we are acting in an agent capacity and revenue is presented net reflecting the service fees received from our customers to facilitate a booking.
We offer discounts to pet parents to encourage use of the Company’s platform. Discounts are primarily in the form of coupon codes for prospective pet parents and are accounted for as reductions to revenue.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have granted stock-based awards consisting primarily of stock options and restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to employees, directors, and consultants of the Company. We estimate the fair value of stock options granted to employees, non-employees and directors using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of stock options that is expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model utilizes inputs which are highly subjective assumptions and generally require significant judgment. These assumptions include:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. See “-Common Stock Valuations” below.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the option.
•Expected Volatility. Because prior to the closing of the Merger we had been privately held and did not have any trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility for comparable publicly traded peer companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. As our Class A Common Stock only recently became publicly traded, the expected volatility for our stock options will be determined by using an average of historical volatilities of selected industry peers deemed to be comparable to our business corresponding to the expected term of the awards in the future until we have a sufficient period of our own volatility
•Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term), as we do not have sufficient historical data to use any other method to estimate expected term.
•Expected Dividend Yield. We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our Class A Common Stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 15-Stock-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Common Stock Valuations
Historically, for all periods prior to the Merger, since there had been no public market for Legacy Rover’s common stock, the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying Legacy Rover’s share-based awards was estimated on each grant date by the Legacy Rover Board. To determine the fair value of Legacy Rover’s common stock underlying option grants, the Legacy Rover Board considered, among other things, input from management, valuations of Legacy Rover common stock prepared by unrelated third-party valuation firms in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, the Legacy Rover Board’s assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant, and factors that may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These factors include, but are not limited to:
•our results of operations and financial position, including the present value of expected future cash flows and the value of tangible and intangible assets;
•risks and opportunities relevant to our business;
•the status of platform development activities;
•our business conditions and projections;
•the market value of companies engaged in a substantially similar business;
•the lack of marketability of our common stock as a private company;
•the prices at which we sold shares of our convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms-length transactions;
•the rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for our securityholders, such as an initial public offering or a sale of the company, given prevailing market conditions;
•the hiring of key personnel and the experience of management; and
•trends and developments in our industry, including the impact of COVID-19.
For valuations performed prior to October 31, 2020, Legacy Rover used the option pricing method (“OPM”) back-solve method. In an OPM framework, the back-solve method for inferring the equity value implied by a recent financing transaction involves making assumptions for the expected time to liquidity, volatility and risk-free rate and then solving for the value of equity such that value for the most recent financing equals the amount paid. This method was selected due to Legacy Rover’s stage and uncertainty regarding the timing and probability of possible future exit scenarios.
For valuations performed on and subsequent to October 31, 2020, Legacy Rover used a hybrid method of the OPM and the Probability-Weighted Expected Return Method (“PWERM”). PWERM considers various potential liquidity outcomes. This approach included the use of an initial public offering scenario, a strategic merger or sale scenario, and a scenario assuming continued operation as a private entity. Under the hybrid OPM and PWERM method, the per share value calculated under the OPM and PWERM are weighted based on expected exit outcomes and the quality of the information specific to each allocation methodology to arrive at a final estimated fair value per share of the common stock before a discount for lack of marketability is applied.
Leases
For leases with a term greater than 12 months, the Company records the related right-of-use (“ROU”) asset and lease liability at the present value of lease payments over the term. The ROU asset equals the carrying amount of the related lease liability, adjusted for any lease payments made prior to lease commencement and lease incentives provided by the lessor.
The Company’s leases do not provide a readily determinable implicit rate. Therefore, the Company estimates its incremental borrowing rate to discount the lease payments based on information available at lease commencement. The Company
determines its incremental borrowing rate based on the rate of interest that the Company would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate fair value of the consideration transferred in a business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, but is subject to an annual impairment test. Management has determined that the Company has a single reporting unit and performs its annual goodwill impairment test as of October 31, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the goodwill may be impaired.
The Company has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines it is not more-likely-than-not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. However, if the Company concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform a quantitative assessment for impairment. The Company completed a qualitative analysis as of October 31, 2021 and no impairment of goodwill was recognized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted, recently accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
See Item 9A. Controls and Procedures to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more information concerning internal controls over financial reporting.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act permits companies with emerging growth company status to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards, delaying the adoption of these accounting standards until they would apply to private companies. We expect to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting standards as of public company effective dates.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act.