Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are an innovative life sciences technology company that enables the safe and efficient manufacture of pharmaceutical products through our rapid automated microbial quality control, or MQC, detection platform. We develop, manufacture, market and sell the Growth Direct system and related proprietary consumables, and value-added services to enable rapid MQC testing in the manufacture of biologics, cell and gene therapies, vaccines, sterile injectables, and other healthcare products. Our system delivers the power of industrial automation to bioprocessing and pharmaceutical manufacturing firms by modernizing and digitizing their MQC operations. Our Growth Direct platform, developed with over 15 years of active feedback from our customers, was purpose-built to meet the growing demands posed by the increasing scale, complexity, and regulatory scrutiny confronting global pharmaceutical manufacturing. Our Growth Direct platform comprises the Growth Direct system, optional laboratory information management system, or LIMS, connection software (which the majority of our customers purchase), proprietary consumables, and comprehensive field service, validation services and post-warranty service contracts. Once embedded and validated in our customers’ facilities, our Growth Direct platform provides for recurring revenues through ongoing sales of consumables and service contracts.
Our technology fully automates and digitizes the process of pharmaceutical MQC and is designed to enable our customers to perform this critical testing process more efficiently, accurately, and securely. Our Growth Direct platform accelerates time to results by several days, a 50% improvement over the traditional method, and reduces MQC testing to a simple two-step workflow, eliminating up to 85% of the manual steps of traditional MQC, generating significant time, operational, and cost savings for our customers. We seek to establish the Growth Direct as the trusted global standard in automated MQC by delivering the speed, accuracy, security, and data integrity compliance that our customers depend on to ensure patient safety and consistent drug supply.
Since inception, we have devoted a majority of our resources to designing, developing, and building our proprietary Growth Direct platform and associated products, launching our Growth Direct platform commercially, expanding our sales and marketing infrastructure to grow our sales, building a global customer support team to deliver our value-added services, investing in robust manufacturing and supply chain operations to serve our customers globally, and providing general and administrative support for these operations. Prior to our IPO, we funded our operations primarily with proceeds from sales of preferred stock, borrowings under loan agreements and product and service sales as well as our cost-reimbursement contract with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Biomedical Advanced Research & Development Authority (“BARDA”). All funding under this contract was fully earned by the fourth quarter of 2021 and, as such, we do not currently anticipate recognizing any non-commercial revenue in the year ending December 31, 2022.
On July 19, 2021, we closed an initial public offering of our Class A common stock (the “IPO”), which resulted in the sale of 7,920,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a public offering price of $20.00 per share, before underwriting discounts. The IPO resulted in gross proceeds of $158.4 million and net proceeds of approximately $143.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us. Additionally, on August 4, 2021, the underwriters exercised their overallotment option in part and purchased 1,086,604 shares of Class A common stock at the initial public offering price of $20.00 per share less discounts and commissions. The overallotment option exercise resulted in net proceeds of approximately $20.2 million. Immediately prior to the completion of the IPO, all of the outstanding shares of our Series A1, Series B1, Series C1 and Series D1 preferred stock converted into 24,200,920 shares of Class A common stock and all of the outstanding shares of our Series C2 and Series
D2 converted into 6,903,379 shares of Class B common stock. As of December 31, 2021, no shares of our preferred stock remained outstanding.
Since our inception, we have incurred net losses in each year. We generated revenue of $23.2 million and $16.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and incurred net losses of $73.5 million and $37.1 million for those same years. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $315.1 million. We expect to continue to incur net losses in connection with our ongoing activities, including:
● growing sales of our products in both the United States and international markets by further expanding our sales and marketing capabilities;
● scaling our manufacturing and supply chain processes and infrastructure to meet growing demand for our products;
● investing in research and development to develop new products and further enhance our existing products;
● protecting and building on our intellectual property portfolio; and
● attracting, hiring and retaining qualified personnel.
Until such time as we can generate revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings. If we are unable to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue our expansion plans including the further development and commercialization efforts of one or more of our products, or may be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
We believe that the net proceeds from the IPO, together with our cash and cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least twelve months following the date these consolidated financial statements were issued. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
COVID-19 update
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and various resulting government directives, we took proactive measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, and partners, while maintaining our ability to supply and service our customers. We continue to monitor the implications of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic on our business, as well as our customers’ and suppliers’ businesses. Some of the measures we have taken follow:
● During this pandemic, we moved quickly to implement several business continuity initiatives aimed at maintaining uninterrupted manufacturing and supply capabilities while keeping our workforce safe, including instituting a COVID-19 task force, forming multiple manufacturing teams with staggered shifts, increasing inventory safety stock levels, and establishing appropriate protective equipment and distancing policies for essential on-site personnel.
● We have been designated an essential business that can continue operations during the COVID-19 pandemic. In early March 2020, we promptly instituted protocols to have many personnel work remotely. At the same time, because of our continued designation as an essential business, many employees continue to work on-site at our facility in Lowell, MA to undertake manufacturing activities that support essential operations to provide mission-critical MQC testing products to global pharmaceutical customers manufacturing life-saving drugs. We have also restricted business travel and have limited access to our facilities mostly to personnel and third parties who must perform critical activities that must be completed on-site. We continue to limit the number of such personnel that can be present at our facilities at any one
time and request that most of our personnel work remotely. To date, these arrangements have not materially affected our ability to maintain our business operations, including the operation of financial reporting systems, internal control over financial reporting and disclosure controls and procedures.
● Our production, shipping and customer service functions remain operational to maintain a continuous supply of products to our customers. We are communicating regularly with our suppliers and logistics partners so that our supply chain remains intact and we have not experienced any material supply issues to date. Our customer service teams around the world are operating remotely and remain available to assist our customers and partners as needed.
● As a result of travel restrictions and shelter-in-place orders, we experienced an impact on our ability to sell, ship, install and validate systems, as well as train customers in certain geographies, which negatively impacted our product and service revenues during 2021 and 2020. To counter some of the effects of these restrictions, we implemented several measures including remote and customer-assisted support activities to support the continued growth of our business. However, the rapid onset of the Omicron variant limited the effectiveness of these measures during the second half of the fourth quarter of 2021, which contributed to our weaker than expected system placements in that period.
● We continue to actively review and manage costs to navigate the current environment.
While the disruption due to COVID-19, and its variants, is currently expected to be temporary, there is considerable uncertainty around its duration. We expect these disruptions to continue to impact our operating results. However, the related financial impact and duration of these disruptions cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Factors affecting our performance
We believe that our financial performance has been, and in the foreseeable future will continue to be, primarily driven by multiple factors as described below, each of which presents growth opportunities for our business. These factors also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address these challenges is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those described under the heading “Risk Factors.”
New customer adoption of the Growth Direct platform
Our financial performance has largely been driven by, and a key factor to our future success will be, our ability to increase the global adoption of our Growth Direct platform in our key markets. We plan to drive global customer adoption through both direct and indirect sales and marketing organizations in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia.
We are investing substantially in these organizations and expect to continue to do so in the future. As part of this effort, we increased our direct sales and marketing team by 14 employees, representing a 78% increase in headcount in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year-end.
Expansion within our existing customer base
There is an opportunity to increase broader adoption and utilization of our Growth Direct platform throughout our existing customers’ organizations by existing customers purchasing more systems. These additional systems will allow our existing customers to convert more of their test volume at existing locations, to support multiple locations, to meet redundancy requirements, or to increase capacity. As of December 31, 2021, a majority of our customers have purchased Growth Direct systems for multiple sites, and approximately 60% of our customers have purchased multiple Growth Direct systems. Increased utilization amongst existing customers can also occur as customers advance through the Growth Direct platform adoption cycle from early validation of initial applications to validation and conversion of multiple applications on the Growth Direct platform.
Innovating and launching new products on the Growth Direct platform
We believe the depth, scalability and robust capabilities of our Growth Direct platform allow us to address key opportunities and challenges facing MQC testing in the pharmaceutical industry. As an innovative leader in automated MQC testing, we intend to invest in further enhancements in our existing Growth Direct platform as well as end-to-end workflow solutions in our core market. We plan to further invest in research and development to support the expansion of our Growth Direct platform through development and launch of new applications to capture greater share of customer testing volume, new product formats to broaden our ability to serve different market segments and launch of new products and technologies to address adjacent segments of the overall MQC workflow. We plan to continue to hire employees with the necessary scientific and technical backgrounds to enhance our existing products and help us introduce new products to market. We expect to incur additional research and development expenses as a result. By expanding and continuously enhancing the Growth Direct platform, we believe we can drive incremental revenue from existing clients as well as broaden the appeal of our solutions to potential new customers.
Expanding Growth Direct into adjacent end markets
We have identified several market expansion opportunities including deploying our existing Growth Direct platform into the personal care products market. We continuously seek to identify other market opportunities where our Growth Direct platform could enhance MQC testing. We could expand into these markets through our existing technologies, through adapting our existing technologies, or through developing new products to specifically address the unmet needs of these adjacent markets. We may drive our expansion into these markets by building commercial infrastructure to specifically target customers in those markets, or by partnering with other participants in those markets.
Revenue mix
Our revenue is derived from sales of our Growth Direct systems, our LIMS connection software, proprietary consumables, services and our cost-reimbursement contract with BARDA. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Growth Direct system revenue was the single largest component of our revenue. Because Growth Direct system revenue involves a capital selling process and tends to be somewhat concentrated within a small (but varied) group of customers each year, it is subject to variability from quarter to quarter. While we expect Growth Direct systems revenue to continue to be the largest contributor to our revenue over the near- to mid-term, as our base of validated Growth Direct systems continues to grow, we expect our recurring revenue (consumables and service contracts) to grow at a faster rate than our non-recurring revenues (Growth Direct systems, validation and other services), which we expect to drive variability and longer-term trends in our revenue mix.
Our non-commercial revenue is generated from long-term contracts with governmental agencies and third parties that are typically fixed in terms of scope and value. As a result, the amount of non-commercial revenue recognized in each period is subject to variability depending on factors such as the number of active contracts as well as the work performed and value remaining under each contract. All funding under our contract with BARDA was fully earned by the fourth quarter of 2021 and, as such, we do not currently anticipate recognizing any non-commercial revenue in the year ending December 31, 2022.
Key business metrics
We regularly review the following key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions. We believe that the following
metrics are representative of our current business; however, we anticipate these may change or be substituted for additional or different metrics as our business grows and evolves.
Growth Direct system placements
We consider a Growth Direct system to be “placed” upon transfer of control of the system to the customer, at which point the revenue for that system is recognized. We regularly review the number of Growth Direct systems placed and cumulative Growth Direct system placements in each period as a leading indicator of our business performance. Our revenue has historically been driven by, and in the future will continue to be impacted by, the rate of Growth Direct system placements as a reflection of our success selling and delivering our products. We expect our Growth Direct system placements to continue to grow over time as we increase penetration in our existing markets and expand into new markets.
The number of Growth Direct system placements and rate of growth varies from period-to-period due to factors including, but not limited to, Growth Direct system order volume and timing, and access to customer sites (including COVID-19 related restrictions). As a result, we expect to experience continued variability in our period-to-period number of Growth Direct system placements due to the aforementioned factors.
Validated systems
We regularly review the number of Growth Direct systems validated and cumulative Growth Direct systems validated in each period as indicators of our business performance. Management focuses on validated Growth Direct systems as a leading indicator of likely future recurring revenue as well as a reflection of our success supporting our customers’ validating placed systems. We expect our validated Growth Direct systems to continue to grow over time as we increase our base of cumulative systems placed and then validate those systems. After a Growth Direct system is placed with a customer and installed, we work with the customer to validate the system, which typically takes anywhere from three to nine months. Once a validation has been completed, we generally expect our customers to transition from their legacy manual method to our automated method and begin regular utilization of consumables over a period of up to three months.
The number of validated Growth Direct systems and rate of growth varies from period-to-period due to factors including, but not limited to, Growth Direct system order volume and timing, whether customers have previously validated Growth Direct systems within their site or network, access to customer sites (including as a result of COVID-19 related restrictions and delays in 2021 and 2020), customer site readiness and the time to install and validate each individual system. As a result, we expect to experience continued fluctuations in our period-to-period number of Growth Direct systems validated due to the aforementioned factors.
Product and service revenue
We regularly assess trends relating to our combined product and service revenue as an indicator of our business performance. Product and service revenue represents all of our commercial revenue for the business. It excludes non-
commercial revenue, which typically supports other business functions such as research and development and is by its nature subject to significant variability.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, restrictions on travel and access to customer sites related to COVID-19, and its variants, negatively impacted our ability to ship, install and validate systems, as well as train customers in certain geographies. This negatively impacted our product and service revenue in the year. While we expect these disruptions to continue to impact our operating results, the related financial impact and duration of these disruptions cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Recurring revenue
We regularly assess trends relating to recurring revenue, which is the revenue from consumables and service contracts, based on our product offerings, our customer base and our understanding of how our customers use our products. Recurring revenue was 33.7% and 24.3% of our total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our recurring revenue as a percentage of the total product and service revenue will generally vary based upon the cumulative number of validated Growth Direct systems in the period, as well as other variables such as the volume of tests being conducted, and the test application(s) being used on those Growth Direct systems. As our base of validated systems continues to grow, we expect our recurring revenue streams to grow at a faster rate than our non-recurring revenue streams and that this will ultimately result in our recurring revenue constituting the majority of our revenue over the longer term.
Components of results of operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from sales of our Growth Direct system (including our LIMS connection software), consumables, validation services, service contracts and field service as well as our contractual arrangement with BARDA. We primarily sell our products and services through direct sales representatives. The arrangements are noncancelable and nonrefundable after ownership passes to the customer.
Product revenue
We derive product revenue primarily from the sale of our Growth Direct systems and related consumables as well as our LIMS connection software, which the majority of our customers purchase. As of December 31, 2021, we had placed 116 Growth Direct systems to over thirty customers globally, including over half of the top twenty pharmaceutical companies as measured by revenue and the manufacturers of 25% of globally approved cell and gene therapies.
Growth Direct systems
Growth Direct system revenue is a non-recurring product revenue stream that we recognize as revenue upon transfer of control of the system to the customer. The Growth Direct system is fully functional for use by the customer upon delivery and, as such, transfer of control occurs at shipment or delivery depending on contractual terms. We expect our Growth Direct system revenue to continue to grow over time as we increase system placements in our existing customers and markets and expand into new customers and markets.
Consumables
Our consumable revenue is a recurring product revenue stream composed of two proprietary consumables to capture test samples for analysis on the Growth Direct system, an Environmental Monitoring or EM, consumable, and a Water/Bioburden consumable, or W/BB consumable. Both proprietary consumables support the growth-based compendial method for MQC testing mandated by global regulators and provide results that are comparable to traditional consumables. Our consumables are designed with features that enable automation on the Growth Direct system, with bar coding for tracking and data integrity, and physical characteristics for robotic handling, to support vision detection, and to prevent counterfeiting.
We expect consumable revenue to increase in future periods as our base of cumulative validated Growth Direct systems grows and those systems utilize our consumables on a recurring, ongoing basis.
LIMS Connection Software
Our LIMS connection software is a non-recurring product revenue stream. Although optional, the majority of our customers elect to purchase this software, which allows Growth Direct systems to export result reports and securely link to a customer’s two-way LIMS connection software to completely eliminate manual data entry and drive productivity.
Service revenue
We derive service revenue from validation services, field service including installations, and service contracts sold to our customers. Revenue from validation services and field service are non-recurring service revenue streams, while revenue from service contracts is a recurring service revenue stream.
We offer our customers validation services (including related documentation) that enable them to replace their existing manual testing method and utilize their Growth Direct systems in compliance with relevant MQC regulations. Validation services are recognized as revenue over time as these services are provided to the customer.
We offer our customers service contracts that can be purchased after the expiration of the one-year assurance warranty that all of our customers receive with the purchase of a Growth Direct system. Under these contracts, they are entitled to receive phone support, emergency on-site maintenance support and two preventative maintenance visits per year. These service contracts generally have fixed fees and a term of one year. We recognize revenue from the sale of service contracts over time as these services are provided over the respective contract term.
We also offer our customers field service which primarily consists of services provided by our field service engineers to install Growth Direct systems at customer sites. We recognize revenue from field service over time as these services are provided to the customer.
We expect service revenue to increase in future periods as the number of placed and validated Growth Direct systems grows and we are able to generate increasing non-recurring revenue from validation services and field service for newly placed systems and increasing recurring revenue from service contracts for validated systems.
Non-commercial revenue
We generate non-commercial revenue from long-term contracts with governmental agencies and third parties. To date, our non-commercial revenue has been derived from contracts with BARDA. Our current contract with BARDA is a cost-reimbursable, cost-sharing arrangement, whereby BARDA reimburses us for a percentage of the total cost incurred which includes allowable indirect costs. We recognize revenue from non-commercial revenue over time using an input method based on cost incurred to date in relation to total estimated cost.
Since the underlying contracts are typically fixed in terms of scope and value, the amount of non-commercial revenue recognized in each period is subject to variability depending on factors such as the number of active contracts as well as the work performed and value remaining under each contract.
In April 2021, we received additional funding from BARDA under our then-active contract with them. All funding under this contract was fully earned by the fourth quarter of 2021 and, as such, we do not currently anticipate recognizing any non-commercial revenue in the year ending December 31, 2022.
Costs and operating expenses
Costs of revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of costs for raw material parts and associated freight, shipping and handling costs, salaries and other personnel costs including stock-based compensation expense, contract manufacturer costs, scrap, warranty cost, inventory reserves, royalties, depreciation and amortization expense, allocated information technology and facility-related costs, overhead and other costs related to those sales recognized as product revenue in the period.
Cost of service revenue primarily consists of salaries and other personnel costs including stock-based compensation expense, travel costs, materials consumed when performing installations, validations and other services, allocated information technology and facility-related costs, costs associated with training, and other expenses related to service revenue recognized in the period.
Cost of non-commercial revenue primarily consists of salaries and other personnel costs including stock-based compensation expense, consulting expense, materials, travel and other costs related to the revenue recognized as non-commercial revenue during the period. Our contract with BARDA is subject to the Federal Acquisition Regulation, or FAR and is priced based on estimated or actual costs of producing goods or providing services. The FAR provides guidance on the types of costs that are allowable in establishing prices for goods or services provided under U.S. government contracts.
We expect that our cost of revenue will generally increase or decrease to the extent that our revenue increases or decreases, but that such costs will increase more slowly than the related revenue streams over time.
Research and development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, product development, hardware and software engineering and consultant services and other costs associated with our technology Growth Direct platform and products, which include:
● employee-related expenses, including costs for salaries, bonuses and other personnel costs including stock-based compensation expense, for employees engaged in research and development functions;
● the cost of developing, maintaining and improving new and existing product designs;
● the cost of hardware and software engineering;
● research materials and supplies;
● external costs of outside consultants engaged to conduct research and development associated with our technology and products; and
● allocated information technology and facility-related costs, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent, maintenance of facilities and insurance as well as related depreciation and amortization.
Our research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We believe that our continued investment in research and development is essential to our long-term competitive position, and we expect these expenses to increase in future periods.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, commissions, benefits and other personnel costs including stock-based compensation expense as well as costs relating to travel, consulting, public relations and allocated information technology and facility-related costs for our employees engaged in sales and marketing activities. We expect sales and marketing expenses to increase in future periods as the number of sales and marketing personnel grows and we continue to expand our geographic reach and capabilities, broaden our customer base and introduce new products.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, bonuses and other personnel costs including stock-based compensation expense for our finance, legal, human resources and general management employees, as well as professional fees for legal, patent, accounting, audit, investor relations, recruiting, consulting and other services. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated information technology and facility-related costs. General and administrative expenses are expected to increase in future periods as the number of administrative personnel grows to support increasing business size and complexity.
Following our IPO in July 2021, we began incurring incremental accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance and director and officer insurance costs as well as investor relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense
Interest expense is comprised of interest cost associated with outstanding borrowings under our loan and security agreements and the amortization of deferred financing costs and debt discounts associated with such arrangements, as well as interest expense related to our capital lease obligation.
Change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability
In connection with the May 2020 term loan facility we entered into with a lender, or 2020 Term Loan, we issued 1,195,652 warrants to purchase shares of Series C1 Preferred Stock at an exercise price of $1.15 per share. These warrants were immediately exercisable and expire 10 years after the issuance date. We also have other outstanding warrants to purchase preferred stock issued in connection with previous financing arrangements.
We classified all of our warrants to purchase preferred stock as a liability on our consolidated balance sheets until our IPO because the warrants are freestanding financial instruments that may require us to transfer assets upon exercise. The liability associated with each of these warrants was initially recorded at fair value upon the issuance date and was subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date. The resulting change in the fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability was recorded as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations. We continued to recognize changes in the fair value of this preferred stock warrant liability at each reporting period until the IPO, when the preferred stock warrants were converted into common stock warrants that are equity classified.
In connection with the IPO, the preferred stock warrants were automatically converted to Class A common stock warrants. We determined the event resulted in equity classification of the Class A common stock warrants and derecognized the fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability as of the IPO date and reclassified to equity.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt includes a loss from the conversion of the 2020 Convertible Notes into Series C1 Preferred Stock in April 2020. In addition, the loss on extinguishment of debt includes unamortized issuance costs, back-end fees and early payment fees related to the refinancing of our $18.0 million term loan with a new $25.0 million term
loan in May 2020. We determined the loss on extinguishment of debt to be the difference between the reacquisition price of the debt and net carrying value of the extinguished debt.
Loss on extinguishment of debt recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, includes a loss from the extinguishment of the 2020 Term Loan. In addition, the loss on extinguishment of debt includes unamortized issuance costs, unamortized prepaid commitment fees, and early payment fees associated with the 2020 Term Loan repayment.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) primarily consists of interest income as well as other miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations such as foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
Income tax expense
We generated significant taxable losses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and, therefore, have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax expense during those periods. However, we did record an immaterial amount of foreign income tax expense during each of those periods.
We have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net operating losses we have incurred in each year or for the research and development tax credits we generated in the United States. As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal and state net operating loss, or NOLs, carryforwards of $137.5 million and $62.7 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future taxable income and begin to expire in 2037 and 2032, respectively. Additionally, we had a federal NOL carryforward of $124.7 million generated since 2018 that will never expire. As of December 31, 2021, we also had U.S. federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $1.1 million and $2.1 million, respectively, which may be available to offset future tax liabilities and begin to expire in 2038 and 2024, respectively. Utilization of the U.S. federal and state NOL carryforwards and research and development tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership changes that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future.
The Company is in the process of performing a Section 382 study to assess whether a change of control has occurred or whether there have been multiple changes of control. These ownership changes are expected to materially limit the net operating loss carryforwards and research and development tax credits available to offset future tax liabilities. We expect to finalize the current Section 382 study during 2022.
We have recorded a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets at each balance sheet date.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
Product revenue increased by $4.5 million, or 41.1%, with the increase attributable to higher Growth Direct system placements as well as higher consumable shipment volumes due to an increase in cumulative validated Growth Direct systems. A $0.5 million benefit from higher average selling prices in the period was offset by a negative impact of consumable product mix of $0.5 million.
Service revenue increased by $3.0 million, or 98.2%. The increase in service revenue was primarily due to a $2.1 million increase in validation and installation revenue due to the increase in Growth Direct systems placed during 2021, as well as a $0.9 million increase in service contract revenue, driven by an increase in cumulative Growth Direct systems validated and under contract.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, restriction on travel and access to customer sites related to COVID-19, and its variants, including the rapid onset of the Omicron variant in the second half of the fourth quarter of 2021. COVID-19, and its variants, negatively impacted our ability to sell, ship, install and validate Growth Direct systems, as well as train customers. This had an adverse impact our product and service revenue in the periods. While we expect these disruptions to continue to impact our operating results, the related financial impact and duration of these disruptions cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Non-commercial revenue decreased by $0.4 million, or 20.0%. The decrease in non-commercial revenue was primarily due to a reduction in cost sharing expenditures due to the stage of the project, partially offset by an increase in cost sharing percentage during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Costs and operating expenses
Costs of revenue
Cost of product revenue increased by $4.8 million, or 25.7%. The increase was primarily driven by $3.4 million in incremental costs related to higher sales volume of Growth Direct systems and consumables. Also contributing to the increase was higher freight cost due to incremental sales volume and inflation of $0.4 million, an increase of $1.8 million in personnel-related costs resulting from higher headcount to support increased production volume and manufacturing support activities as well as to provide redundancy in the event of potential disruptions from COVID-19 and its variants, and a $1.5 million increase in facilities and information technology costs. The increase from these factors was partially offset by a reduction in product cost and of $2.0 million driven by fixed cost leverage resulting from increased production volumes as well as a reduction in other product cost of revenue of $0.3 million.
Cost of service revenue increased by $2.5 million, or 74.9%. This increase was primarily due to higher headcount- related costs of $1.8 million associated with additional validation and field service employees hired in 2021 and 2020 to support increasing service activity, an increase in allocated facilities and information technology costs of $0.3 million, an increase of $0.3 million in materials and supplies, and $0.1 million in other cost of service revenue.
Cost of non-commercial revenue decreased by $0.5 million, or 23.7%. This decrease was primarily due to a reduction in spend due to the timing and extent of development activities in our contract with BARDA.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased by $3.3 million, or 49.8%. This increase was primarily due to an increase of $2.8 million in employee-related costs due primarily to higher headcount to support increased new product development activities, partially offset by a reduction in consulting expense of $0.5 million. In addition, the increase was also due to $0.3 million in higher spending on materials and prototypes used for research and development activities, an increase in allocated facility and information technology costs of $0.4 million, and a net increase of $0.3 million in other general research and development expenses.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $5.8 million, or 98.2%. This increase was due to an increase in employee-related costs (including commissions earned) of $2.7 million primarily due to the expansion of our direct sales and marketing organizations, to drive sales growth, an increase in marketing consulting of $2.4 million, an increase in marketing activities of $0.4 million, and an increase in allocated facility and information technology costs of $0.3 million.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $7.9 million, or 79.4%. This increase was driven by a $4.1 million increase in employee-related costs due to business headcount increase and higher benefit costs, $2.4 million increase in legal, audit, and business insurance costs driven by incremental services and policies associated with operating as a public company, an increase in consulting fees of $0.6 million, increase in facilities and information technology costs of $0.4 million, as well as a net increase of $0.3 million other costs.
Other income (expense)
Interest expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2.7 million and $3.4 million, respectively. The decrease of $0.8 million, or 23.1%, was due primarily to the repayment of our $25.0 million 2020 Term Loan in September 2021.
Change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability
The change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability was a loss of $19.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a loss of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was due primarily to an increase in the fair value of the underlying preferred stock used to determine the value of preferred stock warrants, to reflect the IPO price in 2021. The increase in fair value was recorded upon the IPO prior to the conversion to Class A common stock warrants and reclassification to equity.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a $2.9 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $3.1 million loss in 2021 was comprised of a $1.8 million prepayment penalty, $1.1 million expense related to unamortized discounts, and $0.2 million in unamortized prepaid facility fee and other charges and was incurred as a result of the repayment of the 2020 Term Loan. We determined the loss on extinguishment of debt to be the difference between the reacquisition price of the debt and the net carrying value of the extinguished debt. The loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was comprised of unamortized issuance costs, unamortized prepaid commitment fees, and early payment fees due to the extinguishment of the 2018 Term Loan as well as a non-cash loss from the conversion of the 2020 Convertible Notes into Series C1 Preferred Stock incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other income (expense)
Other expense was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to less than $0.1 million income for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to the Exit Fee expense described under Contractual Obligations and Commitments below.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was $0.1 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The expense relates primarily to tax expense recorded for our foreign entities.
Liquidity and capital resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. To date, we have funded our operations primarily through proceeds from sales of redeemable convertible preferred stock, borrowings under loan agreements, revenue from sales of our products, services and contracts and proceeds from our IPO. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments of $203.5 million. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and investments will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least twelve months following the date these consolidated financial statements are issued.
Contractual obligations and commitments
In October 2013, we entered into an operating lease for office and manufacturing space in Lowell, Massachusetts, which expires in July 2026. The terms of the lease include options for a one-time, five-year extension of the lease and early termination of the lease in July 2024 as well as a $0.7 million tenant improvement allowance which has been drawn down in full. Future minimum commitments under this lease through July 2026 were $2.2 million as of December 31, 2021, including $0.5 million in short-term obligations.
In December 2016, in connection with the amendment of a then-outstanding loan agreement with the lender, we entered into an agreement under which we are obligated to pay the lender an exit fee in the amount of $0.8 million in the event of a “qualifying exit event” prior to December 31, 2026. As defined in the agreement, a “qualifying exit event” includes a public offering of its common stock. No amounts were accrued at December 31, 2020 as a “qualifying exit event” was not deemed probable. Subsequently, the IPO was deemed to be a “qualifying event” and we expensed and paid the exit fee in July 2021.
In March 2020, we entered into an agreement with a supplier to secure future supply of certain materials used in the manufacturing of our Growth Direct systems. As of December 31, 2021, we had committed to minimum payments under these arrangements totaling $0.9 million through December 31, 2022. We had $0.1 million accrued for the supply agreement as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
In December 2020, we entered into a non-cancelable agreement with a service provider for software as a service and cloud hosting services. As of December 31, 2021, we had committed to minimum payments under these arrangements totaling $1.1 million through January 31, 2026, including short-term obligations of $0.2 million. We had $0.1 million and zero accrued for the software subscription as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
In June 2021, we entered into a Sublease agreement for office and back-up manufacturing space in Lexington, Massachusetts, which expires in June 2029. The Sublease agreement includes an option to terminate the sublease in July 2026, subject to an early termination fee. Monthly rent payments are fixed and future minimum lease payments over the term of the sublease are $5.6 million, including $0.7 million in short-term obligations. We also have the right to use furniture and equipment specified in the Sublease agreement for an additional $0.6 million in future payments over the term of the Sublease with the option to purchase the furniture and equipment at the end of the Sublease term. Short-term obligations related to the furniture and equipment are $0.1 million as of December 31, 2021. Concurrent with entering into the Sublease agreement, we executed an Option Agreement with the property owner which provides us the option to enter into a new direct lease for the Lexington facility for an additional five-years following expiration of the Sublease.
For additional information on our contractual obligation and commitments please see Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $55.0 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $73.5 million and net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $8.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $26.6 million. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of an increase of $6.8 million in raw material inventory to build safety stock and support a projected increase in demand. An increase of $1.1 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily due to insurance costs premium increases associated with operating as a public company. An increase of $0.9 million in other long-term assets primarily related to costs capitalized as a result of the implementation of a new Enterprise Resource Planning (“ERP”) software during 2021. A decrease in deferred revenue $1.1 million due to timing of advanced billings for validation services and performance of the related services partially offset by an increase in advance billings related to a higher number of systems under service contracts. These net operating cash uses were partially offset by an increase of $1.8 million in accrued expenses, accounts payable and other current liabilities primarily due to timing of invoicing and cash disbursements, as well as an increase of $0.1 million in deferred rent.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $31.0 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $37.1 million and net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.1 million, partially offset by non-cash charges of $7.2 million. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of an increase of $3.4 million in inventory to build safety stock and support a projected increase in demand, an increase in accounts receivable of $1.4 million, an increase of $1.3 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and an increase of $0.4 million in other long-term assets. These cash uses were partially offset by an increase of $2.5 million in deferred revenue, an increase of $1.8 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, and an increase of $1.0 million in accounts payable. The increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses was due to timing of invoicing and cash disbursement. The increase in accounts receivable was a result of higher product revenue. The increase in deferred revenue was due to an increase in advance billings for validation services related to the volume and timing of Growth Direct system placements as well as an increase in advance billings related to a higher number of systems under service contracts.
Investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $13.3 million, consisting of capital expenditures of $3.2 million and $10.1 million in net purchases of investments.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $15.7 million, consisting of $15.0 million in net purchases of short-term investments and capital expenditures of $0.7 million.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $216.7 million, consisting of net proceeds of $164.1 million from the initial public offering of Class A common stock, net of issuance costs, $79.7 million of net proceeds from the sale of the Series D1 and Series D2 Preferred Stock, net of issuance costs, and $0.9 million from the issuance of common stock upon exercise of stock options and purchase of restricted stock awards.
Partially offsetting cash provided by financing activities in 2021 was the repayment of term loans of $26.2 million and payment of debt extinguishment fees of $1.9 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $64.2 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds of $49.9 million from the issuance of Series C1 and C2 redeemable convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs, $24.1 million in net proceeds from borrowings under our 2020 Term Loan and $9.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes. These cash inflows were partially offset by a $19.4 million cash outflow for principal and debt extinguishment fees paid in conjunction with the repayment of our 2018 term loan.
Long-term debt
In May 2020, we entered into the 2020 Term Loan which provided for borrowings of an initial $25.0 million tranche upon closing and options to borrow up to an aggregate of $35.0 million in two additional tranches of $20.0 million under the second tranche, or the Term B Loan, and $15.0 million under the third tranche, or the Term C Loan, subject to certain Growth Direct system sales milestones.
At closing, we issued warrants to purchase 1,195,652 shares of Series C1 Preferred Stock to the lender with an exercise price of $1.15 per share. We paid a $0.8 million facility fee in connection with the 2020 Term Loan.
In September 2021, we agreed to pay in full all of our outstanding obligations under the 2020 Term Loan in the amount of $28.7 million, comprised of the principal amount of the 2020 Term Loan, interest previously paid-in-kind, accrued cash interest, a prepayment premium, and other fees and expenses. As a result, the 2020 Term Loan, all liens and security interests granted thereunder, and all obligations thereunder (other than the warrants issued to the lender) were satisfied, released, discharged and/or terminated in full, except in respect of certain surviving obligations.
Seasonality
Our revenues can vary from quarter to quarter as a result of seasonality. For a more detailed discussion of the seasonality of our business, please see “Seasonality” in Part I, Item 1. “Business” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. Our estimates are based on our historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following critical accounting policies are those most important to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
Product revenue
We derive product revenue primarily from the sale of Growth Direct systems and related consumables. Product revenue is recognized when control of the promised systems and consumables is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those products or consumables (the
transaction price). For Growth Direct systems and consumables sold by us, control transfers to the customer at a point in time.
Service revenue
We derive service revenue primarily from the sale of validation services, service contracts and field service (including installation). Revenue is recognized when services are provided to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services (the transaction price). Service revenue is recognized over time using an input method based on time lapsed for service contracts and using an output method based on milestones achieved for validation services and field service.
Performance obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct product or service to a customer that are both capable of being distinct, whereby the customer can benefit from the product or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available, and are distinct in the context of the contract, whereby the transfer of the product or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. Our main performance obligations in customer arrangements are Growth Direct systems, LIMS connection software, proprietary consumables, validation services, field service and services due under service contracts.
Multiple performance obligations
Our contracts may include multiple performance obligations when customers purchase a combination of products and services such as Growth Direct system sold together with the LIMS connection software, proprietary consumables or services. For these arrangements, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis using our best estimate of the standalone selling price of each distinct product or service in the contract. The primary methods used to estimate standalone selling prices are based on the prices observed in standalone sales to customers or cost-plus margin depending on the nature of the obligation and available evidence of fair value. Allocation of the transaction price is determined at contract’s inception.
Non-commercial revenue
We generate revenue from a long-term contract with BARDA, which is part of the U.S. government. The contract is a cost-reimbursable, cost-sharing contract, whereby BARDA reimburses us for a percentage of the total costs that have been incurred including indirect allowable rates. We include the unconstrained amount of consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is constrained to the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur.
Stock-based compensation
We measure stock-based option awards granted to employees, officers and directors based on their fair value on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Compensation expense for those awards is recognized over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The straight-line method of expense recognition is applied to all awards with service-only conditions.
The fair value of each stock option is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses inputs such as the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our common stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our common stock options, and our expected dividend yield.
We measure all restricted common stock granted to employees based on the common stock value on the date of grant. The purchase price of the restricted common stock is the common stock value on the date of grant. The restricted common stock includes a repurchase right, whereas upon the occurrence of a specific event, we have the right to
repurchase unvested restricted common stock shares. As such the fair value of the restricted common stock is included in other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheet.
Determination of fair value of common stock
As there had been no public market for our common stock prior to the IPO, the estimated fair value of our common stock prior to our IPO was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management. The board considered our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and an assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Prior to our IPO, our common stock valuations were prepared using either an option pricing method, or OPM, or a hybrid method, both of which use market approaches and income approaches to estimate our enterprise value. The hybrid method is a probability-weighted expected return method, or PWERM, where the equity value in two or more of the scenarios is calculated using an OPM. The PWERM is a scenario-based methodology that estimates the fair value of common stock based upon an analysis of future values for the company, assuming various outcomes. The common stock value is based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns considering each of the possible outcomes available as well as the rights of each class of stock. The future value of the common stock under each outcome is discounted back to the valuation date at an appropriate risk-adjusted discount rate and probability weighted to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. A discount for lack of marketability of the common stock is then applied to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. The OPM treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on the total equity value of a company, with exercise prices based on the value thresholds at which the allocation among the various holders of a company’s securities changes. Under this method, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to stockholders exceeded the value of the preferred stock liquidation preferences at the time of the liquidity event, such as a strategic sale or a merger.
In addition to considering the results of these third-party valuations, our board of directors considered various objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of our common stock as of each grant date, including:
● the prices at which we sold shares of preferred stock (including our sale of Series D1 and Series D2 redeemable convertible preferred stock in March 2021) and the superior rights and preferences of the preferred stock relative to our common stock at the time of each grant;
● the progress of the research and development of our products;
● our stage of development and commercialization and our business strategy;
● external market conditions affecting our industry and the global pharmaceutical industry;
● our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results;
● the lack of an active public market for our common stock and our preferred stock;
● the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering, or IPO, or sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions; and
● the analysis of IPOs and the market performance of similar companies in the life sciences tools and diagnostics industries.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
For valuations after the completion of the IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
Valuation of warrants to purchase preferred stock
We have historically classified warrants to purchase shares of our redeemable convertible preferred stock as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets as these warrants were free-standing financial instruments that may have required us to transfer assets upon exercise. The preferred stock warrant liability is initially recorded at fair value on the issuance date of each warrant and was subsequently remeasured to fair value at each reporting date. Changes in the fair value of the preferred stock warrant liability were recognized as a component of other income (expense) in our consolidated statements of operations. We adjusted the liability for changes in fair value until the warrants were exercised, expire or qualified for equity classification.
We utilized the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which incorporates management’s assumptions and estimates, to value the preferred stock warrants. We assessed these assumptions and estimates on a quarterly basis as additional information impacting the assumptions was obtained. Estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement include the fair value per share of the underlying redeemable convertible preferred stock, the remaining contractual term of the warrants, risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield and expected volatility of the price of the underlying preferred stock. We determined the fair value per share of the underlying preferred stock by taking into consideration our most recent sales of our preferred stock as well as additional factors that we deemed relevant. We have historically been a private company and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information of our stock. Therefore, we estimated expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies for a term equal to the remaining contractual term of the warrants. The risk-free interest rate was determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve for time periods approximately equal to the remaining contractual term of the warrants. We estimated a 0% dividend yield based on the expected dividend yield and the fact that we have never paid or declared dividends.
Upon closing of the IPO, all the warrants to purchase shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock became exercisable for shares of common stock, at which time we adjusted the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to fair value prior to reclassifying the redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liability to additional paid-in capital. As a result, following the closing of the IPO, the warrants were no longer subject to fair value accounting.
Valuation of inventory
We value inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is computed using the first-in, first-out method. We regularly review inventory quantities on-hand for excess and obsolescence and, when circumstances indicate, we record charges to write down inventories to their estimated net realizable value after evaluating future demand, expected product life cycles and current inventory levels. Such charges are classified as cost of product revenue in the statements of operations. Any write-down of inventory to net realizable value creates a new cost basis.
Valuation of derivatives
We record derivatives initially at fair value upon the issuance of our Unsecured Subordinated Convertible Promissory Notes, or Convertible Notes, issued in February 2020 which relates to a conversion option whereby upon the closing of a specified financing event the Convertible Note will automatically convert into shares of the same class and series of capital stock we issued to other investors in the financing at a conversion price equal to 80% of the price per share of the securities paid by the other investor. The initial fair value was determined using management’s assumption on the likelihood a qualified financing event would occur. Changes in the fair value of the derivative liability were
recognized as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statement of operations. In April 2020, the specified financing event was consummated, and as such, the notes were converted into shares of Series C1 Preferred Stock, and the derivative liability was extinguished, and the unamortized derivative discount was recognized as an extinguishment loss.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging growth company status
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, we will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, and our financial statements may not be comparable to other public companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for private companies.
We will cease to be an emerging growth company on the date that is the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (ii) the last day of our fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the date of the closing of the IPO, (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Further, even after we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company, we may still qualify as a “smaller reporting company,” which would allow us to take advantage of many of the same exemptions from disclosure requirements, including reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements.