ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. All forward-looking statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on information available to us on the date hereof, and except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors in Item 1A - Risk Factors herein. The following should be read in conjunction with our annual financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Overview
As of the date of this report, we have not generated significant revenues. Our initial business plan was to develop an online game platform to allow game companies to create, monetize and distribute massive multiplayer online games (MMOG). The Company technology was the monetization component of this overall software platform (our “Platform”). During 2010, we analyzed the market potential for an expanded Company solution and decided to concentrate our efforts on the delivery of a full-featured Company solution that was not restricted to online gaming. The expanded Company solution is designed to provide a complete online solution for families and parents to teach their children about financial management and spending as well as provide a safe and secure venue for children under 13 in the United States and under 16 internationally, to participate in financial transactions both online and in retail stores.
Our focus currently is monetizing the MazoolaSM Digital Wallet Platform in the Financial Technology (“FinTech”) industry through white label, licensing and partnership agreements. We have successfully launched the MazoolaSM App and are focused on improving and monetizing the existing Platform and App that will act as the foundation for the strategic alignment with the FinTech industry. The FinTech industry is composed primarily of startup companies that use software to provide financial services more efficiently and less costly than traditional financial service companies. With our Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (“COPPA”) and GDPRkidsTM Trustmark compliant technology as an added feature, we believe we may have better market success.
Strategic Outlook
We believe that the virtual goods market and the FinTech industry will continue to grow over the long term. Within the market and industry, we are providing services to allow transactions with children in compliance with COPPA and similar international privacy laws, most notably GDPR. We believe that this particular opportunity is relatively untapped and intend to be a leading provider of software to process online transactions for children.
Sustained spending on technology, our ability to raise additional financing, the continued growth of the FinTech industry, and compliance with regulatory and reporting requirements are all external conditions that may affect our ability to execute our business plan. In addition, the FinTech industry is intensely competitive, and most participants have longer operating histories, significantly greater financial, technical, marketing, customer service and other resources, and greater name recognition. In addition, certain potential customers, particularly large organizations, may view our small size and limited financial resources as a negative even if they prefer our offering to those of our competitors.
Our goal, moving forward is to enable both incumbent and new FinTech participants, as well as key verticals with a large base of ‘family accounts,’ to provide their consumers with safe and empowering youth money management and financial literacy content and tools via the mobile MazoolaSM payment platform.
We will utilize our three, patent supported, key differentiators :
1. The ability to define data control settings from parent to child;
2. The ability to (mis)attribute the child’s transaction and personal identification;
3. The ability to disseminate transactional data on minors while remaining COPPA and GDPR compliant;
to separate our technology from our competitors.
Currently, we are targeting established brands with large family-focused account bases - including banks, telecommunication companies, faith-based organizations, media distributors, mobile device Original Equipment Manufacturers (“OEMs”), and merchants.
We are seeking partners that will leverage our Platform to:
Buy vs. Build: Partners can license or revenue share for their specific market or field of use a safe, compliant system, instead of building one on their own.
Safety & Security: Partners can safely engage a younger consumer segment and their families with a new family friendly peer to peer payments approach. Vendors will be explicitly protected from non-compliant transactions and the underlying technology protects the privacy of the user.
Youth Financial Literacy: Partners can expand their brand story around empowerment and education of youth financial literacy while engaging their ‘future customers’ with Gen Z, a digital native population of post-millennial youth.
The REGO MazoolaSM app and associated digital wallet technology is designed to enable our partners to engage families with Gen Z and Gen Alpha youths through a money management, transactional and financial literacy platform that enables young people to make smart decisions about the things they value in life - including their money, their time, their ideas and their connections. The MazoolaSM app enables a new way for individual users to own and monetize their purchasing behavior that is currently unavailable to them.
We believe that our near-term success will depend particularly on our ability to develop customer awareness and confidence in our Platform. Since we have extremely limited capital resources, we will need to closely manage our expenses and conserve our cash by continually monitoring any increase in expenses and reducing or eliminating unnecessary expenditures. Our prospects must be considered in light of the risks, expenses and difficulties encountered by companies at an early stage of development, particularly given that we operate in new and rapidly evolving markets, that we have limited financial resources, and face an uncertain economic environment. We may not be successful in addressing such risks and difficulties.
Factors Affecting Our Business
We are also carefully monitoring the ongoing coronavirus health crisis. The ongoing pandemic could adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. The ongoing pandemic may materially impact our sourcing of employees, specifically engineers. Additionally, travel restrictions may impede our progress to promote our Platform internationally and to raise funds both domestically and internationally. If we cannot raise funds when they are needed or if such funds cannot be obtained on acceptable terms, we may not be able to (a) pay our costs and expenses as they are incurred, (b) execute our business plan, (c) take advantage of future opportunities, or (d) respond to competitive pressures or unanticipated requirements, which may in the extreme case, require us to liquidate the Company. This may seriously harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following discussion analyzes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The following information should be considered together with our financial statements for such periods and the accompanying notes thereto.
Revenue/Net Loss
Revenue
We have not generated significant revenue since our inception. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated revenues of $2,628 and $0. Our revenue is generated from transactional sources with customers.
Net Loss
Our net loss attributable to common stockholders decreased $3.9 million to $11.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $15.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as a result of increased operating expenses more than offset by the change in the fair value of the embedded derivative liability as further described below.
Transaction Expense
Transaction expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $165,018 compared to $0 for year ended December 31, 2020. These are transactional charges primarily for the operation of the MazoolaSM app, and the Chore Check app.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $1.4 million in 2021 to $1.5 million compared to $0.1 million in 2020. In 2021 we continued with marketing and designs for our mobile app and hired consultants to develop and execute the marketing plan.
Product Development
Product development expenses increased by $1.7 million in 2021 to $2.8 million compared to $1.1 million in 2020. During 2021, the Company continued the process to complete the development of the MazoolaSM app prior to its launch and then began developing further enhancements to the app to increase its marketability.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.6 million in 2021 to $5.6 million compared to $2.0 million in 2020. This resulted from the Company issuing shares of common stock and options to Board members, officers and consultants, in the amount of approximately $4,225,000, during the year ended December 31, 2021 versus $536,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased $0.3 million to $1.1 million in 2021 compared to $0.8 million in 2020. This was a result of the increase in debt resulting from successful financing activities.
Forgiveness of Debt
Forgiveness of debt decreased $0.3 million in 2021 to $0.1 million compared to $0.4 million in 2020. On January 28, 2021, the Company received notification that the Paycheck Protection Plan loan was forgiven in full by the Small Business Administration and therefore $79,500 was recognized as forgiveness of debt during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Additionally, the Economic Injury Disaster Loan of $2,000 ($1,000 per employee) does not require repayment and was also recognized as forgiveness of debt.
The Company also had $13,925 of vendor debt forgiven during 2021.
During 2020, the Company negotiated agreements with the former Chief Executive Officer, consultants and employees that resulted in forgiveness of debt for the Company in the amount of $0.4 million.
Change in Fair Value of Embedded Derivative Liability
The change in fair value of embedded derivative liability decreased to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $11 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the Company adopting FASB ASU No. 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40), Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. The Company adopted the modified retrospective transition method of this pronouncement on January 1, 2021 and as a result reclassified $10,987,578 between debt and accumulated deficit.
During 2020, the price of the Company’s common stock rose above the intrinsic value of the conversion option per share related to the Company’s preferred stock and resulted in an increase in the fair value of the embedded derivative liability of $11.0 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Net cash used in operating activities increased $2.9 million to $5.1 million for the year ended 2021 compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase resulted primarily from increased spending for product development, marketing and share based compensation.
Net cash used in investing activities was $82,252 and $3,230 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company applied for service marks and maintained the current patents.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $3.4 million to $5.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company was more successful in raising capital with the launch of the mobile app and the modifications to improve marketability.
Subsequent to December 31, 2021, the Company raised gross proceeds of $200,000 through the issuance of additional 4% secured convertible notes payable-stockholders and gross proceeds of $3,564,000 through the issuance of the Series B Cumulative Convertible Preferred Stock.
As we have not realized significant revenues since our inception, we have financed our operations through public and private offerings of debt and equity securities. We do not currently maintain a line of credit or term loan with any commercial bank or other financial institution.
Since our inception, we have focused on developing and implementing our business plan. We do not believe that our existing cash resources will be sufficient to sustain our operations during the next twelve months. We currently need to generate sufficient revenues to support our cost structure to enable us to pay ongoing costs and expenses as they are incurred, finance the development of our platform, and execute the business plan. If we cannot generate sufficient revenue to fund our business plan, we intend to seek to raise such financing through the sale of debt and/or equity securities. The issuance of additional equity would result in dilution to existing shareholders. If we are unable to obtain additional funds when they are needed or if such funds cannot be obtained on terms acceptable to us, we will be unable to execute upon the business plan or pay costs and expenses as they are incurred, which would have a material, adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Even if we are successful in generating sufficient revenue or in raising sufficient capital in order to commercialize the platform, our ability to continue in business as a viable going concern can only be achieved when our revenues reach a level that sustains our business operations. In 2021, we raised approximately $5.4 million through our issuance of financial instruments. The MazoolaSM app was launched in February of 2021, however, we do not project that significant revenue will be developed until the third quarter of 2022. There can be no assurance that we will raise sufficient proceeds, or any proceeds, for us to implement fully our proposed business plan. Moreover, there can be no assurance that even if platform is developed and launched, that we will generate revenues sufficient to fund our operations. In either such situation, we may not be able to continue our operations and our business might fail.
As of March 31, 2022, the Company has a cash position of approximately $2.6 million. Based upon the current cash position and the Company’s planned expense run rate, management believes the Company will be able to finance its operations through November 2022.
The foregoing forward-looking information was prepared by us in good faith based upon assumptions that we believe to be reasonable. No assurance can be given, however, regarding the attainability of the projections or the reliability of the assumptions on which they are based. The projections are subject to the uncertainties inherent in any attempt to predict the results of our operations, especially where new products and services are involved. Certain of the assumptions used will inevitably not materialize and unanticipated events will occur. Actual results of operations are, therefore, likely to vary from the projections and such variations may be material and adverse to us. Accordingly, no assurance can be given that such results will be achieved. Moreover due to changes in technology, new product announcements, competitive pressures, system design and/or other specifications we may be required to change the current plans.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partners, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. As such, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements are impacted by the accounting policies used and the estimates and assumptions made by management during their preparation. A complete summary of these policies is included in Note 1 of the Notes to Financial Statements included elsewhere herein. We have identified below the accounting policies that are of particular importance in the presentation of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows and which require the application of significant judgment by management.
Stock-based Compensation
We have adopted the fair value recognition provisions Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification (“FASB ASC”) 718. In addition, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 “Share-Based Payment” (“SAB 107”), which provides supplemental FASB ASC 718 application guidance based on the views of the SEC. Under FASB ASC 718, compensation cost recognized includes compensation cost for all share-based payments granted, based on the grant date fair value estimated in accordance with the provisions of FASB ASC 718.
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718), Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting. The amendments in this Update expand the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. Prior to this Update, Topic 718 applied only to share-based transactions to employees. Consistent with the accounting requirement for employee share-based payment awards, nonemployee share-based payment awards within the scope of Topic 718 are measured at grant-date fair value of the equity instruments that an entity is obligated to issue when the good has been delivered or the service has been rendered and any other conditions necessary to earn the right to benefit from the instruments have been satisfied.
We have used the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the option fair values. The option-pricing model requires a number of assumptions, of which the most significant are, expected stock price volatility, the expected pre-vesting forfeiture rate and the expected option term (the amount of time from the grant date until the options are exercised or expire).
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with FASB ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the Company recognizes revenue when it satisfies performance obligations, by transferring promised goods or services to customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for fulfilling those performance obligations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently issued accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1 of the Notes to Financial Statements contained elsewhere in this report.