ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations provides a narrative of our financial performance and condition that should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements. All comparisons under this heading between 2021 and 2020 refer to the fifty-two weeks ended December 26, 2021 and December 27, 2020, unless otherwise indicated.
Overview
Description of Business
Red Robin Gourmet Burgers, Inc., a Delaware corporation, together with its subsidiaries ("Red Robin," "we," "us," "our" or the "Company"), primarily operates, franchises, and develops casual dining restaurants with 531 locations in North America. As of December 26, 2021, the Company operated 430 Company-owned restaurants located in 38 states. The Company also had 101 franchised restaurants in 16 states and one Canadian province as of December 26, 2021. The Company operates its business as one operating and one reportable segment.
Our primary source of revenue is from the sale of food and beverages at Company-owned restaurants. We also earn revenue from royalties and fees from franchised restaurants.
The Company's fiscal year ends on the last Sunday of each calendar year. Most of our fiscal years have 52 weeks; however, we experience a 53rd week once every five to six years. Both 2021 and 2020 refer to 52 week fiscal years.
Fiscal Year 2021 Accomplishments
Despite the continued challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, and associated staffing and supply chain headwinds, we made significant progress on executing our strategic business model during fiscal year 2021. Our accomplishments in 2021 include the following:
•Sustained off-premises sales of more than double pre-pandemic levels, with off-premises sales mix of 31.4% for the fourth quarter of 2021, compared to approximately 14.0% in the fourth quarter of 2019. Off-premises sales comprised $84.7 million, $85.1 million and $36.7 million of comparable restaurant revenue for the fourth quarters of 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively;
•Continued Donatos® roll-out to 120 Company-owned restaurants, bringing the total number of restaurants with Donatos® to 198 restaurants as of December 26, 2021. Restaurants that have been serving Donatos® pizza prior to 2021 are continuing to benefit from growing incremental sales beyond their first year as operations mature and brand affinity grows, with comparable restaurant revenue up 6.5% compared to 2019 in restaurants without supply chain issues;
•At the end of 2021, we were 93% staffed at the salaried manager positions, and 96% staffed in the General Manager role;
•Launched integrated and seamless digital ecosystem for our Guests, including mobile applications on both iOS and Android platforms, an improved and more relevant digital Guest experience consisting of a new and improved website, and the integration of a new loyalty program; and,
•Completed our lease renegotiation and restructuring initiative that we began in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in 3% to 4% occupancy savings over remaining lease terms on restructured leases.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to create unprecedented challenges for our industry including government mandated restrictions, changing consumer behavior, labor and supply chain challenges, and wide spread inflationary costs. Even as government restrictions were lifted, and dining rooms returned to full capacity, the surge in the Delta and Omicron variants continued to highlight the critical importance of providing a safe environment for our Team Members and Guests.
In response to these COVID-19 challenges, the Company limited dining hours and seating capacity in order to preserve the consistent quality experience our Guests expect from us. Our disciplined Guest focus is delivered through our TGX hospitality model, off-premises enhancements, and our management labor model.
Our ability to attract and retain Team Members has become more challenging in the current competitive job market. Staffing is our number one priority; we have supported our staffing efforts through technology enhancements to the application and hiring process, improving our wage policies, holding national hiring days, and deploying internal and external resources to augment recruiting, hiring, and training efforts. The challenges in hiring and retention and global supply chain disruptions have affected many of our vendor partners, resulting in intermittent product and distribution shortages.
We remain focused on proactively addressing these industry challenges, while delivering a great Guest experience and continuing to prioritize the satisfaction and retention of our Team Members.
Financial and Operational Highlights
The following summarizes the financial and operational highlights during the fifty-two weeks ended December 26, 2021:
Restaurant revenue, compared to the same period in the prior year, is presented in the table below:
(1) Comparable restaurant revenue represents revenue from Company-owned restaurants that have operated five full quarters as of the end of the period presented.
Restaurant revenues and operating costs as a percentage of restaurant revenue for the period are detailed in the table below:
The following table summarizes Net loss, loss per diluted share, and adjusted loss per diluted share (a non-GAAP measure) for the fifty-two weeks ended December 26, 2021 and December 27, 2020;
We believe the non-GAAP measure of adjusted loss per diluted share gives the reader additional insight into the ongoing operational results of the Company, and it is intended to supplement the presentation of the Company's financial results in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted loss per diluted share excludes the effects of goodwill impairment, asset impairment, litigation contingencies, board and stockholder matters costs, restaurant closure costs, severance and executive transition costs, executive retention costs, COVID-19 related costs, and related income tax effects. Other companies may define adjusted net loss per share differently, and as a result our measure of adjusted loss per share may not be directly comparable to those of other companies. Adjusted loss per share should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, net loss as reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP as a measure of performance.
Restaurant Data
The following table details restaurant unit data for our Company-owned and franchised locations for the periods indicated:
-------------------
The following table presents total Company-owned and franchised restaurants by state or province as of December 26, 2021:
-------------------
Results of Operations
Operating results for each fiscal period presented below are expressed as a percentage of total revenues, except for the components of restaurant operating costs, which are expressed as a percentage of restaurant revenue. Certain percentage amounts in the table below do not total due to rounding as well as restaurant operating costs being expressed as a percentage of restaurant revenue and not total revenues.
-------------------
(1) Expressed as a percentage of restaurant revenue
Revenues
Restaurant revenue, which comprises primarily food and beverage sales, increased $283.6 million in 2021, or 33.2%, as compared to 2020. The increase was due to a $276.6 million, or 33.5%, increase in comparable restaurant revenue due to the COVID-19 pandemic and a $7.0 million increase primarily from reopened restaurants that were temporarily closed during 2020. The comparable restaurant revenue increase was driven by a 22.3% increase in Guest count and an 11.2% increase in average Guest check. The increase in average Guest check comprised a 6.7% increase in menu mix, and a 3.7% increase in pricing and a 0.8% increase from lower discounting. The increase in menu mix was primarily driven by higher sales of beverages, appetizers, and limited time menu offerings with higher dine-in sales volumes.
Average weekly net sales volumes represent the total restaurant revenue for all Company-owned Red Robin restaurants for each time period presented, divided by the number of operating weeks in the period. Comparable restaurant revenues include those restaurants that are in the comparable base based on operating five full fiscal quarters as of the end of each period presented. Temporarily closed Company-owned restaurants due to the COVID-19 pandemic were not included in the comparable base for the fiscal years ended December 26, 2021 and December 27, 2020. Fluctuations in average weekly net sales volumes for Company-owned restaurants reflect the effect of comparable restaurant revenue changes as well as the performance of new and acquired restaurants during the period, the average square footage of our restaurants, as well as the impact of changing capacity limitations in response to COVID-19 levels in a given locality. Net sales per square foot represents the total of restaurant revenue for Company-owned restaurants included in the comparable base divided by the total adjusted square feet of Company-owned restaurants included in the comparable base.
Franchise revenue primarily comprises royalty income and advertising fund contributions. Franchise revenue increased $8.4 million, or 94.7%, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to improved comparable franchise sales performance, and charging and collecting royalty payments and advertising contributions from our franchisees during 2021. During 2020, the Company had temporarily abated franchisee royalty and advertising contribution payments in mid-March, and resumed collection during the latter half of the second fiscal quarter of 2020.
Other revenue is primarily comprised of gift card breakage, which represents the value associated with the portion of gift cards sold that are unlikely to be redeemed, and licensing royalties. During 2021 and 2020, we recognized $5.4 million and $4.5 million of gift card breakage.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales, which comprises food and beverage costs, is variable and generally fluctuates with sales channel mix and volume. Cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant revenue decreased 30 basis points in 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by pricing and favorable mix shifts, partially offset by commodity inflation.
Labor
Labor costs include restaurant-level hourly wages and management salaries as well as related taxes and benefits. Labor as a percentage of restaurant revenue decreased 300 basis points in 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by staffing shortages, and sales leverage, partially offset by higher wage rates, staffing costs and increased restaurant management compensation costs in 2021.
Other Operating
Other operating costs include costs such as equipment repairs and maintenance costs, restaurant supplies, utilities, restaurant technology, and other miscellaneous costs including royalties paid to Donatos®. Other operating costs as a percentage of restaurant revenue decreased 100 basis points in 2021 as compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by sales leverage and lower utilities and supplies, partially offset by increased third party commissions and hiring advertisement costs.
Occupancy
Occupancy costs include fixed rents, property taxes, common area maintenance charges, general liability insurance, contingent rents, and other property costs. In 2021, occupancy costs as a percentage of restaurant revenue decreased 320 basis points as compared to 2020 primarily driven by sales leverage, savings from permanently closed restaurants and restructured leases.
Our fixed rents in 2021 and 2020 were $68.8 million and $66.1 million, an increase of $2.7 million due to the recognition of occupancy costs in Other charges for temporarily closed Company-owned restaurants during periods of closure due to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, partially offset by decreases from 14 restaurants permanently closed during 2021 and 11 restaurants permanently closed during 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation on capital expenditures for restaurants and corporate assets as well as amortization of acquired franchise rights, leasehold interests, and certain liquor licenses. In 2021, depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of revenue decreased 290 basis points as compared to 2020. The decreases are primarily due to net closed Company-owned restaurants, and sales leverage.
Selling, General, and Administrative expenses
Selling, general, and administrative costs include all corporate and administrative functions. Components of this category include marketing and advertising costs, our restaurant support center, regional, and franchise support salaries and benefits; travel; professional and consulting fees; corporate information systems; legal expenses; office rent; training; and board of directors expenses.
Selling, general, and administrative expense increased $15.9 million, or 14.9% in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase in selling, general, and administrative expenses in 2021 was primarily driven by the return of marketing spend closer to a more normalized level in 2021, merit increases and lapping temporary salary reductions in 2020, increased travel costs, and higher professional services spend.
Pre-opening Costs
Pre-opening costs, which are expensed as incurred, comprise the costs related to preparing restaurants to introduce Donatos® and other initiatives, as well as direct costs, including labor, occupancy, training, and marketing, incurred related to opening new restaurants and hiring the initial work force. Our pre-opening costs fluctuate from period to period, depending upon, but not limited to, the number of restaurant openings, the size of the restaurants being opened, and the location of the restaurants. Pre-opening costs for any given quarter will typically include expenses associated with restaurants opened during the quarter as well as expenses related to restaurants opening in subsequent quarters.
We incurred pre-opening costs during 2021 related to the rollout of Donatos® and the costs associated with opening one new restaurant. We incurred pre-opening costs during 2020 related to the rollout of Donatos®. The Company completed the rollout of 120 restaurants during the year ended December 26, 2021, and expects to continue its roll out of Donatos® to approximately 50 restaurants in 2022 with full completion by 2024. Rollout of Donatos® requires pre-opening expense of approximately $12 thousand per restaurant.
Other Charges
For further information on Other charges line items, refer to Footnote 4, Other Charges, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest Expense and Interest Income
Interest expense in 2021 and 2020 was $14.2 million and $10.2 million, respectively. Our weighted average interest rate in 2021 and 2020 was 7.1% and 4.5%.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we received a $49.4 million federal cash tax refund that included approximately $1.1 million of interest, recorded in the Interest income and other, net line on the consolidated statements of operation and comprehensive loss.
Income Taxes
Income tax benefit was $0.2 million in 2021, compared to an income tax benefit of $7.5 million in 2020. Our effective tax rate was a 0.3% benefit in 2021 and a 2.6% benefit in 2020. The decrease in tax benefit for the year ended December 26, 2021 is primarily due to the 2020 favorable rate impact of net operating loss ("NOL") carrybacks allowed as part of the CARES Act.
The Company had outstanding federal and state refund claims of approximately $15.8 million as of December 26, 2021. In January 2022, the Company received $2.4 million of those refund claims and expects to receive the remaining $13.4 million over the next 12-18 months due to processing delays at the IRS.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents increased $6.7 million to $22.8 million at December 26, 2021, from $16.1 million at the beginning of the fiscal year. As the Company continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic and generates operating cash flow, the Company is using available cash flow from operations to pay down debt, maintain existing restaurants and infrastructure, and execute on its long-term strategic initiatives. As of December 26, 2021, the Company had approximately $57.7 million in liquidity, including cash on hand and available borrowing capacity under its credit facility.
Cash Flows
The table below summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for each fiscal year presented (in thousands):
Operating Cash Flows
Net cash flows provided by operating activities increased $27.1 million to $47.3 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. The changes in net cash provided by operating activities are primarily attributable to a $163.4 million increase in profit from operations (defined as the change in operating margins from comparable and non-comparable restaurants), lower accounts receivable and higher accounts payable balances due to the timing of operational receipts and payments, as well as other changes in working capital as presented in the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash flows used in investing activities increased $20.8 million to $42.2 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase is primarily due to adding Donatos® to 120 restaurants during 2021, as well as increased spending on restaurant improvements, and investments in technology.
The following table lists the components of our capital expenditures for each fiscal year presented (in thousands):
Expenditures for Donatos® expansion include expenditures for kitchen equipment, other equipment and other capital costs associated with adding Donatos® to our restaurants, Restaurant improvement capital and other consists of capital equipment for our restaurants, Investment in technology, infrastructure and other consists of capital costs related to restaurant technology assets, capital overhead, and other items, and new restaurants and restaurant refreshes primarily relates to costs associated with the re-establishment of our new restaurant development program.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities increased $13.3 million to $1.6 million in 2021 as compared to 2020. The increase primarily resulted from a $40.2 million increase in net draws of long-term debt, a decrease of $1.6 million for cash used to repurchase the Company's common stock due to the Company's financial covenants restricting the repurchase of common stock in 2021, and a $1.2 million decrease in cash paid for debt issuance costs in 2021 compared to 2020, partially offset by a $28.7 million decrease from net cash proceeds received from the issuance of common stock in 2020.
Prior Credit Facility
On November 9, 2021, the Company entered into the Third Amendment to the Company’s amended and restated credit facility (the "prior credit facility") to obtain additional flexibility to continue to implement our business strategy. The Third Amendment, which waived compliance with the Leverage Ratio Covenant for the third fiscal quarter of 2021, and provided for adjustments during fourth fiscal quarter of 2021, also included certain amendments to the prior credit facility to address LIBOR transition matters.
As of December 26, 2021, the Company had outstanding borrowings under the prior credit facility of $176.1 million, of which $9.7 million was classified as current, in addition to amounts issued under letters of credit of $7.9 million. Amounts issued under letters of credit reduce the amount available under the credit facility but are not recorded as debt.
As of December 26, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all covenants applicable to our credit facility, as amended.
For additional details regarding our prior credit facility, see Footnote 8, Borrowings included within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
New Credit Facility
On March 4, 2022 the Company entered into a new Senior Secured Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility (the "new credit facility"). The new facility references the Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR"), a new index calculated by short-term repurchase agreements and backed by U.S. Treasury securities, or the Alternate Base Rate ("ABR"), which represents the highest of (a) the Prime Rate, (b) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.50% per annum, or (c) one-month term SOFR plus 1.00% per annum.
We are subject to a number of customary covenants under our new credit facility, including limitations on additional borrowings, acquisitions, stock repurchases, sales of assets, and dividend payments, as well as a Total Net Leverage ratio covenant.
For additional details regarding our new credit facility, see Footnote 8, Borrowings included within the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Debt Outstanding
Total debt outstanding increased $6.3 million to $177.0 million at December 26, 2021, from $170.6 million at December 27, 2020, due to net borrowings of $6.3 million on the credit facility during 2021. As of December 26, 2021, the Company had $35 million of available borrowing capacity under its credit facility. Net borrowings during 2021 totaled $6.3 million.
Share Repurchase
On August 9, 2018, the Company's board of directors authorized the Company's current share repurchase program of up to a total of $75 million of the Company's common stock. The share repurchase authorization will terminate upon completing repurchases of $75 million of common stock unless otherwise terminated by the board. Pursuant to the repurchase program, purchases may be made from time to time at the Company's discretion and the Company is not obligated to acquire any particular amount of common stock. From the date of the current program approval through December 26, 2021, we have repurchased a total of 226,500 shares at an average price of $29.14 per share for an aggregate amount of $6.6 million. Accordingly, as of December 26, 2021, we had $68.4 million of availability under the current share repurchase program.
Effective March 14, 2020, the Company temporarily suspended its share repurchase program to provide additional liquidity during the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 26. 2021, our ability to repurchase shares was limited to conditions set forth by our lenders in the Second Amendment to our credit facility prohibiting us from repurchasing additional shares until the first fiscal quarter of 2022 at the earliest and not until we deliver a covenant compliance certificate demonstrating a lease adjusted leverage ratio less than or equal to 5.00:1.00. The new credit facility limits our ability to repurchase shares to certain conditions set forth by our lenders in the new credit facility.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes the amounts of payments due under specified contractual obligations as of December 26, 2021 (in thousands):
-------------------
(1) Long-term debt obligations primarily represent minimum required principal payments under our existing credit agreement as of December 26, 2021, including estimated interest of $12.4 million based on a 7% average borrowing interest rate.
(2) Finance lease obligations include interest of $3.1 million.
(3) Operating lease obligations exclude variable lease costs, such as sales based contingent rent, and include interest of $197.3 million.
(4) Purchase obligations includes the Company's share of expected system-wide fixed price commitments for food, beverage, and restaurant supply items. These amounts are estimates based on anticipated inventory needed for the Company's restaurants, and could vary due to the timing of volumes.
(5) Other non-current liabilities primarily represent the employee deferred compensation plan liability. Refer to Note 15, Employee Benefit Programs, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Financial Condition and Future Liquidity
We require capital principally to maintain, improve, and refurbish existing restaurants, support infrastructure needs, and for general operating purposes, as well as to grow the business through new restaurant construction and expansion of our restaurant base which serves Donatos®. In addition, we have and may continue to use capital to pay principal on our borrowings and repurchase our common stock as allowed by our credit agreement. Our primary short-term and long-term sources of liquidity are expected to be cash flows from operations and our credit facility. Based upon current levels of operations and anticipated growth, and the diminishing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect cash flows from operations and available borrowing capacity under the credit facility will be sufficient to meet debt service, capital expenditures, and working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months. We and the restaurant industry in general maintain relatively low levels of accounts receivable and inventories, and vendors generally grant short-term trade credit for purchases, such as food and supplies. The addition of new restaurants and refurbishment of existing restaurants are reflected as long-term assets and not as part of working capital.
Working Capital
We typically maintain current liabilities in excess of our current assets which results in a working capital deficit. We are able to operate with a working capital deficit because restaurant sales are primarily conducted on a cash or credit card basis. Rapid turnover of inventory results in limited investment in inventories, and cash from sales is usually received before related payables for food, supplies, and payroll become due. In addition, receipts from the sale of gift cards are received well in advance of related redemptions. Rather than maintain higher cash balances that would result from this pattern of operating cash flows, we typically utilize operating cash flows in excess of those required for currently maturing liabilities to pay for capital expenditures, debt repayment, or to repurchase stock. When necessary, we utilize our credit facility to satisfy short-term liquidity requirements. We believe our future cash flows generated from restaurant operations combined with our remaining borrowing capacity under the credit facility will be sufficient to satisfy any working capital deficits and our planned capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those we believe are both significant and that require us to make difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often because we need to estimate the effect of inherently uncertain matters. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experiences and various other factors we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates, including our estimates of future restaurant level cash flows, which are subject to the current economic environment, and we might obtain different results if we use different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as the Company's most critical accounting policies and estimates, which are most important to the portrayal of the Company's financial condition and results and require management's most subjective and complex judgment. Information regarding the Company's other significant accounting policies is disclosed in Note 1, Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets - Long-lived assets, including restaurant sites, leasehold improvements, other fixed assets, right of use assets, and amortizable intangible assets are reviewed when indicators of impairment are present. Expected cash flows associated with an asset are the key factor in determining the recoverability of the asset. Identifiable cash flows are measured at the restaurant level. The estimate of cash flows is based upon, among other things, certain assumptions about expected future operating performance, including assumptions on future revenue trends. Management's estimates of undiscounted cash flows may differ from actual cash flows due to, among other things, changes in economic conditions, changes to our business model, or changes in operating performance. If the sum of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying value of the asset, we recognize an impairment loss. The amount of the impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying value exceeds the fair value of the asset, which is determined using discounted cash flows.
Judgments made by management related to our ability to realize undiscounted cash flows in excess of the carrying amounts of such assets are affected by factors such as the ongoing maintenance and improvements of the assets, changes in economic conditions, and changes in operating performance. As the ongoing expected cash flows and carrying amounts of long-lived assets are assessed, these factors could cause us to realize a material impairment charge. Each restaurant's past and present operating performance were reviewed in combination with projected future results, primarily through projected undiscounted cash flows, which indicated possible impairment. We compared the carrying amount of each restaurant to its fair value as estimated by management. The fair value of the long-lived assets is typically determined using a discounted cash flow projection model. The discount factor is determined using external information regarding the risk-free rate of return, industry beta factors, and premium adjustments. These factors are combined with internal information such as the Company's average cost of debt and effective tax rate to determine a weighted average cost of capital which is applied to the undiscounted cash flows. In certain cases, management uses other market information such as market rent, when available, to estimate the fair value of a restaurant. The impairment charges represent the excess of each restaurant's carrying amount over its estimated fair value. During 2021, the Company determined long-lived assets at ten excess properties were impaired as a result of our cash flow analysis, and recognized non-cash impairment charges of $6.4 million primarily related to the impairment of the long-lived assets associated with excess properties. During 2020, we impaired 40 Company-owned restaurants as a result of our cash flow analysis resulting in non-cash impairment charges of $21.7 million.
Information technology systems, such as internal-use computer software, are reviewed and tested for recoverability if the internal-use computer software is not expected to provide substantive service potential, a significant change occurs to the extent or manner in which the software is used or is expected to be used, a significant change is made or will be made to the software program, or costs of developing or modifying internal-use software significantly exceed the amount originally expected to develop or modify the software. During 2020, the Company impaired information technology assets totaling $5.2 million due to the COVID-19 pandemic redirecting our implementation of certain digital platforms in order to accelerate our speed to market.
Liquor licenses with indefinite lives are reviewed for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying amount is not recoverable, we record an impairment charge for the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value. We determine fair value based on quoted prices in the active market for the license in the same or similar jurisdictions, representing a level 1 fair value measurement. During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company performed its annual review of its indefinite lived liquor licenses that had a carrying value of $7.2 million, and recorded impairment charges of $0.5 million to indefinite-lived intangibles in 2021. No impairment charges were recorded to liquor licenses with indefinite lives in 2020, or 2019.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Footnote 2, Recent Accounting Pronouncements, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for our discussion of recently issued accounting standards.