ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K are forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The factors listed in Item 1A “Risk Factors,” as well as any cautionary language in this Form 10-K, provide examples of risks, uncertainties and events that may cause our actual results to differ materially from those projected. Except as may be required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect events after the date of this report.
Overview
We are the premier global weight-loss solutions company, offering an integrated portfolio of proven products and services that manage and treat obesity and associated metabolic disease. Our primary operations are in the following geographical areas: United States, Australia and certain European and Middle Eastern countries. Our current portfolio includes the Lap-Band Adjustable Gastric Banding System, the reshapecare virtual health coaching program, the ReShape Marketplace, the Obalon Balloon System, the ReShape Vest, an investigational device to help treat more patients with obesity, and the Diabetes Bloc-Stim Neuromodulation device, a technology under development as a new treatment for type 2 diabetes mellitus. There has been no revenue recorded for the Obalon Balloon System which was recently acquired, and there has been no revenue recorded for the ReShape Vest or the Diabetes Bloc-Stim Neuromodulation as these products are still in the development stage.
Recent Developments
On January 19, 2021, the Company entered into the fourth amendment to the credit agreement that increased the amount available under the delayed draw term loans by $1.0 million, of which all funds were received upfront and used for the escrow fund securing the termination fee under the Merger Agreement. The maturity date of the loans under the credit agreement, including those under the amendment was March 31, 2021, all of which has subsequently been paid in full.
On March 1, 2021, the Company received confirmation from the SBA that the PPP Loan was forgiven in full including all interest incurred.
On March 10, 2021, the Company entered into the fifth amendment to the credit agreement that extended the maturity date from March 31, 2021, to March 31, 2022.
On June 15, 2021, the Company completed its merger with Obalon, pursuant to which a wholly owned subsidiary merged with and into Obalon. As a result of the merger, Obalon was renamed “ReShape Lifesciences Inc.” and ReShape Lifesciences Inc. was renamed “ReShape Weightloss Inc.”, which is now a wholly owned subsidiary of ReShape Lifesciences Inc. Additionally, the Company began trading on the Nasdaq.
On June 28, 2021, the Company entered into a warrant exercise agreement with existing accredited investors to exercise certain outstanding warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 7.9 million shares of the Company’s common stock. In consideration for the immediate exercise of the existing warrants for cash, the investors were granted new unregistered warrants to purchase up to 5.9 million shares of common stock with an exercise price of $6.00 per share. The Company received approximately $45.5 million in proceeds, of which $10.8 million was used to pay off the credit agreement, including $10.5 million of debt and $0.3 million of accrued interest. The remaining proceeds will be used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
On October 12, 2021, the Company announced the launch of a multi-platform consumer advertising campaign utilizing national television, print, social media, and public relations to market the Next-Generation Lap-Band program with available aftercare supported through reshapecare, the reimbursable virtual health coaching platform to create consumer awareness and increase patient demand.
On November 4, 2021, the Company announced the launch of an advanced line of supplements for bariatric surgery and medical weight loss patients, ReShape Optimize by ProCare Health. Products from the new supplement line will be available for purchase in the ReShape Marketplace, an extension of reshapecare.
On February 16, 2022, the Company renewed the office space lease in San Clemente, California for one year. This lease renewal will commence on July 1, 2022, and end on June 30, 2023.
Financial Overview
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain data from our operating results from the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, expressed as percentages of net revenue (in thousands):
Non-GAAP Disclosures
In addition to the financial information prepared in conformity with GAAP, we provide certain historical non-GAAP financial information. Management believes that these non-GAAP financial measures assist investors in making comparisons of period-to-period operating results and that, in some respects, these non-GAAP financial measures are more indicative of the Company’s ongoing core operating performance than their GAAP equivalents.
Management believes that the presentation of this non-GAAP financial information provides investors with greater transparency and facilitates comparison of operating results across a broad spectrum of companies with varying capital structures, compensation strategies, derivative instruments, and amortization methods, which provides a more complete understanding of our financial performance, competitive position, and prospects for the future. However, the non-GAAP financial measures presented in this Form 10-K have certain limitations in that they do not reflect all of the costs associated with the operations of our business as determined in accordance with GAAP. Therefore, investors should consider non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Further, the non-GAAP financial measures presented by the Company may be different from similarly named non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA in its evaluation of the Company’s core results of operations and trends between fiscal periods and believes that these measures are important components of its internal performance measurement process. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net loss before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, changes in fair value of liability warrants and other one-time costs. Management uses Adjusted EBITDA in its evaluation of the Company’s core results of operations and trends between fiscal periods and
believes that these measures are important components of its internal performance measurement process. Therefore, investors should consider non-GAAP financial measures in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or as superior to, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Further, the non-GAAP financial measures presented by the Company may be different from similarly named non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
The following table contains a reconciliation of non-GAAP net loss to GAAP net loss attributable to common stockholders for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands).
Comparison of Results of Operations
Revenue. The following table summarizes our net revenue by geographic location based on the location of customers for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as the percentage by location of total revenue and the amount of change and percentage of change (dollars in thousands):
Revenue totaled $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary reason for the increase of $2.3 million, or 20.4%, is due to a $2.0 million increase in sales for the United States, and a $0.3 million increase internationally. The increase in total revenue is primarily due to lessened COVID 19 pandemic restrictions for elective surgeries in 2021 as compared to 2020. There has also been a rise in obesity awareness due to the complications associated with COVID 19 for obesity, and the Company has increased its overall sales and marketing efforts, which has resulted in increased sales. We did see a slight decrease in sales during the fourth quarter of 2021, due to the rise of the Delta and Omicron variants, and the associated restrictions.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit: The following table summarizes our cost of goods sold and gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as percentage of total revenue and the amount of change and percentage of change (dollars in thousands):
Gross profit. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $8.3 million, compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $2.0 million or 33.3%. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 61.4% compared to 55.4% for the same period in 2020. The increase in gross profit margin is primarily due to increased volume, as revenue increased by 20.4%, reduced period expenses, and improved product mix with higher domestic sales as a percentage of revenue, which have a higher gross profit margin than international sales. We have also begun to realize significant cost of goods savings by moving our manufacturing from Costa Rica to a new supplier in the United States.
Operating Expenses: The following table summarizes our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as the percentage of total revenue, and the amount of changes and percentage of change (dollars in thousands):
Total operating expenses increased by $46.1 million, or 246.4%, due primarily to an impairment charge of $28.8 million, an increase in stock-based compensation of $11.4 million and an increase in general and administrative expenses related to the merger with Obalon of $2.3 million. After the Obalon merger, and subsequent listing on the Nasdaq, the Company issued either restricted stock units or stock options to all employees and non-employee directors of the Company, its first grant since 2017. The vesting schedules for these grants were retroactive to hire dates, so there was a catch-up expense of $8.9 million. Due to this catch-up, the Company expects for stock-based compensation expense to normalize going forward. The Company has begun focusing on increased brand recognition through improved marketing strategies, including television and print advertisements, and social media presence which has increased our overall sales and marketing expenses. As previously disclosed, the Company announced the launch of a multi-platform consumer advertising campaign utilizing national television, print, social media and public relations during the fourth quarter of 2021.
Sales and Marketing Expense. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $4.5 million, or 95.2%, to $9.2 million, compared to $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to an increase in advertising and marketing costs of $2.5 million, as the Company launched its direct to consumer campaign, and increased its social media presence. In addition, we had an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $1.2 million, as during the third quarter of 2021, the Company issued both RSUs and stock options containing a look back provision to begin vesting at the one-year anniversary of the date of employment, resulting in an expense of $0.9 million at the time the awards were granted. Additionally, payroll related expenditures increased by $0.4 million as the Company strengthened its commercial organization and commissions increased by $0.2 million from higher revenue compared to the prior year. The Company also had an increase in software costs of $0.2 million. These increases were minimally offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in consulting fees. The Company expects to continue devoting more resources toward sales and marketing, particularly through our national direct to consumer campaign, and so we expect total Sales and Marketing expenses to increase for 2022.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $13.9 million, or 131.9%, to $24.4 million, compared to $10.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to an increase of $8.9 million in stock-based compensation expense, as during the third quarter of 2021, the Company issued both RSUs and stock options containing a look back provision to begin vesting at the one-year anniversary of the date of employment, resulting in an expense of $6.8 million at the time the awards were granted. In addition, the Company had increases in audit, consulting and other professional services of $3.2 million, of which $2.3 million was directly related to the merger with Obalon, an increase in payroll related expenses of $1.0 million, including a $0.7 million increase in bonus fees, an increase in legal and patent related fees of $0.4 million, an increase in rent and facilities of $0.3 million due to the facilities assumed from the merger with Obalon, and an increase in insurance fees of $0.1 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in bad debt expense of $0.2 million, as the Company continues to focus on collections.
Research and Development Expense. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, decreased by $1.0 million, or 27.9%, to $2.5 million, compared to $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due to a $2.2 million reduction in consulting, and clinical trial expenses as a result of a slowdown in clinical trials for the ReShape Vest due to the COVID 19 pandemic, and a reduction in payroll expenses of $0.1 million. This decrease was offset by an increase of $1.3 million in stock-based compensation expense, as during the third quarter of 2021, the Company issued both RSUs and stock options containing a look back provision to begin vesting at the one-year anniversary of the date of employment, resulting in an expense of $1.2 million at the time the awards were granted.
Loss on Impairment of Intangible Assets and Goodwill. The Company incurred two impairment charges totaling $28.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $21.6 million due to a reduction in our market capitalization at year-end. In addition, an impairment charge of $7.2 million was recorded, due to a reduction in our market capitalization coupled with the effects of the delays in the ReShape Vest clinical trials from the COVID-19 pandemic thus reducing the near-term future net cash flows. For further details regarding the impairment charges, see Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included in