ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Report. The forward-looking statements included in this discussion and elsewhere in this Report involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.“ Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
Plan of Operations
Since execution of the Sublicense Agreement with TMDI in November 2019 (as discussed in greater detail above under “Item 1. Business”), our plan of operations has been primarily focused on preliminary activities of marketing and production planning for our licensed aerosol inhaler product line ultimately leading to the initial sales of our new products, beginning in early 2020. In that regard, we have supplemented the proceeds received from the sale of convertible notes with the private sales of restricted shares of our common stock to various accredited investors, and completed the recent sale of a convertible debenture in the aggregate principal amount of $1,941,176 and other convertible notes, as discussed in greater detail below, to further fund our operations moving forward.
We plan to grow our operations as discussed in greater detail above under “Growth Strategy” under “Item 1. Business”.
Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)
In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, which causes the infectious disease known as COVID-19, was reported in Wuhan, China. The World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” on January 30, 2020 and a global pandemic on March 11, 2020. In March and April 2020, many U.S. states and local jurisdictions began issuing ‘stay-at-home’ orders. As disclosed above, the Company has recently adopted a new business strategy focused on developing potential commercial opportunities which will involve the rapid application of therapeutics using proprietary metered dose inhaler technology that the Company has recently licensed from a third party. This strategy includes typical pharmaceutical type marketing efforts (e.g., marketing directly to doctors) that has been shown to work with traditional drug product type sales, versus novelty type sales, which currently include cannabidiols. We are planning on moving away from traditional internet sales and marketing and believe this transition will benefit the Company going forward. COVID-19 resulted in the Company being forced to temporarily suspend its marketing plans as the Company was not able to travel to meet with doctors directly. Moving forward, the range of possible impacts on the Company’s business in the event the coronavirus pandemic continues to include: (i) changing demand for the Company’s products; (ii) rising bottlenecks in the Company’s supply chain; and (iii) increasing contraction in the capital markets. At this time, the Company’s sales have not been materially affected by the pandemic (as the Company has had only limited sales to date), and it believes that it is premature to determine the potential impact on the Company’s business prospects from these or any other factors that may be related to the coronavirus pandemic; however, it is possible that Covid-19 and the worldwide response thereto, may have a material negative effect on our operations, cash flows and results of operations.
Through the date of this Report, we have been able to successfully support our operations with our cash on hand, through equity sales (which have to date been completed through private offerings), and borrowings. Moving forward we believe we will need to raise additional funding to support our operations which funding we anticipate being available through the sale of equity or debt, similar to our recently completed sale of a convertible debenture and convertible debt, as discussed below. We also continue to evaluate our business operations based on new information as it becomes available and will make changes that we consider necessary in light of any new developments regarding the pandemic. Additionally, we anticipate requiring further funds in the future to grow our operations and produce additional product lines, which funds we anticipate raising through equity offerings, and if necessary, debt.
The future impact of COVID-19 on our business and operations is currently unknown. The pandemic is continuously evolving and the full extent to which COVID-19 will ultimately impact us depends on future
developments, including the duration and spread of the virus, as well as potential seasonality of new outbreaks and virus mutations.
Results of Operations
The following discussion pertains to the Company’s revenues and expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020, as reported in our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included herein.
Revenues - The Company commenced limited sales of its inhaler products to customers, while still in a product development mode, on a trial basis in January 2020. However, due to the subsequent impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other contributing factors, the Company has not sustained a consistent level of sales thus far. The Company has two different sales channels as follows:
·Wholesale - designed to capture fairly large, but sporadic, orders received from wholesale customers, often for substantial quantities with relatively high profit margins.
·Retail - designed to capture a high volume of small orders received from retail customers through an online portal, with significantly lower profit margins.
The revenues from such sales on a trial basis in the year ended December 31, 2021 were $534 compared to $130,916 for the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020, consisting mainly of two large wholesale orders. Revenues from sales of the Company’s inhaler and other products, under both sales channels, are expected to gradually increase in the future, once the current trial period ends.
Cost of Goods Sold - Cost of goods sold in the year ended December 31, 2021 were $200 compared to $19,394 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. The cost of goods sold reflected the cost of procuring inhalers and related products and supplies for resale. The cost of goods sold in the year ended December 31, 2021 was not relevant due to the very low level of sales in that period, whereas the cost of goods sold in the nine months ended December 31, 2020, resulted in a gross profit margin of $111,522.
General and Administrative Expense - General and administrative expenses in the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2,114,770 compared to $2,023,379 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. This fluctuation was due to the increase in certain cash overhead expenses, mostly for payroll, arising from the adoption of a new business strategy focused on commercial opportunities involving the rapid application of therapeutics using the RxoidTM MDI technology, supplemented by the assets acquired from Razor Jacket in late 2020.
Amortization Expense - Amortization expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $33,759 compared to $75,000 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was largely due to the termination of the Sublicense Agreement, effective February 9, 2021, under which the Company was previously obligated to reimburse TMDI in the amount of $200,000 for a license fee owed by TMDI to EM3, covering the first two years of the Sublicense Agreement, as discussed in greater detail in the section above, partially offset by the initial amortization expense recognized on an operating lease asset beginning in October 2021.
Depreciation Expense - Depreciation expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $22,100 compared to $7,255 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. This increase reflects depreciation on the Company’s purchases of property and equipment beginning in September 2020.
Other Income (Expense) - Interest expense in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,329,441 compared to $58,009 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to the amortization of the original issue debt discount and other adjustments to interest expense arising from the warrant liability recognized from the issuance of common stock warrants issued in conjunction with a convertible debenture in August 2021, partially offset by the conversion of certain convertible notes into common stock in August 2020 and March 2021. Other income (expense) also includes a gain from the change in valuation of the warrant liability in the year ended December 31, 2021 of $631,853.
Net Loss - Net loss in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,867,883 compared to $2,052,121 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020, representing the net amounts of the various revenue and
expense categories indicated above. The Company has not recognized any income tax benefits for these net losses due to the uncertainty of their ultimate realization.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flows from Operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,209,131 compared to $1,724,829 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. This net increase was largely due to the higher level of overhead costs and other working capital changes following the Company’s adoption of a new business strategy in early 2020, as further noted above.
Cash flows from Investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $292,531 compared to $106,740 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to the Company’s greater level of purchases of property and equipment which began in September 2020.
Cash flows from Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,195,000 compared to $2,194,500 in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from $1,650,000 received from the sale of the Debenture in the original principal amount of $1,941,176, as well as from the private sales of 1,462,500 shares of restricted common stock to several accredited investors at an offering price of $0.40 per share for total proceeds of $585,000, partially offset by the net repayment of various unsecured notes payable in the amount of $40,000. Net cash provided by financing activities in the nine-month transition period ended December 31, 2020 reflected the sale of 9,288,750 shares of restricted common stock in private transactions in the amount of $1,922,500, and the issuance of new notes payable in the amount of $422,000, partially offset by the payments of existing notes payable in the amount of $150,000.
Effective August 31, 2020, the Company reached the necessary milestone to trigger the automatic conversion of certain notes payable issued to the holders on various dates in 2018 and 2019, as amended, in the total principal amount of $732,835 into shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to a 4.99% ownership limitation for each beneficial owner of such notes. In conjunction with this conversion, holders of notes in the principal amount of $404,601, plus an additional accrued interest amount of $96,536, converted their notes into 10,022,749 shares of common stock.
Effective March 31, 2021, the following additional conversions of the Company’s remaining convertible notes payable occurred: (i) the holders of convertible notes payable issued in 2018 at a conversion price of $0.13 per share with total principal and accrued interest balances in the aggregate amount of $410,888 converted their notes into a total of 3,160,684 shares of common stock; and (ii) the holders of convertible notes payable amended or issued in 2019 at a conversion price of $0.05 per share with total principal and accrued interest balances in the aggregate amount of $383,470, the automatic conversion of which had previously been triggered on August 31, 2020, as discussed above, subject to each holder’s beneficial ownership limitation, converted their notes into a total of 7,669,381 shares of common stock. As a result of these conversions, a total of 10,830,065 new shares of common stock were issued and the Company’s outstanding debt obligations were substantially reduced.
On October 15, 2020, the Company entered into a private stock subscription agreement with an accredited investor whereby the Company agreed to sell the investor 2,640,000 shares of restricted common stock and warrants to purchase 6,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock at an exercise price of $0.50 per share and a term of one year, in exchange for a cash payment to the Company in the amount of $100,000, and the performance of certain other obligations. Based on previous negotiations between the Company and the investor prior to the execution of this agreement, the investor had made a provisional payment of $90,000, which was reflected by the Company as a liability as of September 30, 2020. Upon execution of the agreement, the investor paid the remaining $10,000 to the Company. The resale of the shares held by the purchaser are subject to a lock-up agreement.
In November 2020, the Company closed an Asset Purchase and Sales Agreement with Razor Jacket, an Oregon based supplier of isolate and related products, to acquire all of Razor Jacket’s equipment relating to the manufacture of cannabinoid isolates and related products. As previously noted, the Company paid $300,000 in cash at closing, and issued 625,000 shares of restricted common stock to the owners of Razor Jacket, and provided them the right to earn up to 16.5 million shares of Series A Preferred Stock of the Company, convertible for common stock on a one-for-one basis, subject to certain conditions.
In order to meet short-term working capital needs in mid-2021, the Company obtained unsecured cash advances from two of its officers (its Chief Executive Officer, Donal R. Schmidt, Jr., and Sean Berrier, the Senior Vice President (a non-executive officer position)) in May through August 2021 in the net amount of $260,000. Such advances are expected to be repaid out of the proceeds of an underwritten public offering of the Company’s equity securities which the Company is currently pursuing. However, no assurance can be given that the Company will be successful in achieving a closing of the underwritten public offering.
In order to meet longer-term working capital needs in advance of a proposed underwritten offering, which may not be completed timely, if at all, on August 4, 2021, the Company sold the Debenture and issued the same investor the Investor Warrants, each discussed in greater detail above under “Item 1. Business-Prior Material Acquisitions and Transactions“.
The amount owed under the Debenture, including amounts owed upon the occurrence of an event of default, may be converted, in whole or part, by the holder, into common stock of the Company, at a conversion price of $0.40 per share (the “Conversion Price”), provided that the outstanding amount of the Debenture automatically converts into common stock of the Company upon the closing of a Qualified Offering, at the lower of (i) the Conversion Price; and (ii) 75% of the offering price of the Qualified Offering. The conversion of the Debenture is subject to a beneficial ownership limitation of 4.99%, preventing such conversion by the holder thereof, if such exercise would result in such holder and its affiliates, exceeding ownership of 4.99% of our common stock, which percentage may be increased to up to 9.99%, with at least 61 days prior written notice by the holder thereof.
The Investor Warrants, which are evidenced by a common stock Purchase Warrant (the “Warrant Agreement”), have an exercise price of $0.40 per share, and may be exercised at any time from the grant date of the Investor Warrants until August 3, 2026. The total number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the warrants equals 100% of the total initial shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the Debenture. The Investor Warrants have cashless exercise rights if when exercised, and following the six-month anniversary of the closing of the offering, a registration statement registering the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise thereof, is not effective with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The exercise of the Investor Warrants is subject to a beneficial ownership limitation of 4.99%, preventing such exercise by the holder thereof, if such exercise would result in such holder and its affiliates, exceeding ownership of 4.99% of our common stock, which percentage may be increased to up to 9.99% with at least 61 days prior written notice by the holder thereof. The Investor Warrants contain anti-dilution rights such that if we issue, or are deemed to have issued, common stock or common stock equivalents at a price less than the then exercise price of the Investor Warrants, subject to certain customary exceptions and the sale of up to $1.5 million in private transactions, the exercise price of the Investor Warrants is automatically reduced to such lower value, and the number of shares of common stock issuable upon exercise thereafter is adjusted proportionately so that the aggregate exercise price payable upon exercise of such Investor Warrants is the same prior to and after such reduction in exercise price. As a result, the effect of the anti-dilution right may cause significant dilution to existing shareholders.
Pursuant to a Placement Agent Agreement entered into with Maxim Group LLC (the “Placement Agent”), who served as placement agent for the offering of the Debenture and Investor Warrants, we agreed to pay the Placement Agent for the offering a cash commission of 8% of the gross proceeds received in the offering ($132,000), and to grant the Placement Agent a warrant to purchase 5% of the total shares issuable upon conversion of the Debenture (242,647), with an exercise price equal to the same exercise price as the Investor Warrants ($0.40 per share), which have a term of five years and are in substantially similar form as the Investor Warrants (the “Placement Warrants” and together with the Investor Warrants, the “Offering Warrants”). We agreed to register the shares of common stock issuable upon exercise of the Placement Warrants under the Securities Act.
The Company has been using the proceeds of the offering to meet its short-term working capital needs in anticipation of closing a qualified listing on a national exchange and raising capital in connection with an underwritten offering, provided no assurance can be given that the Company will be successful in uplisting to a national exchange or achieving a closing of the underwritten public offering.
As of December 31, 2021, we had a cash balance of $0.2 million and a working capital deficit of $2.6 million. We have not generated a net profit from the limited sales of our inhaler products beginning in early 2020 and only generated minimal revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021. Until such time that we can generate substantial net profit from operations, if ever, we expect to finance our operating activities through a combination of equity offerings and debt financings and we may seek to raise additional capital through strategic collaborations.
However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all, which would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our operations. Failure to receive additional funding could cause us to cease operations, in part or in full. Furthermore, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations, which may cause dilution to our existing stockholders.
In the first quarter of 2022 we sold the Suggs Note and the Red Road Note, each discussed in greater detail above under “Item 1. Business-Prior Material Acquisitions and Transactions“.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
We do not engage in off-balance sheet transactions.
Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The Company has generated limited revenues and has suffered recurring losses totaling $8,521,423 since inception. These factors, among others, indicate that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time. The consolidated financial statements do not contain any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.