Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes to the consolidated financial statements. We report our financial results on a 52/53-week fiscal year, which ends on the last Sunday in December. Fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 all had 52 weeks of operations.
Overview
Ruth’s Hospitality Group, Inc. develops and operates fine dining restaurants under the trade name Ruth’s Chris Steak House. As of December 26, 2021, there were 150 Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants, including 73 Company-owned restaurants, three restaurants operating under contractual agreements and 74 franchisee-owned restaurants, including 23 international franchisee-owned restaurants.
On July 29, 2019, we completed the acquisition of substantially all the assets of three franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants for a cash purchase price of $18.6 million. The results of operations, financial position and cash flows of the MBR Franchise Acquisition are included in our consolidated financial statements as of the date of the acquisition. For additional information, see Note 3 of the consolidated financial statements.
All Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants are located in the United States. The franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants include 23 international franchisee-owned restaurants in Aruba, Canada, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Philippines, Singapore and Taiwan. In 2019, the Company opened two new Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants - one in Columbus, OH in October and one in Somerville, MA in November. A franchisee opened a new restaurant in 2019 in Chongqing, China. In 2020, the Company relocated one of its Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants in Washington, D.C. due to the expiration of a lease. Franchisees did not open any new restaurants in 2020. During fiscal year 2020 nine Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants were permanently closed and one franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurant was permanently closed. In 2021, the Company opened two new Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants - one in Short Hills, NJ in September and one in Lake Grove, NY in December. The Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurant in Bellevue, WA closed in April 2021, and the Bethesda, MD and Mauna Lani, HI locations closed in December 2021. Franchisees opened two new Ruth’s Chris Steak Houses in fiscal year 2021 - one in Manila, Philippines in September and one in Changsha, China in November.
The Ruth’s Chris menu features a broad selection of high-quality USDA Prime and Choice grade steaks and other premium offerings served in Ruth’s Chris’ signature fashion-“sizzling” and topped with butter-complemented by other traditional menu items inspired by our New Orleans heritage. The Ruth’s Chris restaurants reflect the 56-year commitment to the core values instilled by our founder, Ruth Fertel, of caring for our guests by delivering the highest quality food, beverages and service in a warm and inviting atmosphere.
Our Ruth’s Chris restaurants cater to special occasion diners and frequent customers, in addition to the business clientele traditionally served by upscale steakhouses, by providing a dining experience designed to appeal to a wide range of guests. We believe our focus on creating this broad appeal provides us with opportunities to expand into a wide range of markets, including many markets not traditionally served by upscale steakhouses. We offer USDA Prime and other high-quality steaks that are aged and prepared to exact company standards and cooked in 1,800-degree broilers. We also offer veal, lamb, poultry and seafood dishes and a broad selection of appetizers. We complement our distinctive food offerings with an award-winning wine list. During the fiscal year 2021, the average check was $89 per person at Company-owned Ruth’s Chris Restaurants.
Recap of Fiscal Year 2021 and Fiscal Year 2020 Operating Results
Operating income (loss) for fiscal year 2021 increased from fiscal year 2020 by $78.3 million to $49.7 million. Operating income for fiscal year 2021 was impacted favorably by a $141.3 million increase in restaurant sales, a reduction in loss on impairment of $14.7 million and increases in franchise income and other operating income, which were partially offset by increased food and beverage costs, restaurant operating expenses and marketing and advertising. Increased restaurant sales were attributable to the reduction of COVID-19 pandemic effects on Company-owned restaurant sales. After-tax net income from continuing operations during fiscal year 2021 increased from fiscal year 2020 by $67.6 million to $42.3 million.
Operating income (loss) for fiscal year 2020 decreased from fiscal year 2019 by $81.0 million to a loss of $28.5 million. Operating loss for fiscal year 2020 was impacted unfavorably by a $180.6 million decrease in restaurant sales, a loss on impairment of $16.5 million and decreases in franchise income and other operating income, which were partially offset by decreased food and beverage costs, restaurant operating expenses, marketing and advertising, and general and administrative expenses. Lower restaurant sales were attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic effect on Company-owned restaurant sales. After-tax net income (loss) from continuing operations during fiscal year 2020 decreased from fiscal year 2019 by $67.5 million to a loss of $25.3 million.
For further information on the impact of COVID-19 and actions taken by the Company in response to the pandemic, see Note 1 of the consolidated financial statements.
Key Financial Terms and Metrics
We evaluate our business using a variety of key financial measures:
Restaurant Sales. Restaurant sales consist of food and beverage sales by Company-owned restaurants. Restaurant sales are primarily influenced by total operating weeks in the relevant period and comparable restaurant sales growth. Total operating weeks is the total number of Company-owned restaurants multiplied by the number of weeks each is in operation during the relevant period. Total operating weeks are impacted by restaurant openings and closings, as well as changes in the number of weeks included in the relevant period. Comparable restaurant sales growth reflects the change in year-over-year or quarter-over-quarter, as applicable, sales for the comparable restaurant base. We define the comparable restaurant base to be those Company-owned restaurants in operation for not less than eighteen months prior to the beginning of the fiscal year including the period being measured. Comparable restaurant sales growth is primarily influenced by customer traffic, which is measured by the number of entrées sold, and the average guest check. Customer traffic is influenced by the popularity of our menu items, our guest mix, our ability to deliver a high-quality dining experience and overall economic conditions. Average guest check, a measure of total restaurant sales divided by the number of entrées, is driven by menu mix and pricing.
Franchise Income. Franchise income includes (1) franchise and development fees charged to franchisees, (2) sales-based royalty income and (3) sales-based advertising fees. Franchise royalties consist of 5.0% of adjusted gross sales from each franchisee-owned restaurant. In addition, our more recent franchise agreements require an advertising fee of up to 1.0% of gross sales to be paid by the franchisee. Under our prior franchise agreements, the Company would pay 1.0% out of the 5.0% royalty toward national advertising. We evaluate the performance of our franchisees by measuring franchisee-owned restaurant operating weeks, which is impacted by franchisee-owned restaurant openings and closings, and comparable franchisee-owned restaurant sales growth, which together with operating weeks, drives royalty income.
Other Operating Income. Other operating income consists primarily of breakage income associated with gift cards, and includes fees earned from management agreements, banquet-related guarantee and services revenue and other incidental guest fees.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs include all restaurant-level food and beverage costs of Company-owned restaurants. We measure food and beverage costs by tracking cost of sales as a percentage of restaurant sales and cost per entrée. Food and beverage costs are generally influenced by the cost of food and beverage items, distribution costs and menu mix.
Restaurant Operating Expenses. We measure restaurant operating expenses for Company-owned restaurants as a percentage of restaurant sales. Restaurant operating expenses include the following:
•
Labor costs, consisting of restaurant management salaries, hourly staff payroll and other payroll-related items, including taxes and fringe benefits. We measure our labor cost efficiency by tracking hourly and total labor costs as a percentage of restaurant sales;
•
Operating costs, consisting of maintenance, utilities, bank and credit card charges, and any other restaurant-level expenses; and
•
Occupancy costs, consisting of both fixed and variable portions of rent, common area maintenance charges, insurance premiums and real property taxes.
Marketing and Advertising. Marketing and advertising includes all media, production and related costs for both local restaurant advertising and national marketing. We measure the efficiency of our marketing and advertising expenditures by tracking these costs as a percentage of total revenues. We have historically spent approximately 2.5% to 4.0% of total revenues on marketing and advertising. It is anticipated that spending in this area will increase throughout fiscal year 2022 as the economy improves.
General and Administrative. General and administrative costs include costs relating to all corporate and administrative functions that support development and restaurant operations and provide an infrastructure to support future Company and franchisee growth. General and administrative costs are comprised of management, supervisory and staff salaries and employee benefits, travel, performance-based compensation, stock compensation, information systems, training, corporate rent, professional and consulting fees, technology and market research. We measure our general and administrative expense efficiency by tracking these costs as a percentage of total revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization. Depreciation and amortization includes depreciation of fixed assets and certain definite life intangible assets. We depreciate capitalized leasehold improvements over the shorter of the total expected lease term or their estimated useful life.
Pre-Opening Costs. Pre-opening costs consist of costs incurred prior to opening a Company-owned restaurant, which are comprised principally of manager salaries and relocation costs, employee payroll and related training costs for new employees, including practice and rehearsal of service activities as well as lease costs incurred prior to opening.
Gain (Loss) on Lease Modifications. Gain (Loss) on lease modifications consist of gains and losses related to changes in the scope of a lease or the consideration for a lease that was not included in the original terms of the lease. Costs incurred related to the exit of a signed lease are also included.
Loss on Impairments. Loss on impairments consist of charges recognized by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value (net realizable value for inventory). Impairment charges were taken on fixed assets, inventory, liquor licenses and operating lease right-of-use assets.
Results of Operations
The table below sets forth certain operating data expressed as a percentage of total revenues, unless otherwise marked as a percentage of restaurant sales, for the periods indicated. Please refer to the Consolidated Statement of Operations for additional information regarding the Company’s results of operations. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the operating results that may be expected in the future.
Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
Restaurant Sales. Restaurant sales increased $141.3 million, or 54.2%, to $402.0 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. Comparable Company-owned restaurant sales increased 58.6%, which consisted of an average check increase of 13.1%, and a 40.2% increase in traffic counts as local restrictions and market conditions improved relating to the COVID-19 pandemic during fiscal year 2021.
Franchise Income. Franchise income increased $6.8 million, or 57.9%, to $18.5 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. The increase is primarily attributable to an increase in sales-based royalty income from a sales increase as local restrictions and market conditions improved relating to the COVID-19 pandemic during fiscal year 2021.
Other Operating Income. Other operating income increased $3.3 million, or 63.4%, to $8.6 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. Other operating income includes our share of income from managed restaurants, gift card breakage revenue and miscellaneous restaurant income. The change in other operating income was primarily due to an increase of $1.5 million in income from restaurants operating under contractual agreements and $891 thousand in breakage revenue.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs increased $52.6 million, or 69.4%, to $128.5 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. Food and beverage costs, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 29 basis points to 32.0% compared to fiscal year 2020 largely due to an increase of 36.5% in total beef costs.
Restaurant Operating Expenses. Restaurant operating expenses increased $29.3 million, or 19.4%, to $179.7 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. Restaurant operating expenses, as a percentage of restaurant sales, decreased 13.0% to 44.7% compared to fiscal year 2020 primarily due to labor efficiencies and the impact of fixed costs on higher restaurant sales in 2021.
Marketing and Advertising. Marketing and advertising expenses increased $6.6 million, or 96.3% to $13.5 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. Marketing and advertising, as a percentage of total revenue, increased 60 basis points to 3.1% compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase in marketing and advertising expenses during fiscal year 2021 was attributable to $4.7 million related to digital and data transformation and increasing expenses as the Company resumes its marketing programs that were suspended as a result of its response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $717 thousand or 2.2% to $32.5 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. The decrease in general and administrative costs was primarily attributable to a reduction in compensation related costs in fiscal year 2021.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation and amortization expenses decreased $1.5 million to $20.5 million during fiscal year 2021, primarily due to reduced depreciation expenses from the permanent closure of nine Ruth’s Chris Steak House locations in fiscal year 2020.
Pre-opening Costs. Pre-opening costs of $1.9 million during fiscal year 2021 were primarily due to the planned openings of two Ruth’s Chris Steak House restaurants in Short Hills, NJ and Lake Grove, NY totaling $1.3 million. The remaining $632 thousand of pre-opening expenses related to pre-opening rent expense on locations where the Company took possession of the property from the landlord. Pre-opening costs of $1.6 million in fiscal year 2020 primarily related to pre-opening rent expense on locations where the Company took possession of the property from the landlord.
Losses (Gains) on Lease Modifications. Losses on lease modifications was $1.1 million in fiscal year 2021. The Company had $206 thousand in gains on lease modifications during fiscal year 2020. Gains and losses on lease modifications consist of gains and losses related to changes in the scope of a lease or the consideration for a lease that was not included in the original terms of the lease. Costs incurred related to the exit of a signed lease are also included. The losses on lease modifications during fiscal year 2021 were attributable to the termination of a lease in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The gains on lease modifications during fiscal year 2020 were attributable to the changes of lease terms in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loss on Impairment. Loss on impairment decreased $14.7 million or 88.8% to $1.9 million in fiscal year 2021. Loss on impairments consist of charges recognized by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value (net realizable value for inventory). Impairment charges were taken on fixed assets, inventory, liquor licenses and lease right-of-use assets triggered by the adverse economic impact of COVID-19.
Interest Expense. Interest expense decreased $1.2 million or 25.7% to $3.5 million during fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020. The decrease in expense was primarily due to lower average debt balances and average interest rates during fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020.
Other Income. During fiscal year 2021 we recognized $102 thousand of other income. During fiscal year 2020 we recognized $26 thousand of other expense.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). The effective income tax rates for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 for continuing operations were 8.8% and 23.8%, respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 represents an income tax expense of $4.1 million, whereas the effective tax rate for fiscal year 2019 represents income tax benefit of $7.9 million. The significant change was driven primarily by the Company’s generation of pre-tax income from continuing operations in fiscal year 2021 partially offset by the generation of a $40.0
million federal tax NOL that the Company plans to carryback to tax years 2015 and 2016, compared with the generation of pre-tax losses in fiscal year 2020.
Net Income (Loss). Net income was $42.3 million during fiscal year 2021 compared to a $25.3 million net loss during fiscal year 2020 due to the factors noted above.
Fiscal Year 2020 Compared to Fiscal Year 2019
Restaurant Sales. Restaurant sales decreased $180.6 million, or 40.9%, to $260.8 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Comparable Company-owned restaurant sales decreased 40.2%, which consisted of an average check decrease of 6.4%, and a 36.1% decrease in traffic counts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Franchise Income. Franchise income decreased $6.1 million, or 34.4%, to $11.7 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. The decrease is primarily attributable to a decrease in sales-based royalty income from a sales decrease as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Operating Income. Other operating income decreased $3.5 million, or 40.3%, to $5.2 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Other operating income includes our share of income from managed restaurants, gift card breakage revenue and miscellaneous restaurant income. The change in other operating income was primarily due to a decrease of $1.6 million in breakage revenue and $555 thousand in income from restaurants operating under contractual agreements.
Food and Beverage Costs. Food and beverage costs decreased $51.8 million, or 40.6%, to $75.8 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Food and beverage costs, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 17 basis points to 29.1% compared to fiscal year 2019 largely due to an increase of 1.6% in total beef costs.
Restaurant Operating Expenses. Restaurant operating expenses decreased $64.3 million, or 29.9%, to $150.4 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Restaurant operating expenses, as a percentage of restaurant sales, increased 9.1% to 57.7% compared to fiscal year 2019 primarily due to the impact of fixed costs on lower restaurant sales in 2020.
Marketing and Advertising. Marketing and advertising expenses decreased $8.6 million, or 55.6% to $6.9 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. Marketing and advertising, as a percent of total revenue, decreased 80 basis points to 2.5% compared to fiscal year 2019. The decrease in marketing and advertising expenses during fiscal year 2020 was attributable to the Company reducing expenses in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $1.4 million or 4.0% to $33.2 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. The decrease in general and administrative costs was attributable to a reduction of $1.5 million in compensation costs and a $1.2 million reduction in travel related expenses partially offset by an increase in professional fees of $1.3 million.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses. Depreciation and amortization expense increased $610 thousand to $22.0 million during fiscal year 2020, primarily due to property additions related to new restaurants and remodel projects placed in service within the last twelve months.
Pre-opening Costs. Pre-opening costs remained relatively unchanged at $1.6 million in fiscal year 2020 compared to $1.8 million in fiscal year 2019 and primarily relate to pre-opening rent expense on locations that the Company has taken possession of the property from the landlord.
Gain on Lease Modifications. Gain on lease modifications was $206 thousand in fiscal year 2020. The Company did not have any gains on lease modifications during fiscal year 2019. Gain on lease modifications consist of gains and losses related to changes in the scope of a lease or the consideration for a lease that was not included in the original terms of the lease. Costs incurred related to the exit of a signed lease are also included. The gain on lease modifications during fiscal year 2020 was attributable to the changes of lease terms in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Loss on Impairment. Loss on impairment was $16.5 million in fiscal year 2020. The Company did not have any loss on impairment expense during fiscal year 2019. Loss on impairments consist of charges recognized by which the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its fair value (net realizable value for inventory). Impairment charges were taken on fixed assets, inventory, liquor licenses and lease right-of-use assets triggered by the adverse economic impact of COVID-19.
Interest Expense. Interest expense increased $2.5 million to $4.7 million during fiscal year 2020 from fiscal year 2019. The increase in expense was primarily due to higher average debt balances during fiscal year 2020 compared to fiscal year 2019.
Other Income. During fiscal year 2020 we recognized $26 thousand of other income. During fiscal year 2019 we recognized $115 thousand of other expense.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). The effective income tax rates for fiscal years 2020 and 2019 for continuing operations were 23.8% and 16.2%, respectively. The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2020 represents an income tax benefit of $7.9 million, whereas the effective tax rate for fiscal year 2019 represents income tax expense of $8.2 million. The significant change was driven primarily by the Company’s generation of a pre-tax loss from continuing operations in fiscal year 2020, compared with the generation of pre-tax income in fiscal year 2019.
Net Income (Loss). Net loss was $25.3 million during fiscal year 2020 compared to $42.2 million net income during fiscal year 2019 due to the factors noted above.
Segment Profitability
Segment profitability information for the Company’s two operating segments is presented in Note 17 of the consolidated financial statements.
Potential Fluctuations in Quarterly Results and Seasonality
Our quarterly operating results may fluctuate significantly as a result of a variety of factors. See “Risk Factors” and “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” for a discussion of certain material risks that could affect our quarterly operating results.
Our business is also subject to seasonal fluctuations. Historically, the percentages of our annual total revenues during the first and fourth fiscal quarters have generally been higher due, in part, to the year-end holiday season and the popularity of dining out in the fall and winter months. Accordingly, results for any one quarter are not necessarily indicative of results to be expected for any other quarter or for any year, and comparable restaurant sales for any particular period may decrease. The evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may affect the seasonality of our business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our principal sources of cash during fiscal year 2021 was net cash provided by operating activities. Our principal uses of cash during fiscal year 2021 were for principal repayments under our senior credit facility, capital expenditures and common stock repurchases.
In October 2019, our Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing the Company to repurchase up to $60 million of outstanding common stock from time to time. During fiscal year 2020, as a result of the impacts to our business arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company suspended its share repurchase program. During the third quarter of fiscal year 2021 the Company resumed its share repurchase program and repurchased 887,515 shares at an aggregate cost of $16.6 million or an average cost of $18.69 per share, under a Rule 10b5-1 plan. All repurchased shares were retired and cancelled. As of December 26, 2021, $25.0 million remained available for future purchases under the share repurchase program.
During the second quarter of fiscal year 2013, we commenced paying quarterly cash dividends to holders of common and restricted stock. In the first quarter of fiscal year 2020, we paid a cash dividend of $0.15 per share, or $4.4 million in the aggregate. As a result of the impacts to our business arising from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company suspended its share repurchase program and dividend payments beginning in the second fiscal quarter of 2020. The Company’s amended and restated credit agreement currently does not limit the payment of dividends and share repurchases if our Consolidated Leverage Ratio (as defined in the revolving credit facility) as of the end of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is less than 2.50:1.00 and holds a minimum liquidity of $25.0 million. On January 6, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.12 per share, or $4.1 million in the aggregate, to be paid on February 17, 2022 to common and restricted stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 3, 2022. Future dividends will be subject to the approval of our Board of Directors.
We believe that our current cash position, $92.1 million as of December 26, 2021, coupled with our anticipated cash flow from operations should provide us with adequate liquidity for the next twelve months and, when combined with our anticipated access to additional capital, should provide us with adequate liquidity for the foreseeable future.
Senior Credit Facility
As of December 26, 2021, we had $70.0 million of outstanding indebtedness under our senior credit facility with approximately $65.3 million of borrowings available, net of outstanding letters of credit of approximately $4.7 million. As of December 26, 2021, the
weighted average interest rate on our outstanding debt was 1.9% and the weighted average interest rate on our outstanding letters of credit was 1.9%. In addition, the commitment fee on the daily unused average portion of our senior credit facility was 0.3%.
During the fourth fiscal quarter of 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated credit agreement, which amends and restates its prior credit agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, National Association as administrative agent, and certain other lenders (as amended and restated, the “Credit Agreement”). The Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility of $140.0 million with a $10.0 million sub-facility of letters of credit and a $5.0 million sub-facility for swingline loans. Subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions and lender consent, the revolving credit facility may be increased up to a maximum of $200.0 million. The Credit Agreement has a maturity date of October 18, 2026.
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and affirmative and negative covenants (including limitations on indebtedness and liens) as well as financial covenants, as described below, requiring a minimum fixed coverage charge ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement (“Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio”) limiting the Company’s actual leverage ratio as defined in the Credit Agreement (“Maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio”). The Credit Agreement restored the Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio to a ratio equal to or greater than 1.25:1.00 and restored the Maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio to a ratio no greater than 3.00:1.00. Under the Credit Agreement, dividends and share repurchases are not limited if the Company’s Consolidated Leverage Ratio is less than 2.50:1.00 and holds a minimum liquidity of $25.0 million. As of December 26, 2021 our Consolidated Leverage Ratio was less than 2.50:1.00. The Credit Agreement also contains events of default customary for credit facilities of this type (with customary grace periods, as applicable), including nonpayment of principal or interest when due; material incorrectness of representations and warranties when made; breach of covenants; bankruptcy and insolvency; unsatisfied ERISA obligations; unstayed material judgment beyond specified periods; default under other material indebtedness; and certain changes of control of the Company. If any event of default occurs and is not cured within the applicable grace period or waived, the outstanding loans may be accelerated by lenders holding a majority of the commitments and the lenders’ commitments may be terminated. The obligations under the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by certain of the Company’s subsidiaries and are secured by a lien on substantially all of the Company’s personal property assets other than any equity interest in current and future subsidiaries of the Company.
At the Company’s option, revolving loans may bear interest at either:
(i)
LIBOR, plus an applicable margin, or
(ii)
the highest of (a) the rate publicly announced by Wells Fargo as its prime rate, (b) the average published federal funds rate in effect on such day plus 0.50% and (c) one month LIBOR plus 1.00%, plus an applicable margin (the rate described in this clause (ii) prior to adding the applicable margin, the “Base Rate”).
The applicable margin and the fee for the unused commitment is based on the Company’s Maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio, ranging (a) from 1.50% to 2.25% above the applicable LIBOR rate or (b) 0.50% to 1.25% above the applicable Base Rate. The Credit Agreement also includes a mechanism for an alternate rate to LIBOR, which is the highest of (a) the prime rate or (b) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%.
Capital Expenditures and Acquisition of Restaurants
Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2021, which aggregated $19.7 million, pertained primarily to $9.0 million for new restaurants, $8.4 million for technology and $2.3 million for restaurant remodel and capital replacement projects. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2020, which aggregated $10.6 million, pertained primarily to $6.7 million for new restaurants and $3.3 million for restaurant remodel and capital replacement projects. Capital expenditures in fiscal year 2019, which aggregated $50.3 million, pertained primarily to $14.4 million for restaurant remodel projects and capital replacement projects; $11.0 million for new restaurants and $18.6 million related to the acquisition of the MBR Franchise Acquisition from the owner franchisee. We anticipate capital expenditures in fiscal year 2022 will be approximately $53.0 to $58.0 million. We currently expect to open five more Company-owned restaurants at leased locations in fiscal year 2022.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our primary sources and uses of cash (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Operating cash inflows pertain primarily to restaurant sales and franchise income. Operating cash outflows pertain primarily to expenditures for food and beverages, restaurant operating expenses, marketing and advertising and general and administrative costs. Operating activities provided cash flow all three fiscal years primarily because operating revenues have exceeded cash-based expenses.
Investing Activities. Investing activities in fiscal years 2021 and 2020 primarily related to capital expenditure projects. Fiscal year 2019 investing activities pertained primarily to both the acquisition of franchisee owned restaurants and capital expenditure projects.
Financing Activities. Financing activities provided cash in fiscal year 2020 and used cash in fiscal years 2021 and 2019. During fiscal year 2021 we: reduced debt by $45.0 million; repurchased common stock of $16.6 million; paid $2.8 million in employee taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock; and paid $612 thousand in deferred financing costs. We paid $2.8 million in taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock and the exercise of stock options because some recipients elected to satisfy their individual tax withholding obligations by having us withhold a number of vested shares of restricted stock and/or a number of shares otherwise issuable pursuant to stock options. During fiscal year 2020 we: issued common stock for $49.6 million; increased the debt outstanding under our senior credit facility by $51.0 million; repurchased common stock of $13.2 million; paid dividends of $4.4 million; paid $1.6 million in employee taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock; and paid $962 thousand in deferred financing costs. During fiscal year 2019 we: repurchased common stock of $25.8 million; increased the debt outstanding under our senior credit facility by $23.0 million; paid dividends of $15.6 million; and paid $3.7 million in employee taxes in connection with the vesting of restricted stock and the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations as of December 26, 2021:
Long-term debt obligations include principal maturities and expected interest payments. Expected interest payments were estimated using the interest and fee rates under our senior credit facility as of December 26, 2021. Operating lease obligations do not include contingent rent, common area maintenance, property taxes and other pass through charges from our landlords. The above table does not include recorded liabilities to vendors or employees nor does it include routine purchase commitments shorter than twelve months in duration for food and supplies.
Pursuant to the terms of the purchase agreement, upon closing of the sale of the Mitchell’s Restaurants in January 2015, Landry’s assumed the lease obligations of the Mitchell’s Restaurants. However, the Company has guaranteed Landry’s lease obligations aggregating $21.2 million under four of the leases. Separate from the purchase agreement, Landry’s has agreed to indemnify the Company in the event of a default under any of the leases. The above table does not include potential lease obligations for the Mitchell’s Restaurants.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 26, 2021, we do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition is based upon our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements is based, in part, on our critical accounting policies that require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in those consolidated financial statements. Our significant accounting policies, which may be affected by our estimates and assumptions, are more fully described in Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements. Critical accounting policies are those that we believe are most important to portraying our financial condition and results of operations and also require the greatest amount of subjective or complex judgments by management. Judgments or uncertainties regarding the application of these policies may result in materially different amounts being reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We consider the following policies to be the most critical in understanding the judgments that are involved in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Deferred Gift Card Revenue and Gift Card Breakage Revenue
Revenue from restaurant sales is recognized when food and beverage products are sold. Deferred revenue primarily represents the Company’s liability for gift cards that have been sold but not yet redeemed and is recorded at the expected redemption value. When the gift cards are redeemed, the Company recognizes restaurant sales and reduces the deferred revenue liability. Company issued gift cards redeemed at franchisee-owned restaurants reduce the deferred revenue liability but do not impact our restaurant sales. Gift card transactions involving franchisees are settled on a monthly basis through the Company’s third-party gift card provider. The expected redemption value of gift cards represents the full value of all gift cards issued less the amount the Company has recognized as other operating income for gift cards that are not expected to be redeemed.
The portion of gift cards sold to customers which are never redeemed is commonly referred to as gift card breakage. Gift card breakage produces a revenue stream which is a key element of the profitability of the Company’s gift card program and is classified as a component of other operating revenue.
The Company’s accounting method for recognizing breakage revenue is the redemption method. Under the redemption method, breakage revenue is recognized and the gift card liability is derecognized for unredeemed gift cards in proportion to actual gift card redemptions based on historical breakage rates, including breakage rates during previous economic recessions. The Company continues to review historical gift card redemption information and considers any changes in redemption patterns as a result of the current economic environment, to assess the reasonableness of projected gift card breakage rates and patterns of redemption. Future gift card usage may be different than our historical experience and as result our estimate of cards not expected to be redeemed is subject to inherent uncertainty. If actual redemption activity differs significantly from our historical experience our deferred revenue liability and results of operations could be materially impacted.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review property and equipment (which includes leasehold improvements), purchased intangibles subject to amortization, and operating lease right-of-use (ROU) assets for impairment when events or circumstances indicate these assets might be impaired. We test impairment using historical cash flows and other relevant facts and circumstances as the primary basis for our estimates of future cash flows. The analysis is performed at the restaurant level for indicators of permanent impairment. In determining future cash flows, we make significant estimates with respect to future operating results of each restaurant over the expected remaining life of the primary asset in the restaurant. If assets are determined to be impaired, the loss on impairment is measured by calculating the amount by which the asset-carrying amount exceeds its fair value. This process requires the use of estimates and assumptions, which are subject to a high degree of judgment. If these assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record additional losses on impairment on these assets. During fiscal year 2021, the Company recognized $1.9 million in impairment loss due to the decline in the estimated fair value of the long-lived assets, including property, plant and equipment, inventory, and lease right-of-use assets at two closed locations.
The judgments we make related to the expected useful lives of long-lived assets and our ability to realize undiscounted cash flows in excess of the carrying amounts of these assets are affected by factors such as the ongoing maintenance and improvements of the assets, changes in economic conditions, changes in usage or operating performance and desirability of the restaurant sites. As we assess the ongoing expected cash flows and carrying amounts of our long-lived assets, significant adverse changes in these factors could cause us to recognize a material loss on impairment.
Generally, costs for exit or disposal activities, including restaurant closures, are expensed as incurred. The costs include the cost of disposing of the assets as well as other facility-related expenses from previously closed restaurants. For restaurants operated under operating leases, on the date we commit to a plan to abandon the related ROU asset, we evaluate the ROU asset for potential impairment and determine the go-forward accounting based on requirements in Topic 842.
Valuation and Recoverability of Goodwill and Franchise Rights
Goodwill and franchise rights arise primarily from our acquisition of franchisee-owned Ruth’s Chris restaurants. We recognized $7.1 million of franchise rights and $9.0 million of goodwill related to the MBR Franchise Acquisition completed on July 29, 2019. During fiscal year 2020 a territory rights impairment charge of $3.1 million was taken at two locations.
Prior to the MBR Franchise Acquisition, the most significant acquisitions were completed in 1996, 1999, 2006, 2007 and 2017. Goodwill is not subject to amortization and franchise rights acquired prior to 2008 are also not subject to amortization. Such assets must be tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. The annual testing date for determining whether goodwill and other intangible assets are impaired is the last day of the Company’s 48th fiscal week, which in fiscal year 2021 was November 28, 2021. A variety of inherently uncertain estimates, judgments and projections are used in both assessing whether there has been an indicator that an impairment of an intangible asset
may have occurred. We performed our annual impairment test of our goodwill and franchise rights using a qualitative assessment. In using the qualitative approach, we evaluated factors, including but not limited to, recent financial performance; forecasts for future cash flows; our stock price and market capitalization; recent impairment tests; legal factors; the business climate; and the competitive environment. If we determine that it is more likely than not that an intangible asset may be impaired, we are required to estimate its fair value. Because similar intangible assets are not bought and sold regularly in public markets, estimates of fair value of our intangible assets are inherently uncertain.
We evaluate the useful lives of our intangible assets to determine if they are definite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, legislative action that results in an uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required capital expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets.
Insurance Liability
We maintain various insurance policies for workers’ compensation, health and welfare, general liability, professional liability and property damage. Pursuant to those policies, we are responsible for losses up to certain limits and are required to estimate a liability that represents our ultimate exposure for aggregate losses below those limits. The recorded liabilities are based on management’s estimates of the ultimate costs to be incurred to settle known claims and claims not reported as of the balance sheet date. We use independent actuaries to develop the estimated workers’ compensation, general and health and welfare liabilities. Our estimated liability is not discounted and is based on a number of assumptions and factors, including historical trends, actuarial assumptions and economic conditions. If actual trends differ from our estimates, our financial results could be impacted.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 740, Income Taxes (Topic 740). Topic 740 establishes financial accounting and reporting standards for the effects of income taxes that result from an enterprise’s activities during the current and preceding years. It requires an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting of income taxes. We recognize deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. In the event the future consequences of differences between financial reporting bases and tax bases of our assets and liabilities resulted in a net deferred tax asset, an evaluation is made of the probability of our ability to realize the future benefits indicated by such asset. A valuation allowance related to a deferred tax asset is recorded when it is more likely than not that some portion or the entire deferred tax asset will not be realized. The realization of such net deferred tax will generally depend on whether we will have sufficient taxable income of an appropriate character within the carry-forward period permitted by the tax law. Without sufficient taxable income to utilize the deductible amounts and carry forwards, the related tax benefits will expire unused. We have evaluated both positive and negative evidence in making a determination as to whether it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Measurement of deferred items is based on enacted tax laws.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019 the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. This update was effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021. This update simplifies the accounting for interim period tax law changes and loss limitations, ownership changes in equity investments, intraperiod tax allocations and the step-up of tax basis in goodwill that is not acquired during a business combination. The adoption of ASU 2019-12 did not have a significant impact on the Company’s ongoing financial reporting.