ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto included in this Report beginning on page. The results shown herein are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in any future periods. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
Significant Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our results of operations, liquidity and capital resources are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Significant estimates made by management include, but are not limited to, the allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuations and classifications, the useful life of property and equipment, the valuation of lease liabilities and related right of use assets, the valuation of deferred tax assets, the value of stock-based compensation, and the fair value of non-cash common stock issuances. We base our estimates on historical and anticipated results and trends and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, including assumptions as to future events. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. By their nature, estimates are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Actual results that differ from our estimates could have a significant adverse effect on our operating results and financial position. We believe that the significant accounting policies and assumptions described below and in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements may involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity than others.
Accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts
The Company has a policy of providing an allowance for doubtful accounts based on its best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in its existing accounts receivable. The Company periodically reviews its accounts receivable to determine whether an allowance is necessary based on an analysis of past due accounts and other factors that may indicate that the realization of an account may be in doubt. Account balances deemed to be uncollectible are charged to bad debt expense and included in the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote.
Revenue recognition
The Company follows Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue From Contracts With Customers, which is effective for public business entities with annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017. This new revenue recognition standard (new guidance) has a five step process: a) Determine whether a contract exists; b) Identify the performance obligations; c) Determine the transaction price; d) Allocate the transaction price; and e) Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied.
The Company sells a variety of hair and skin care products. The Company recognizes revenue for the agreed upon sales price when a purchase order is received from the customer and subsequently the product is shipped to the customer, which satisfies the performance obligation. Consideration paid to the customer to promote and sell the Company’s products is typically recorded as a reduction in revenues. See Note 12 for revenue disaggregation disclosures.
Going Concern
As reflected in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, the Company had a net loss of $182,903 and $297,755, respectively, for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021. Additionally, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $5,291,567 at May 31, 2022. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of 12 months from the issuance date of this report. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to implement its business plan, raise capital, and generate sufficient revenue; however, the Company’s cash position may not be sufficient to support its daily operations. Management intends to raise additional funds by way of a private or public offering. While the Company believes in the viability of its strategy to further implement its business plan and generate sufficient revenue and in its ability to raise additional funds, there can be no assurances to that effect. The financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
● have an auditor report on our internal control over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
● comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., an auditor discussion and analysis);
● submit certain executive compensation matters to shareholder advisory votes, such as “say-on-pay” and “say-on-frequency;” and
● disclose certain executive compensation related items such as comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion, (ii) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would occur if the market value of our ordinary shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three year period.
Results of Operations
For the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021
Our results of operations are summarized below.
Net sales increased by $702,648 or 43% for the year ended May 31, 2022, as compared to the year ended May 31, 2021, primarily due to the increase in our direct sales to consumer segment.
Cost of sales includes primarily the cost of products and freight-in costs. For the year ended May 31, 2022, the overall cost of sales increased by $228,885 or 38.2%, as compared to the comparable period in 2021. Cost of sales as a percentage of net revenues for the year ended May 31, 2022 was 35.5% as compared to 36.7% for the comparable period in 2021. The overall decrease in cost of sales, as a percentage of sales, is primarily attributable to the Company’s increased efficiencies in procurement and manufacturing systems, and reduction in product cost.
Gross profit, as a percentage of sales, for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021 was 64.5% and 63.3%, respectively. The increase in gross profit, as a percentage of sales, is primarily attributable to our continued increased focus on the direct sales to consumer channels, which have higher margins.
Operating expenses for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021 were $1,719,074 and $1,354,962, respectively. Operating expenses are costs related to marketing and selling expenses, compensation and related taxes, professional and consulting fees, and general and administrative costs. Operating expenses as a percentage of net revenues for the year ended May 31, 2022 were 73.6% as compared to 82.9% for the comparable period in 2021. Operating expenses increased by $364,112 or 26.9% primarily due to an increase in advertising and marketing expenses by $469,249 for displaying our products through our advertising platforms, increased delivery charges and cost of independent marketing contractors, partially offset by a decrease in professional and consulting services by $73,398. Other than an increase in advertising costs, which were aimed at procuring more customers, and reduction in consulting costs, the other operating expenses were fairly consistent.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the Years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021
The following table provides detailed information about our net cash flows:
We are an emerging growth company and currently engaged in our product sales and development. We have an accumulated deficit and have incurred operating losses since our inception and expect losses to continue during fiscal year 2023. This raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital, implement its business plan and to ultimately achieve profitable operations. Management may consider various options to raise capital, which may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. There can be no assurances that management will be able to obtain sufficient additional funds, if needed, or that such funds, if available, will be obtained on terms satisfactory to us. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
For the Years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended May 31, 2022 was $126,055, attributable to a net loss of $182,903 offset by non-cash items such as depreciation expense of $7,871, bad debts of $6,941, inventory write-off of $71,481, stock-based compensation of $21,967 and increase in non-cash gain on debt settlement of $35,000. The net loss was increased by a net decrease in operating assets and liabilities of $16,411 primarily due to increase in accounts receivable and decrease in customer deposits offset by a decrease in inventory purchases.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $48,407, attributable to a net loss of $297,755 offset by non-cash items such as depreciation expense of $9,969, bad debts of $1,061, inventory write-off of $23,714, stock-based compensation of $138,800, non-cash lease expense of $1,713 and increase in non-cash gain on debt settlement of $29,333. The net loss was offset by a net increase in operating assets and liabilities of $200,238 primarily due to increase in accounts payable and collection of receivables offset by an increase in inventory purchases and decrease in customer deposits.
Investing Activities
For the Years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021
The Company did not invest any money in the purchase of property and equipment during the year ended May 31, 2022.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $15,408 primarily due to the purchase of property and equipment of $15,408.
Financing Activities
For the Years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended May 31, 2022 was $2,849 primarily attributable to the cash proceeds of $35,000 of grants received from US Small Business Administration pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”), offset by payments to a related party of $28,851 and repayment of equipment financing of $3,300.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended May 31, 2021 was $54,907 primarily attributable to the cash proceeds of $6,300 of loans received from US Small Business Administration pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) of the CARES Act, advances received from a related party of $51,907, and repayment of equipment financing of $3,300.
As of May 31, 2022, we had the following secured loans outstanding, both of which were administered pursuant to the CARES Act: an Economic Injury Disaster Loan (“EIDL”) in the principal amount of $150,000 and a loan received pursuant to the PPP in the amount of $6,300. The Company has not paid any installments on either loan, and as of May 31, 2022 and currently, both loans are in default.
During June 2022, we made an acquisition of a business Axil & Associated Brands Corp., a leader in hearing protection and enhancement products for the acquisition of both the hearing protection business of Axil consisting of ear plugs and ear muffs, and Axil’s ear bud business. We purchased the business pursuant to issuances of common stock and preferred stock. We hope to increase our operating cash flows with the added revenue stream.
We are dependent on our product sales to fund our operations and will require additional capital in the future, such as pursuant to the sale of additional common stock or of debt securities or entering into credit agreements or other borrowing arrangements with institutions or private individuals, to maintain operations, which may not be available on favorable terms, or at all, and could require us to sell certain assets or discontinue or curtail our operations. If the current equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. In addition, pursuant to a voting agreement, effective June 16, 2022, with Axil and Intrepid Global Advisors, we are subject to certain limitations on our ability to sell our capital stock until June 2024. Our officers and directors have made no written commitments with respect to providing a source of liquidity in the form of cash advances, loans, and/or financial guarantees. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital we need for our operations on favorable terms, or at all. We have not located any sources for additional funds and may not be able to do so in the future. We expect that we will seek additional financing in the future. However, we may not be able to obtain additional capital or generate sufficient revenues to fund our operations. Failure to secure any necessary financing in a timely manner and on favorable terms could have a material adverse effect on our growth strategy, financial performance and stock price and could require us to delay or abandon our business plans. If we are unsuccessful at raising sufficient funds, for whatever reason, to fund our operations, we may be forced to cease operations. If we fail to raise funds, we expect that we will be required to seek protection from creditors under applicable bankruptcy laws.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results or operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.