ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors,” “Business” and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31. As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” “our,” “the Company” or “RVL” refer to RVL Pharmaceuticals plc (formerly Osmotica Pharmaceuticals plc). This discussion and analysis is based upon the historical financial statements of RVL Pharmaceuticals plc included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are a specialty pharmaceutical company focused on the commercialization and development of products that target markets with underserved patient populations in the ocular medicine and medical aesthetics therapeutic areas. In July 2020, we received regulatory approval from the FDA for RVL-1201, or Upneeq, (oxymetazoline hydrochloride ophthalmic solution), 0.1%, for the treatment of acquired blepharoptosis, or droopy or low-lying eyelids in adults. We believe Upneeq is the first non-surgical treatment option approved by the FDA for acquired blepharoptosis. We launched Upneeq in September 2020 to a limited number of eye care professionals and expanded our commercialization
efforts in 2021 among ophthalmology, optometry and oculoplastic specialties. We currently make Upneeq available exclusively through RVL Pharmacy, Inc., our wholly-owned pharmacy.
On August 27, 2021, we announced the closing of the divestiture of the Company’s Legacy Business, to Alora for $111 million in cash upon closing, subject to certain post-closing adjustments, and up to $60 million in contingent milestone payments. Pursuant to the Transaction we retained the rights to Upneeq and to arbaclofen extended release tablets, which is under development for the treatment of spasticity in multiple sclerosis. As a result, our business is now primarily focused on the commercialization and development of Upneeq. Following the Transaction, on January 17, 2022 we formally changed our name to RVL Pharmaceuticals plc.
The Legacy Business met the criteria within Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 205-20, Presentation of Financial Statements to be reported as discontinued operations because the transaction was a strategic shift in business that had a major effect on our operations and financial results. Therefore, we have reported the historical results of the Legacy Business including the results of operations and cash flows as discontinued operations, and related assets and liabilities were retrospectively reclassified as assets and liabilities of discontinued operations for all periods presented herein. Unless otherwise noted, applicable amounts in the prior year have been recast to conform to this discontinued operations presentation. Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of our condensed consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information. Unless otherwise indicated, the following information relates to our continuing operations following the sale of our Legacy Business to Alora. A description of our business prior to the consummation of the transaction is included in Item 1. “Business,” in Part I of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, that was previously filed with the SEC on March 30, 2021.
With the divestiture of the Legacy Business, our commercial operations are conducted by our wholly-owned subsidiary, RVL Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and its subsidiary RVL Pharmacy. RVL Pharmacy operates pharmacy operations dedicated to the processing and fulfillment of prescriptions for Upneeq.
We acquired Upneeq as part of our asset acquisition of RevitaLid, Inc., now known as RVL Pharmaceuticals, Inc., in 2017. As part of the acquisition, we agreed to make future earn-out, milestone and royalty payments based on net sales and regulatory developments with respect to Upneeq.
On July 8, 2020, the FDA approved our NDA for Upneeq for the treatment of acquired blepharoptosis in adults. Upneeq was approved based on three Phase III clinical studies that supported Upneeq's efficacy and safety. Results from Upneeq's first Phase III clinical trial showed that the formulation met its primary efficacy endpoint and was well-tolerated.
Upneeq is manufactured and supplied to us by Nephron Pharmaceuticals Corporation under an exclusive supply agreement that has a term of five years from the production of the initial commercial batches, and automatically renews for additional one-year periods unless either party provides at least 90 days’ advance written notice of non-renewal.
On July 28, 2020, we entered into a license agreement with Santen granting Santen the exclusive development, registration, and commercialization rights to RVL-1201 in Japan, China, and other Asian countries as well as EMEA countries. Santen is responsible for further development of RVL-1201 in the licensed territories. Under the license agreement with Santen, we have received an upfront payment of $25.0 million in 2020, license milestone payments of $10.0 million in 2021 and may receive additional milestone payments up to $54.0 million based on regulatory and sales achievements in Santen’s territories. We are also entitled to royalty payments on net sales of RVL-1201 in Santen commercialization territories.
We are exploring opportunities to sell or out-license our late-stage product candidate arbaclofen ER tablets designed for the alleviation of signs and symptoms of spasticity resulting from multiple sclerosis for which we have completed Phase III clinical trials. In June 2020, we resubmitted our NDA for arbaclofen ER tablets for the alleviation of spasticity in multiple sclerosis to the FDA. On July 17, 2020 we received notice from the FDA that it considered the resubmission a complete response to the July 9, 2016 action letter and set a goal date for a FDA decision on the NDA of December 29, 2020. On December 28, 2020 we received a CRL indicating the FDA could not approve the NDA in its then current
form. The CRL stated that we did not provide adequate justification (including in our most recent NDA amendment) for the statistical analysis of the change from baseline to Day 84 in TNmAS-MAL scores comparing arbaclofen 40 mg to placebo, one of the co-primary endpoints. On January 23, 2021, we submitted a Type A meeting request to the FDA to discuss the CRL’s recommendations and obtain advice on a path forward for the NDA. The meeting took place on March 4, 2021, during which we explored selective review of the currently available data and options for a path forward for FDA approval, including conducting another clinical study. On August 2, 2021, we submitted a special protocol assessment, or SPA, to the FDA proposing an additional clinical study for arbaclofen ER. The FDA responded in a letter dated October 15, 2021, indicating that they are unable to issue an agreement on the submitted protocol. We are reviewing the FDA’s comments and may request a Type A meeting with the Division to discuss the protocol. We intend to revise the protocol and statistical analysis plan and resubmit the SPA agreement request.
Business Update Regarding COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in federal, state and local governments and private entities mandating various restrictions, including travel restrictions, access restrictions, restrictions on public gatherings, and stay at home orders. The effect of these orders, government imposed quarantines and measures we have taken, such as implementing work-at-home policies, may negatively impact productivity, disrupt our business and/or could adversely affect our commercialization plans and results. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain it or treat its impact and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets.
The continuing COVID-19 pandemic has presented a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world. We launched our commercial activities for Upneeq and began engaging with eye care providers to promote Upneeq in September 2020 and have since expanded our field sales force. In some instances our sales force has encountered challenges engaging with eye care providers during this on-going pandemic. Although many areas of the United States have re-opened, or begun to re-open, access to offices and other commercial facilities, there continue to be areas where restrictions remain in place or may be reinstated as a result of concerns about the spread of new variants, such as the Delta or Omicron variants, which may have the potential to affect our ability to conduct our business and the ability of patients to visit their eye care providers. Additionally, new variants, including the Delta and Omicron variants, which could be resistant to existing vaccines, may lead to new shutdowns or business disruptions in the future, and our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timeline presently planned could be materially and adversely impacted.
To date, we have been able to continue to supply Upneeq to patients without significant disruptions, and we do not currently anticipate significant interruption in the near term. However, we are continuing to monitor the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations, including our sales, expenses, and pharmacy operations.
Our third-party contract manufacturing partner for Upneeq has been able to operate its manufacturing facility at or near normal levels. While we currently do not anticipate significant interruptions in our manufacturing supply chain, the COVID-19 pandemic and related mitigation efforts may have a negative impact in the future on our third party suppliers’ and contract manufacturing partner’s ability to manufacture Upneeq or to have Upneeq reach all markets.
In the U.S., our office-based employees have been permitted to work from home since mid-March 2020. During this time, we are ensuring essential staffing levels in our operations remain in place, including maintaining key personnel in our pharmacy.
For additional information on the various risks posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, please read Item 1A. Risk Factors included in this annual report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Segment Information
We currently operate in one business segment focused on the commercialization and development of specialty pharmaceutical products that target markets with underserved patient populations. We are not organized by market and are managed and operated as one business. We also do not operate any separate lines of business or separate business entities with respect to Upneeq. A single management team reports to our chief operating decision maker who comprehensively manages our entire business. Accordingly, we do not accumulate discrete financial information with respect to separate product lines and do not have separately reportable segments. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Results of Operations - Continuing Operations
Revenues
As a result of the divestiture, all revenues of the Legacy Business have been reclassified under discontinued operations. Our revenues consist of product sales, royalty revenues and licensing revenue.
Net product sales-Our revenues consist of sales of Upneeq and sales of Osmolex the products rights to which were sold to Adamas in January 2021. Osmolex was shipped to customers pursuant to purchase orders, which in certain cases were pursuant to a master agreement with that customer, and we invoiced the customer upon shipment. For these sales we recognized revenue when control transferred to the customer, typically on delivery to that customer. The amount of revenue we recognized was equal to the selling price, adjusted for any variable consideration, which included estimated chargebacks, commercial rebates, discounts and allowances at the time revenues were recognized.
RVL Pharmacy ships Upneeq to our customers pursuant to prescriptions; however, in certain cases where our state pharmacy licenses are pending prescriptions are fulfilled by a third party pharmacy partner. We refer to these sales as Pharmacy Sales. Additionally, Upneeq is sold directly to physician practices in certain states which permit physicians to dispense Upneeq in their offices. We refer to these revenues as Direct Dispense sales. All sales are paid for using credit cards for which we are paid prior to shipment. We recognize revenue when control has transferred to the customer, which is typically on delivery to the customer for Pharmacy Sales, or in the case of Direct Dispense sales, when the product is shipped to the physician. Accordingly, Pharmacy Sales revenue is not recognized until we have evidence that the product was delivered to the customer. The amount of revenue we recognize is equal to the selling price, adjusted for any variable consideration, which largely consists of discounts and disputed chargebacks, at the time revenues are recognized.
Royalty revenue-For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Licensing revenue-For license arrangements with commercial partners that include payments based on the achievement of regulatory approvals or other non-sales milestone, revenue is recognized when the performance obligation identified in the arrangement is completed.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries and benefits for employees in executive, sales, marketing, finance, accounting, business development, legal, information technology and human resource functions. General and administrative expenses also include corporate facility costs, including rent, utilities, insurance, legal fees related to corporate matters, share based compensation, fees for accounting and other consulting services, including public company costs associated with the preparation of our SEC filings, legal and accounting costs, investor relations costs, director and officer liability insurance costs, as well as costs related to compliance with laws and regulations, including the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
Research and Development Expenses
Costs for research and development are charged as incurred and include employee related expenses (including salaries and benefits, share based compensation, travel and expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturing organizations and service providers that assist in conducting clinical and preclinical studies), costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities and costs associated with quality and regulatory operations.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical studies, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the patterns of costs incurred, and are reflected in our condensed consolidated financial statements as prepaid expenses or accrued expenses as applicable.
Results of Operations - Continuing Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Financial Operations Overview
The following table presents revenues and expenses from continuing operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
NM - Not Meaningful
Revenues
The following table presents total revenues for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Total revenues decreased to $17.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower licensing revenue from Santen and the absence of sales of Osmolex which was divested in January 2021.
Net Product Sales. Net product sales increased by $5.6 million to $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to higher volumes of Upneeq sold in 2021, reflecting its first full year of sales following its commercial launch in September 2020, partially offset by the absence of Osmolex sales.
Royalty and Licensing Revenue. Royalty and licensing revenue decreased by $15.8 million to $10.0 million predominately reflecting lower regulatory milestones received under the license agreement with Santen in 2021 as compared to $25.8 million received during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit Percentage
The following table presents a breakdown of total cost of goods sold for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Total cost of goods sold increased $0.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $3.6 million as compared to $3.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by higher volumes of Upneeq sold and higher royalties incurred during 2021, partially offset by lower sample and regulatory costs for Upneeq, and the absence of product costs for Osmolex during 2021.
Gross profit percentage decreased to 79% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 88% for the year ended December 31, 2020 largely due to lower license revenue during 2021 as compared to 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $14.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $87.5 million as compared to $72.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in our selling, general and administrative expenses reflects the expansion of our salesforce and higher marketing expenses associated with the launch of Upneeq, severance and other expenses related to the cessation of operations in the Company’s subsidiary in Argentina, debt and equity issuance costs incurred in connection with the issuance of the Notes and ordinary shares in the fourth quarter of 2021, and higher legal and transactional expenses associated with the divestiture of the Legacy Business, partially offset by lower securities litigation costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses include share compensation expense of $5.8 million and $3.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in share compensation expense reflects the acceleration of vesting of equity awards triggered by the divestiture of the Legacy Business during the third quarter of 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses incurred for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses decreased by $6.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $6.9 million as compared to $13.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease primarily reflects lower headcount, lower spending on arbaclofen ER, Upneeq and other R&D projects, partially offset by severance costs related to the cessation of operations in the Company’s Argentine subsidiary during the second quarter of 2021.
Research and development expenses include share compensation expense of $0.9 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of share compensation expense reflects the acceleration of vesting of equity awards triggered by the divestiture of the Legacy Business during the third quarter of 2021.
Impairment of Intangible Assets
Impairment of intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $7.9 million and $28.9 million, respectively, due to write-downs to fair value for arbaclofen ER, an indefinite-lived In-Process R&D asset, due to delays in the anticipated launch of the product candidate, if approved.
Interest Expense and Amortization of Debt Discount
Interest expense and amortization of debt discount decreased by $1.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $3.0 million as compared to $4.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to the recognition of $1.3 million of interest expense on our senior secured notes in the fourth quarter of 2021 within the separate caption titled “Change in fair value of debt and interest expense” pursuant to our elections related to fair value accounting (see “Change in Fair Value of Debt and Interest Expense and Change in Fair Value of Warrants” section below).
Change in Fair Value of Debt and Interest Expense and Change in Fair Value of Warrants
Changes in the fair value of our senior secured notes and warrants, each newly issued in October 2021, resulted in (losses) gains of $(1.0) million and $5.6 million, respectively. Changes in the fair value of our senior secured notes includes $1.3 million of related interest expense. See Note 21, Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Non-operating Expense, Net
Other non-operating expense, net was $1.3 million and less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was primarily due to asset disposal costs related to leasehold improvements associated with the curtailment of operations in Argentina during the second quarter of 2021.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
The following table summarizes our income tax expense (benefit) and effective tax rate for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Income tax expense (benefit) changed from a $5.8 million benefit in the year ended December 31, 2020 to a $0.3 million expense in the year ended December 31, 2021. The significant change in the 2021 income tax expense was primarily the result of the sale of the Legacy Business.
Components of Results of Operations - Discontinued Operations
On August 27, 2021 we announced the closing of the divestiture of the Legacy Business comprising our discontinued operations. The components of our discontinued operations described below include results for the period from January 1, 2021 to August 27, 2021, or the “2021 period,” and the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Revenues
Our revenues from discontinued operations consisted of product sales, royalty revenues and licensing and contract revenue.
Net product sales-Our revenues consisted primarily of product sales of our promoted products, principally Divigel and the OB Complete family of prescription prenatal dietary supplements, M-72, Lorzone, and our non promoted products. We shipped our products to our customers pursuant to purchase orders, which in certain cases were pursuant to a master agreement with that customer, and we invoiced the customer upon shipment. For these sales we recognized revenue when control was transferred to the customer, which was typically on delivery to the customer. The amount of revenue we recognized was equal to the selling price, adjusted for any variable consideration, which included estimated chargebacks, commercial rebates, discounts and allowances at the time revenues were recognized.
Royalty revenue-For arrangements that included sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license was deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties related, we recognized revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occurred, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all the royalty had been allocated had been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
Licensing and contract revenue-We had arrangements with commercial partners that allowed for the purchase of product from the Company by the commercial partners for purpose of sub-distribution. Licensing revenue was recognized when the performance obligation identified in the arrangement was completed. Variable considerations, such as returns on product sales, government program rebates, price adjustments and prompt pay discounts associated with licensing revenue, were generally the responsibility of our commercial partners.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consisted primarily of personnel expenses, including salaries and benefits for employees in sales, marketing, accounting, legal and human resource functions. General and administrative expenses also included corporate facility costs, including rent, utilities, insurance, legal and other fees related to accounting and other consulting services.
Research and Development Expenses
Costs for research and development were charged as incurred and included employee related expenses (including salaries and benefits, travel and expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, contract manufacturing organizations and service providers that assist in conducting clinical and preclinical studies), costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities and costs associated with regulatory operations.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical studies, were recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations or information provided to us by our vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities were based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the patterns of costs incurred, and were reflected in our consolidated financial statements as prepaid expenses or accrued expenses as applicable.
Results of Operations - Discontinued Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Financial Operations Overview
The following table presents revenues and expenses from discontinued operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Revenues
The following table presents total revenues from discontinued operations for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Total revenues decreased by $87.7 million to $62.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $150.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in net product sales.
Net Product Sales. Net product sales decreased by $84.3 million to $59.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $143.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately $41.5 million of this decrease was attributable to less than eight months of operations during the 2021 period. Approximately $19.2 million of the decrease was due to lower realized prices, while approximately $23.6 million was due to lower volumes of products sold. Net sales of methylphenidate ER (including M-72) decreased $15.7 million, of which, $10.1 million is attributable to the absence of methylphenidate sales during the period from August 28, 2021 to December 31, 2021, or the “remainder of 2021.” During the 2021 period, net product sales of methylphenidate ER (including M-72), decreased $5.6 million due to price erosion from generic competitors resulting in significantly lower net selling prices and lower volumes. Net sales of VERT decreased $20.4 million, of which, $6.0 million is attributable to the absence of VERT sales during the remainder of 2021. Product sales from VERT decreased by $14.4 million for the 2021 period due to additional generic competition resulting in lower volumes and net realized selling prices.
Product sales of Lorzone decreased $3.9 million during 2021 as compared to 2020. Product sales from Lorzone declined $4.2 million for the 2021 period, reflecting continued erosion of pricing and volumes due to the launch of generic competition. Product sales of Divigel decreased $13.3 million, of which, $11.4 million was attributable to the absence of Divigel sales during the remainder of 2021. Product sales from the OB Complete family of prescription prenatal dietary supplements decreased $3.9 million, of which, $2.1 million is attributable to the absence of OB Complete sales during the period of 2021 following the divestiture of the Legacy Business. Product sales from OB Complete decreased by $1.8 million during the 2021 period due to lower volumes sold reflecting a reduction of promotional activity beginning in 2020 and continuing into 2021. Product sales of Nitrofurantoin decreased $7.3 million, of which, $1.9 million is attributable to the absence of Nitrofurantoin sales during the remainder of 2021. Sales of Nitrofurantoin decreased $5.4 million in the 2021 period due to additional competitors entering the market. Other product sales decreased by $19.7 million, largely due to decreased pricing and volumes of other non-promoted products sold during the year.
Royalty Revenue. Royalty revenue decreased by $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, of which $0.4 million was due to lower product sales by license partners during the 2021 period, with the remainder of the decrease due to the absence of the Legacy Business for the remainder of 2021.
Licensing and Contract Revenue. Licensing and contract revenue decreased by $2.3 million in 2021, of which $0.6 million was due to lower sales activity by collaboration partners during the 2021 period, with the remainder of the decrease due to the absence of the Legacy Business for the remainder of 2021.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit Percentage
The following table presents a breakdown of total cost of goods sold for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Total cost of goods sold decreased $41.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $30.0 million as compared to $71.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Amortization of intangible assets decreased by $10.8 million. Following the designation of the Legacy Business as a discontinued operation on June 24, 2021 the Company ceased recognizing amortization expense related to intangible assets of the Legacy Business. Royalty expense decreased by $5.4 million, of which $3.1 million was related to a decrease in net sales of certain licensed products during the 2021 period, with the remainder of the decrease due to the absence of the Legacy Business for the remainder of 2021. Other cost of goods sold decreased $24.8 million, of which $10.9 million related to lower volumes of product sold during the 2021 period, with the remainder of the decrease due to the absence of the Legacy Business for the remainder of 2021.
Gross profit percentage decreased to 51% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 53% for the year ended December 31, 2020. Excluding amortization and depreciation, our gross profit percentage for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 62% as compared to 64% for the year ended December 31, 2020 largely due to higher unit production costs, partially offset by lower inventory reserves and royalty expense.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $3.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $5.5 million as compared to $9.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses primarily reflects lower marketing expenses as promotional resources were reallocated to Upneeq beginning in mid-2020, and lower general and administrative expenses related to insurance, costs of licenses and fees and lower headcount during 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses decreased by $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $5.9 million as compared to $6.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease primarily reflects the completion of development programs for several non-promoted products during 2020.
Impairment of Intangible Assets
There was no impairment of intangible assets for the year-ended December 31, 2021.
Impairment of intangible assets for the year-ended December 31, 2020 were $43.3 million primarily consisting of write-downs to fair value for methylphenidate ER, VERT, and Oxybutynin of $19.5 million, $20.2 million, and $3.6 million, respectively. The impairments of methylphenidate ER, VERT and Oxybutynin reflect the competitive generic environment which has continued to erode net realized pricing and volumes of these products. In the fourth quarter of 2020 we recognized an impairment of finite-lived development technology and product rights for VERT of $10.7 million and $9.5 million, respectively due to the approval of a competing product and the anticipated deterioration of pricing and volumes.
The following table presents a breakdown of impairments recognized by asset and asset group for the period indicated (dollars in thousands):
Interest Expense and Amortization of Debt Discount
Interest expense and amortization of debt discount decreased by $3.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 to $6.4 million as compared to $10.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in borrowing costs reflects lower levels of indebtedness following the prepayment of debt in the third quarter of 2020, and lower interest rates during 2021.
Other Non-operating Loss (Income), Net
Other non-operating loss (income) was $1.1 million and $(0.6) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Income Tax (Benefit) Expense
The following table summarizes our income tax expense (benefit) and effective tax rate for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Our income tax provision changed from an income tax expense of $1.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to an income tax benefit of $0.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. The changes in the 2021 income tax benefit was the result of a valuation allowance recorded on the Hungarian entity.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents and borrowings available under our Note Purchase Agreement, dated October 1, 2021, with Athyrium Opportunities IV Acquisition LP, as administrative agent, and Athyrium Opportunities IV Acquisition 2 LP, as the Purchaser. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $40.4 million and total debt obligations with aggregate principal amounts of $57.4 million including an aggregate principal amount of $55.0 million of long-term debt, the maturities of which commence in March 2024 and extend through October 2026. Our primary uses of cash are to fund operating expenses, including commercialization costs associated with Upneeq, capital expenditures, and debt service payments.
The Note Purchase Agreement provides for the issuance of the Notes to the Purchaser in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million in three separate tranches. The first tranche of Notes was issued in an aggregate principle amount equal to $55.0 million on October 12, 2021. At any time after October 12, 2021 but prior to the first anniversary thereof, upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, including a minimum liquidity requirement and minimum net product sales target for Upneeq, we may request the issuance of the second tranche Notes in an aggregate principal amount of up to $20.0 million. At any time after October 12, 2021 but prior to the second anniversary thereof, we may request the issuance of the third tranche Notes in an aggregate principal amount of up to $25.0 million, which shall be funded in the sole discretion of the Purchaser. The minimum net product sales target for Upneeq is $3.0 million for the quarter ending March 31, 2022, and increasing in $1.0 million increments each quarter thereafter until the quarter ending June 30, 2024, for which quarter and all subsequent quarters the threshold is $12.0 million. The minimum liquidity requirement under the Note Purchase Agreement requires us to maintain, at any time, unrestricted cash and cash equivalents greater than or equal to $15.0 million.
At December 31, 2021, the interest rate on our Notes was 10.5%.
On October 12, 2021 we completed a follow-on offering and issued and allotted 14,000,000 ordinary shares of the Company and warrants to purchase up to 14,000,000 ordinary shares, at a public offering price of $2.50 per share and accompanying warrant. In addition, we granted the underwriter a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 2,100,000 ordinary shares and/or warrants to purchase additional 2,100,000 ordinary shares at the public offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On October 11, 2021 the underwriter exercised its option to purchase additional warrants to purchase up to 2,100,000 ordinary shares. The warrants have an exercise price of $3.10 per share, were immediately exercisable and will expire 3.5 years from the date of issuance. The aggregate net proceeds from the follow-on offering were approximately $32.5 million after deducting underwriting commissions and offering expenses.
On September 8, 2021, we entered into a sales agreement, the Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or Cantor under which we may offer and sell our ordinary shares having aggregate sales proceeds of up to $75.0 million from time to time through Cantor as its sales agent by any method permitted that is deemed an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including, without limitation, sales made directly on the Nasdaq Global Select Market or any other existing trading market for the Company’s ordinary shares. At December 31, 2021, we had sold 146,162 of our ordinary shares at a weighted-average price of $3.13 for aggregate proceeds of $0.5 million and net proceeds to us of $0.0 million, after deducting commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
On July 16, 2020, we completed a follow-on equity offering and allotted 5.0 million ordinary shares. The aggregate proceeds from the follow-on offering were approximately $30.4 million after deducting offering expenses. Proceeds from the offering were used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
On January 13, 2020, we completed an equity offering and allotted 6.9 million ordinary shares at a public offering price of $5.00 per share. The number of shares issued in this offering reflected the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase 900,000 ordinary shares. The aggregate net proceeds from the follow-on offering were approximately $31.8
million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses. Proceeds from the offering were used for working capital and general corporate purposes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we repurchased 1,435,725 ordinary shares, at a weighted-average price of $5.62 for an aggregate of $8.1 million pursuant to a share repurchase program authorized by our board of directors in September 2019. We did not repurchase any shares during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Going Concern
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $40.4 million, an accumulated deficit of $517.5 million and total long-term debt with aggregate principal amounts of $55.0 million, with such maturities commencing in March 2024 and extending through October 2026. In addition, our primary indebtedness contains various restrictive covenants including minimum liquidity and minimum quarterly product sales requirements. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses from continuing operations of $82.8 million and $89.0 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $54.7 million in cash from operating activities.
The divestiture of the Legacy Business in 2021 resulted in the loss of substantially all of our revenue generating assets. Our current business plan is focused on the continued launch and commercialization of Upneeq, which has and will continue to diminish our cash flows in at least the near term. We will require additional capital to fund our operating needs, including the expanded commercialization of Upneeq and other activities. We expect to incur significant expenditures and sustained operating losses for the foreseeable future.
We do not believe that current sources of liquidity will be sufficient to fund our planned expenditures and meet our obligations for at least 12 months following the date the consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are issued without raising additional funding. As a result, there is a substantial doubt as to our ability to operate as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern will require us to obtain additional funding, generate positive cash flow from operations and/or enter into strategic alliances or sell assets.
Our plans to address these conditions include pursuing one or more of the following options to secure additional funding, none of which can be guaranteed or is entirely within our control, i) raise funds through additional sales of our ordinary shares, through equity sales agreements with broker/dealers or other public or private equity financings, ii) raise capital through borrowings under existing debt facilities and/or convertible debt, and/or or iii) raise non-dilutive funds through product collaborations and/or partner or sell a portion or all rights to any of our assets.
There can be no assurance that we will receive cash proceeds from any of these potential sources or, to the extent cash proceeds are received, such proceeds would be sufficient to support our current operating plan for at least the next 12 months from the date the consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are issued. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities may result in additional dilution to our shareholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred shares, these securities could provide for rights senior to those of our ordinary shares and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. Additional funds may not be available when we need them, on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all.
The consolidated financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been prepared on a going concern basis, which assumes the realization of assets and settlement of liabilities in the normal course of business, and therefore do not include any adjustments to the amount and classification of assets and liabilities that may be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our consolidated cash flows, including our continuing operations and discontinued operations, for the periods indicated (dollars in thousands):
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities are primarily driven by earnings from operations (excluding the impact of non-cash items), the timing of cash receipts and disbursements related to accounts receivable and accounts payable and the timing of inventory transactions and changes in other working capital amounts. Net cash used in operating activities was $54.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and net cash provided by operating activities was $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily as a result of lower net income after considering non-cash adjustments, and higher cash used by operating assets and liabilities, particularly higher prepaid assets and lower accrued expenses as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $116.5 million primarily from proceeds from the divestitures of our Legacy Business and product rights related to Osmolex. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflected purchases of property, plant and equipment.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities of $135.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, largely reflected the repayment of borrowings under our term loan facility offset by net proceeds from the issuance of Notes, insurance financing loans and proceeds from the issuance of ordinary shares and warrants. Net cash provided by financing activities of $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 largely reflects net proceeds from the issuance of ordinary shares offset by prepayments of debt and repurchases of ordinary shares during the year.
Critical Accounting Estimates - Continuing Operations
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported throughout the financial statements. Those estimates and assumptions are based on our best estimates and judgment. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using historical experience and known facts and circumstances. We adjust our estimates and assumptions when we believe the facts and circumstances warrant an adjustment. As future events and their effects cannot be determined with precision, actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
We consider the policies and estimates discussed below to be critical to an understanding of our financial statements because their application places the most significant demands on our judgment. Specific risks for these critical accounting policies are described in the following sections. For all these policies, we caution that future events rarely develop exactly as forecast, and such estimates naturally require adjustment.
Our discussion of critical accounting policies and estimates is intended to supplement, not duplicate, our summary of significant accounting policies so that readers will have greater insight into the uncertainties involved in these areas. For
a summary of all our significant accounting policies see Note 2, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Testing Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets for Impairment
Subsequent to the divestiture of the Legacy Business, we continue to carry significant amounts of goodwill from prior acquisitions and substantial value for an indefinite-lived in-process research and development, or IPR&D, intangible asset relating to arbaclofen ER on our balance sheet. At December 31, 2021, the combined carrying value of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, net of accumulated amortization and or impairment charges, was $83.1 million or 58% of our total assets. See Note 9, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On October 1 of each year, we perform annual impairment testing of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, or more frequently whenever an event or change in circumstance occurs that would require reassessment of the recoverability of those assets. The impairment analysis for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets consists of an optional qualitative test potentially followed by a quantitative analysis. These measurements rely upon significant judgment from management described as follows:
● The qualitative analysis for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires us to identify potential factors, including, but not limited to, changes, if any, in our market capitalization, carrying values, the status of regulatory and commercial success risks, competitive trends or related cash flow projections that may result in an impairment and estimate whether such factors would warrant performance of a quantitative test;
● The quantitative goodwill impairment test, when performed, requires us to estimate the fair value of our single reporting unit. We estimate the fair value of our reporting unit using a weighted average of up to three valuation methods based on discounted cash flows, market multiples and or market references. These valuation methods require management to make various assumptions, including, but not limited to, future profitability, cash flows, discount rates, weighting of valuation methods and the selection of comparable publicly traded companies; and
● The quantitative test for indefinite-lived intangible assets, when performed, is determined using a discounted cash flow model that necessitates the development of estimated net cash flows for each asset, the appropriate discount rate to select for each future cash flow stream, the assessment of each asset’s life cycle, the potential regulatory and commercial success risks, and competitive trends impacting each asset and related cash flow stream as well as other factors. IPR&D assets are also subject to adjustments reducing their anticipated revenues and costs by a probability of success, or POS, factor based upon empirical research of probabilities a new drug candidate would be approved based on the candidate’s stage of clinical development.
Our estimates are based on historical trends, management’s knowledge and experience and overall economic factors, including projections of future earnings potential. Developing future cash flows in applying the income approach requires us to evaluate our intermediate to longer-term strategies, including, but not limited to, estimates about sales growth, operating margins, capital requirements, inflation and working capital management. The development of appropriate rates to discount the estimated future cash flows requires the selection of risk premiums, which can materially impact the present value of future cash flows. Selection of an appropriate peer group and or market reference transactions under the market approach involves judgment, and an alternative selection of guideline companies or market references could yield materially different market multiples. Weighing the different value indications involves judgment about their relative usefulness and comparability to the reporting unit. A variety of the above-referenced valuation assumptions are based on significant inputs not observable in the market and thus our quantitative tests, when performed, represent Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. The use of different inputs and assumptions could increase or decrease the resulting estimated fair values and the amounts of related impairments, if any.
There was no impairment of goodwill during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Concurrent with the divestiture of our Legacy Business in August 2021, goodwill of $45.0 million was allocated based on relative fair value of the Legacy Business. As a result, $55.8 million in goodwill remains on our balance sheet at December 31, 2021. A
sustained decline in our market capitalization, even if due to macroeconomic or industry-wide factors, could put pressure on the carrying value of our goodwill and cause us to conduct additional impairment tests.
Based on the results of IPR&D impairment assessments performed relative to arbaclofen ER, we recognized impairment charges of $7.9 million and $28.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to delays in anticipated commercialization of the product candidate, if approved. At December 31, 2021, $27.2 million in indefinite-lived IPR&D intangible assets remains on our balance sheet. The use of any different valuation inputs would have increased or decreased our recognized impairment charges. Further delays in the anticipated timing of commercialization of arbaclofen ER and or material changes in legal, market and or regulatory risks may cause us to conduct additional impairment tests.
A determination that all or a portion of our goodwill and or IPR&D asset is impaired, although a non-cash charge to operations, could have a material adverse effect on our business, consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Calculating Expense for Share-Based Compensation Arrangements
Our employees and directors have received various long-term compensation awards, including from time-to time, stock options, restricted stock units, performance stock units, and other share-based awards. We calculate expense for some of those awards using fair value estimates based on significant unobservable inputs. See Note 14, Share-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
During the year ended December 31, 2020 we recognized $4.6 million of aggregate share compensation expense. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we recognized $7.0 million of aggregate share compensation expense, which included, the acceleration of the vesting of certain stock options and restricted stock units and all performance stock units under our incentive compensation plans in connection with the divestiture of the Legacy Business.
At December 31, 2021, there were approximately:
● 3.2 million stock options outstanding under the 2018 Equity Incentive Plan, with aggregate unrecognized share compensation expense related to unvested awards of $3.6 million, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average remaining service period of 2.1 years; and
● 1.4 million restricted stock units outstanding under the 2018 Equity Incentive Plan, with aggregate unrecognized share compensation expense related to unvested awards of $4.5 million, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average remaining service period of 1.8 years.
Share compensation expense is measured at the date of grant, based on the fair value of an award and recognized ratably over its vesting term. We determine the fair value of restricted stock units based on the market price of our ordinary shares at the grant date, which is objectively determinable and not subject to significant unobservable inputs.
We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options and performance stock units using a Black-Scholes Merton option-pricing model and a Monte Carlo simulation model, respectively. The assumptions used in our models represent management's best estimates and involve a number of variables, uncertainties and assumptions and the application of management's judgment, as they are inherently subjective. The most significant unobservable input is the volatility of our stock price. A public quotation was first established for our ordinary shares in October 2018, which often does not provide us with an adequate historical basis to reasonably estimate the expected volatility of our ordinary shares over the expected life of an award. Accordingly, we generally estimate volatility based on a weighting of our own stock price volatility and or the historical stock price trends of similar entities within our industry over a period of time commensurate with the expected term.
The fair value of our stock options and performance stock units would have differed had we selected different peers, assigned different weighting assumptions between our own and peer volatility or used different techniques to estimate volatility.
Increasing our estimated volatility assumption by 500 basis points, or 5 percent, for all stock options issued in 2021 at the date of grant would increase our 2021 share compensation expense by an immaterial amount and also increase our aggregate unrecognized share compensation cost related to unvested awards at December 31, 2021 by less than $0.2 million.
Estimating the Value of Financial Instruments Remeasured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
Our Notes, a material component of long-term debt at December 31, 2021, and warrants, as reflected within warrant liabilities, a material component of total liabilities, at December 31, 2021, have each been measured and carried at fair value since their issuance in October 2021. Changes in the estimated fair value of such instruments are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss. Such instruments represent financial liabilities whose measurement contains significant unobservable inputs, which management considers to be Level 3 measurements under the fair value hierarchy. See Note 21, Financial Instruments and Fair Value Measurements to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Changes in the fair value of our Notes and warrants during the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in (losses) gains recognized through earnings of $(1.0) million and $5.6 million, respectively, with a resultant carrying value at December 31, 2021 of $(43.8) million and $(3.2) million, respectively.
We use a discounted cash flow technique, an income-based approach, to determine the fair value of the Notes. This technique relies upon an assumption of pricing the Notes to their maturity (without mandatory or voluntary prepayments) and incorporates inputs such as contractual repayment terms, maturity, and discount rate. The most significant unobservable input for the Notes is the discount rate which we estimate by performing a yield analysis that relies upon the discount rate observed in the initial issuance of the Senior Secured Notes as well as certain benchmark debt instruments with observable pricing from which we draw conclusions on the change in the discount rate from period to period.
We use the Black-Scholes Merton option-pricing model to value the warrants. This model incorporates transaction details such as the Company’s stock price, contractual terms, maturity, risk free rates, and volatility. The most significant unobservable input for the warrant liabilities is volatility. Given the limited trading volume and period of time the Company’s stock has been traded in an active market, the expected volatility is estimated by taking the average historical price volatility for industry peers, consisting of several public companies in the Company’s industry that are similar in size, stage, or financial leverage, over a period of time commensurate to the expected term of the warrants.
Remeasuring the fair value of our Notes and warrants on a recurring basis through earnings requires the estimation of significant unobservable inputs, and thereby requires significant demands on our judgment. Using different estimates or assumptions would have materially affected our results in 2021 and subsequent periods. For example, as of December 31, 2021:
● A 100 basis point, or one percent, decrease or increase to the rate we used to discount future cash flows under our Notes would have increased or decreased, respectively, the estimated fair value of our Notes and changed the associated gains or losses recognized through 2021 earnings by $1.4 million; and
● A 1,000 basis point, or ten percent, decrease or increase to the estimated volatility assumption under our warrants would have increased or decreased, respectively, the estimated fair value of our warrants and decreased or increased, respectively, the associated gains recognized through 2021 earnings by $1.2 million.
Estimating Valuation Allowances on Deferred Tax Assets
We are required to estimate the degree to which tax assets and loss carryforwards will result in a future income tax benefit, based on our expectations of future profitability by tax jurisdiction. We provide a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets that we believe will more likely than not go unutilized. If it becomes more likely than not that a deferred tax asset will be realized, we reverse the related valuation allowance and recognize an income tax benefit for
the amount of the reversal. See Note 17, Income Taxes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
At December 31, 2021, the Company had a federal net operating loss carryforward of $43.4 million, state net operating loss carryforwards of $114.0 million, net operating loss carryforwards in certain foreign tax jurisdictions of $104.2 million which will begin to expire in 2022 and total tax credit carryforward of $7.2 million, primarily consisting of Federal Orphan Drug Tax Credits that are expected to be fully realized prior to their expiration, beginning in 2036. The Company also had a federal capital loss carryforward of $104.6 million at December 31, 2021, which will expire in 2026.
At December 31, 2021, our valuation allowance on deferred tax assets was $52.9 million, which primarily consists of $21.1 million relating to $157.4 million net operating loss carryforwards and $23.8 million relating to $104.6 million of federal capital loss carryforwards, none of which are expected to be realized.
We must make assumptions and judgments to estimate the amount of valuation allowance to be recorded against our deferred tax assets, which take into account current tax laws and estimates of the amount of future taxable income, if any. Realization of the deferred tax assets is dependent on a variety of factors, some of which are subjective in nature, including the generation of future taxable income, the amount and timing of which are uncertain. In evaluating the ability to recover the deferred tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including cumulative income in recent fiscal years, the forecast of future taxable income exclusive of certain reversing temporary differences and significant risks and uncertainties related to our business. In determining future taxable income, management is responsible for assumptions utilized including, but not limited to, the amount of U.S. federal, state and international pre-tax operating income, the reversal of certain temporary differences, carryforward periods available to us for tax reporting purposes, the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies and other relevant factors. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income and are consistent with the plans and estimates that we are using to manage the underlying business.
We assess the need for a valuation allowance each reporting period and would record any material changes that may result from such assessment to income tax expense in that period. Changes to any of the assumptions or judgments could cause our actual income tax obligations to differ from our estimates.
Critical Accounting Estimates - Discontinued Operations
In addition to the critical accounting policies and estimates discussed above with applicability to continuing operations, the following supplemental discussion is intended to enhance an understanding of policies and estimates relevant to the Legacy Business which qualifies for classification as a discontinued operation. See Note 4, Discontinued Operations to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Product Sales-Revenue is recognized at the point in time when our performance obligations with our customers have been satisfied. At contract inception, we determine if the contract is within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue Recognition, and then evaluate the contract using the following five steps: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue at the point in time when the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Revenue is recorded at the transaction price, which is the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring products to a customer. We consider the unit of account for each purchase order that contains more than one product. Because all products in a given purchase order are generally delivered at the same time and the method of revenue recognition is the same for each, there is no need to separate an individual order into separate performance obligations. In the event that we fulfilled an order only partially because a requested item is on backorder, the portion of the purchase order covering the item is generally cancelled, and the customer has the option to submit a new one for the backordered item.
We determine the transaction price based on fixed consideration in our contractual agreements, which includes estimates of variable consideration, and the transaction price is allocated entirely to the performance obligation to provide pharmaceutical products. In determining the transaction price, a significant financing component does not exist since the timing from when we deliver product to when the customers pay for the product is less than one year and the customers do not pay for product in advance of the transfer of the product.
We record product sales net of any variable consideration, which includes estimated chargebacks, commercial rebates, discounts and allowances and doubtful accounts. We utilize the expected value method to estimate all elements of variable consideration included in the transaction. The variable consideration is recorded as a reduction of revenue at the time revenues are recognized. We will only recognize revenue to the extent that it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in a future period. These estimates may differ from actual consideration amount received and we will re assess these estimates each reporting period to reflect known changes in factors.
Royalty Revenue-For arrangements that include sales based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (a) when the related sales occur, or (b) when the performance obligation to which some or all the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or substantially satisfied).
Licensing Revenue- We recognize development and regulatory milestone revenue from milestone events under our license with Santen that have been achieved and the Company is reasonably certain such revenues would not have to be reversed.
Freight-We record amounts billed to customers for shipping and handling as revenue, and record shipping and handling expenses related to product sales as selling, general and administrative expenses. We account for shipping and handling activities related to customers as costs to fulfill the promise to transfer the associated products. When shipping and handling costs are incurred after a customer obtains control of the products, we also have elected to account for these as costs to fulfill the promise and not as a separate performance obligation.
Accounting for Sales Deductions
Product sales are recorded net of estimated chargebacks, commercial and governmental rebates, discounts, allowances, copay discounts, advertising and promotions and estimated product returns, or collectively, “sales deductions.”
Provision for estimated chargebacks, certain commercial rebates, discounts and allowances and doubtful accounts settled in sales credits at the time of sales are analyzed and adjusted, if necessary, monthly and recorded against gross trade accounts receivable. Estimated product returns, certain commercial and governmental rebates and customer coupons settled in cash are analyzed and adjusted, if necessary, monthly and recorded as a component of accrued expenses.
Calculating certain of these items involves estimates and judgments based on sales or invoice data, contractual terms, historical utilization rates, new information regarding changes in applicable regulations and guidelines that would impact the amount of the actual rebates, our expectations regarding future utilization rates and estimated customer inventory levels. Amounts accrued for sales deductions are adjusted when trends or significant events indicate that adjustment is appropriate and to reflect actual experience. The most significant items deducted from gross product sales where we exercise judgment are chargebacks, commercial and governmental rebates, product returns, discounts and allowances and advertising and promotions.
Where available, we have relied on information received from our wholesaler customers about the quantities of inventory held, including the information received pursuant to days of sales outstanding, which we have not independently verified. For other customers, we have estimated inventory held based on buying patterns. In addition, we have evaluated market conditions for products primarily through the analysis of wholesaler and other third party sell-through, as well as internally-generated information, to assess factors that could impact expected product demand at period end. We believe that the estimated level of inventory held by our customers is within a reasonable range as compared to both: (i) historical amounts and (ii) expected demand for the products that represent a majority of the volume at period end.
If the assumptions we use to calculate our allowances for sales deductions do not appropriately reflect future activity, our financial position, results of operations and cash flows could be materially impacted.
See also Note 6, Accounts Receivable, Net and Other Receivables, Sales Deductions and Allowances to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Testing Finite-Lived, Long-Lived Assets, for Impairment
As of December 31, 2020, our combined finite-lived, long-lived assets balance, principally property, plant and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets was $56.3 million, which is classified within assets held for sale in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K as a result of the classification of the Legacy Business as a discontinued operation.
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets, are evaluated for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable through the estimated undiscounted future cash flows derived from such assets. Factors that we consider in deciding when to perform an impairment review include significant changes in our forecasted projections for the asset or asset group for reasons including, but not limited to, significant under-performance of a product in relation to expectations, significant changes or planned changes in our use of the assets, significant negative industry or economic trends, and new or competing products that enter the marketplace. The impairment test is based on a comparison of the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated from the use of the asset group.
Recoverability of an asset that will continue to be used in our operations is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the forecasted undiscounted future cash flows related to the asset. In the event the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its undiscounted future cash flows and the carrying amount is not considered recoverable, impairment may exist. If impairment is indicated, the asset is written down by the amount by which the carrying value of the asset exceeds the related fair value of the asset with the related impairment charge recognized within the statements of operations.
Evaluations of the recoverability of an asset are generally based on fair value estimates determined using either discounted cash flow models or preliminary offers from prospective buyers. The discounted cash flow models include assumptions related to product revenue, growth rates and operating margin. These assumptions are based on management’s annual and ongoing budgeting, forecasting and planning processes and represent our best estimate of future product cash flows. These estimates are subject to the economic environment in which we operate, demand for the products and competitor actions. The use of different assumptions could increase or decreased our estimated discounted future cash flows and the resulting estimated fair values of these assets, causing increases or decreases in the recoverability of assets, potentially resulting asset impairment charges. Events giving rise to impairment are an inherent risk in the pharmaceutical industry and cannot be predicted.
Based on the results of impairment assessments performed relative to finite-lived, long-lived assets, we recognized impairment charges of $43.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of write-downs to fair value for methylphenidate ER, VERT, and Oxybutynin reflecting unfavorable developments in the competitive generic environment which had continued to erode net realized pricing and volumes of these products.
Fixed asset impairments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were immaterial and were attributable to the minor abandonment of information technology assets.