Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage precision oncology company focused on developing targeted therapies to inhibit frontier targets in RAS-addicted cancers. We possess sophisticated structure-based drug discovery capabilities built upon deep chemical biology and cancer pharmacology know-how and innovative, proprietary technologies that enable the creation of small molecules tailored to unconventional binding sites. Our understanding of genetic drivers and adaptive resistance mechanisms in cancer, coupled with robust drug discovery and medicinal chemistry capabilities, has guided us to establish a deep pipeline targeting critical signaling nodes within the RAS pathway and associated pathways. This cohesive approach underpins our clinical strategy of exploring mechanism-based dosing paradigms and in-pathway combinations to optimize treatment for cancer patients.
Our research and development pipeline comprises RAS(ON) inhibitors that bind directly to RAS variants, which we refer to as RAS(ON) Inhibitors, and RAS companion inhibitors that target key nodes in the RAS pathway or associated pathways, which we refer to as RAS Companion Inhibitors. Our RAS Companion Inhibitors (e.g., SHP2, mTORC1 and SOS1 inhibitors) are designed primarily for combination treatment strategies involving one or more therapeutic agents, which may include our RAS(ON) Inhibitors. Our long-term goal is to combine selected RAS Companion Inhibitors with RAS(ON) Inhibitors on behalf of patients based on molecular tumor features.
RAS (ON) Inhibitors
Our RAS(ON) Inhibitors are based on our proprietary tri-complex technology platform, which enables a highly differentiated approach to inhibiting the active, GTP-bound form of RAS, which we refer to as RAS(ON). We are developing a portfolio of compounds that we believe are the first and only RAS(ON) inhibitors to use this mechanism of action. We currently have four RAS(ON) Inhibitors in the IND-enabling stage of preclinical development: RMC-6236, our inhibitor of multiple RAS variants, which we refer to as RASMULTI(ON), RMC-6291, our inhibitor targeting KRASG12C(ON), RMC-9805, our inhibitor targeting KRASG12D(ON) and RMC-8839, our inhibitor targeting KRASG13C(ON). We currently plan to submit an IND for RMC-6236 in the first half of 2022 and to provide evidence of first-in-class single agent activity for this compound in 2023. We currently plan to submit an IND for RMC-6291 in the first half of 2022 and to provide preliminary evidence of superior activity for this compound in 2023. We currently plan to submit an IND for RMC-9805 in the first half of 2023 and to submit an IND for RMC-8839 in the second half of 2023. In addition to the compounds currently in development, we are also focused on developing additional mutant-selective inhibitors.
RAS Companion Inhibitors
RMC-4630
Our RAS Companion Inhibitor RMC-4630 is designed as a potent and selective inhibitor of SHP2, a central node in the RAS signaling pathway. In collaboration with Sanofi, we are evaluating RMC-4630 in a multi-cohort Phase 1/2 clinical program.
Our highest priority hypothesis regarding RMC-4630 is that it can deliver additional clinical benefit to patients with RAS-addicted tumors treated with a RAS inhibitor. Below is a list of the active or planned clinical studies of RMC-4630 in combination with RAS inhibitors:
•an active Amgen-sponsored Phase 1b study of RMC-4630 in combination with Amgen’s KRASG12C(OFF) inhibitor, sotorasib (LumakrasTM);
•RMC-4630-03, an active Phase 2 study of RMC-4630 in combination with sotorasib that we are sponsoring under a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Amgen under our global partnership with Sanofi; and
•the planned Sanofi-sponsored Phase 1/2 study of RMC-4630 in combination with Mirati Therapeutics’ KRASG12C(OFF) inhibitor, adagrasib.
Amgen is currently evaluating RMC-4630 in an active Phase 1b study in combination with Amgen’s KRASG12C(OFF) agent sotorasib in Amgen’s CodeBreaK 101c study.
As a complement to the CodeBreaK 101c study, we are sponsoring RMC-4630-03, which is an additional global Phase 2 study of RMC-4630 in combination with sotorasib for patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) carrying a KRASG12C mutation who have failed prior standard therapy and who have not previously been treated with a RAS inhibitor. The first patient in RMC-4630-03 has been dosed and enrollment is ongoing. We are sponsoring the RMC-4630-03 study under our global partnership with Sanofi and conducting the trial in collaboration with Amgen, which is supplying sotorasib globally under a clinical collaboration and supply agreement. We expect to complete enrollment in RMC-4630-03 in the second half of 2022, to provide preliminary evidence of the clinical benefit of RMC-4630 as a RAS Companion Inhibitor from the RMC-4630-03 study in the second half of 2022 and to provide additional evidence of the clinical benefit of this compound from this study in 2023.
Sanofi plans to sponsor a combination study under our 2018 collaborative research, development and commercialization agreement with Aventis, Inc. (an affiliate of Sanofi) (the Sanofi Agreement) and under a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement between Sanofi and Mirati to evaluate RMC-4630 (also known as SAR442720) in combination with Mirati’s KRASG12C(OFF) inhibitor, adagrasib.
There are also several active or planned clinical studies of RMC-4630 that do not involve combinations with RAS inhibitors:
•RMC-4630-01, an active Phase 1 study of RMC-4630 as monotherapy;
•a Sanofi-sponsored active Phase 1/2 study of RMC-4630 in combination with the PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab (Keytruda®); and
•a combination of RMC-4630 with an ERK inhibitor in patients with pancreatic cancer as part of an investigator sponsored study planned by Netherlands Cancer Institute.
RMC-5552
Our RAS Companion Inhibitor RMC-5552 is designed as a selective inhibitor of hyperactivated mTORC1 signaling in tumors. We are evaluating RMC-5552 first as a monotherapy in a Phase 1 study (RMC-5552-01), and plan to evaluate RMC-5552 in combination with RAS inhibitors for patients with cancers harboring a RAS mutation and co-occurring mutations in the mTOR signaling pathway.
In January 2022, we reported initial findings from the ongoing dose escalation portion of the RMC-5552-01 study, including preliminary evidence of clinical activity against advanced tumors with mutations associated with hyperactive mTORC1 signaling. As of January 7, 2022, all four efficacy evaluable patients treated with 6 mg per week experienced disease control, including one patient with a confirmed partial response with a 63% reduction from baseline and the other three with stable disease. We currently expect to provide additional evidence of single agent activity for this compound in 2023.
RMC-5845
Our RAS Companion Inhibitor RMC-5845 targets SOS1, a protein that plays a key role in converting RAS(OFF) to RAS(ON) in cells. RMC-5845 is intended for select combination therapies for certain genetically-defined tumors. This compound is ready for preparation of an IND based on the Company’s preclinical development. We continue evaluating the scientific rationale for advancing RMC-5845 into clinical development in the context of other assets in our portfolio.
Collaboration agreement with Sanofi
In June 2018, we entered into the Sanofi Agreement with Aventis, Inc. (an affiliate of Sanofi) to research and develop SHP2 inhibitors, including RMC-4630, for any indications. The Sanofi Agreement was assigned to Genzyme Corporation, a Sanofi affiliate, in December 2018. For the purposes of this discussion, we refer to Genzyme Corporation as Sanofi. Pursuant to the Sanofi Agreement, we granted Sanofi a worldwide, exclusive, sublicensable (subject to our consent in certain circumstances) license under certain of our patents and know-how to research, develop, manufacture, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise commercialize SHP2 inhibitors, including RMC-4630, for any and all uses, subject to our exercise of rights and performance of obligations under the Sanofi Agreement. Such intellectual property exclusively licensed to Sanofi includes our interest under any of our solely-owned or jointly-owned inventions arising out of activities undertaken pursuant to the development of SHP2 inhibitor product candidates under the Sanofi Agreement.
Under the Sanofi Agreement, we have primary responsibility for early clinical development of RMC-4630 pursuant to a development plan that is currently approved through 2022. The development plan and budget beyond 2022 will be determined by a joint research and development committee, over which Sanofi has final decision-making power subject to certain exceptions. Sanofi is responsible to reimburse us for all internal and external costs and expenses to perform our activities under approved development plans, except for costs and expenses related to studies designated in the Sanofi Agreement as RevMed Studies, for which we will bear all costs and expenses, and for the planned RMC-4630-03 study, for which we have agreed that Sanofi will reimburse us for 50% of the costs and expenses. Unreimbursed costs borne by us for any RevMed Studies and for our 50% share of the RMC-4630-03 collaboration study are subject to future reimbursement by Sanofi through a buy-in payment pursuant to the terms of the Sanofi Agreement if they use data from a RevMed Study or the RMC-4630-03 study in support of a marketing approval application. There currently are no active RevMed Studies.
We are responsible for the manufacture of SHP2 inhibitors for Phase 1 and non-registrational Phase 2 clinical trials pursuant to a development plan that is currently approved through 2022, while Sanofi is responsible for manufacturing SHP2 inhibitors for all other clinical trials and commercial supply. Sanofi has the sole right and responsibility to perform all regulatory activities under the Sanofi Agreement, except with respect to certain trials conducted by us or otherwise conducted under our IND, including our current clinical trials evaluating RMC-4630. Once we have completed all clinical trials for a product candidate that are assigned to us under a development plan, all regulatory approvals for such product candidate are automatically assigned to Sanofi.
We are also primarily responsible for performing preclinical research on SHP2 inhibitors, pursuant to a research plan that is currently approved through 2021. The parties currently do not anticipate additional collaboration preclinical research under the research plan in 2022. Sanofi is responsible to reimburse us for all internal and external costs and expenses incurred to perform activities under approved research plans, with the exception of internal and external research costs and expenses under the approved research plans for 2019 and 2020, for which Sanofi was obligated to reimburse us for 80% of such costs. We were responsible for 20% of all internal and external research costs incurred under the research plans for 2019 and 2020. Sanofi is responsible to reimburse us for all internal and external costs and expenses incurred under the research plan for 2021.
Unless otherwise delegated to us by the joint commercialization committee, Sanofi also has the sole right and responsibility for all aspects of the commercialization of SHP2 inhibitors in the world for any and all uses, at its expense, subject to our right to elect to co-promote SHP2 inhibitors in the United States. Sanofi is obligated to use commercially reasonable efforts to seek marketing approval for at least one SHP2 inhibitor product candidate in certain major market countries. Sanofi agrees to provide us, and we agree to provide Sanofi, with research, development and commercialization updates through the joint committees.
During the term of the Sanofi Agreement, we may not, alone or with any affiliate or third party, conduct certain research activities with respect to, or develop or commercialize, any product that contains a SHP2 inhibitor outside of the Sanofi Agreement.
Pursuant to the Sanofi Agreement, we received an upfront payment of $50 million from Sanofi in July 2018. Upon the achievement of specified development and regulatory milestones, Sanofi will be obligated to pay us up to $520 million in the aggregate, including up to $235 million upon the achievement of specified development milestones and up to $285 million upon achievement of certain marketing approval milestones. In the United States, we will share equally with Sanofi the profits and losses applicable to commercialization of SHP2 inhibitor products, pursuant to a profit/loss share agreement that the parties will negotiate based on key terms agreed in the Sanofi Agreement. On a product-by-product basis, Sanofi will also be required to pay us tiered royalties on annual net sales of each product outside the United States ranging from high single digit to mid-teen percentages. The royalty payments are subject to reduction under specified conditions set forth in the Sanofi Agreement. Subject to certain exceptions, the royalties are payable on a product-by-product and country-by-country basis until the latest of the expiration of all valid claims covering such product in such country contained in the patents licensed to Sanofi under the Sanofi Agreement and the expiration of regulatory exclusivity for such product in such country.
Sanofi has the sole and exclusive right to file, prosecute and maintain any patents licensed to it pursuant to the Sanofi Agreement, as well as to enforce infringement of or defend claims against such patents that relate to SHP2 inhibitor products.
Unless terminated earlier, the Sanofi Agreement will continue in effect until the later of the expiration of all of Sanofi’s milestone and royalty payment obligations and the expiration of the profit/loss share agreement. Upon expiration of the Sanofi Agreement, the licenses granted to Sanofi thereunder shall become fully paid-up, royalty-free, perpetual and irrevocable. Sanofi may terminate the Sanofi Agreement in its entirety or on a country-by-country or product-by-product basis for any reason or for significant safety concerns, upon prior notice to us within certain specified time periods. Sanofi may terminate the Sanofi Agreement in its entirety upon our change of control, with prior notice. Either party may terminate the Sanofi Agreement if an undisputed material breach by the other party is not cured within a defined period of time, or immediately upon notice for insolvency-related events of the other party. We may terminate the Sanofi Agreement after a certain number of years if Sanofi develops a competing program without commencing a registrational clinical trial for a SHP2 inhibitor product candidate, and subject to certain other conditions. We may also
terminate the Sanofi Agreement at any time, if Sanofi ceases certain critical activities for SHP2 inhibitor product candidates for more than a specified period of time, provided that such cessations of critical activity were not a result of certain specified factors, and subject to certain other conditions. Upon any termination of the Sanofi Agreement with respect to any product or country, all licenses to Sanofi with respect to such product or country shall automatically terminate and all rights generally revert back to us. If the Sanofi Agreement is terminated, in its entirety or with respect to a product, other than by us for Sanofi’s material breach or insolvency, we may be required to pay Sanofi royalties on worldwide net sales of reverted products up to mid-single digit percentages based on the development and regulatory status of such reverted products, in each case subject to reductions in accordance with the terms of the Sanofi Agreement.
Through December 31, 2021, we have received an aggregate of $154.8 million from Sanofi, including the upfront payment and research and development expense reimbursements.
Financial Operations Overview
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue consists of revenue under the Sanofi Agreement for our SHP2 program. We entered into the Sanofi Agreement in June 2018. We received a $50.0 million upfront payment from Sanofi in July 2018, receive reimbursement for research and development services, and are entitled to future potential development and regulatory milestones.
For further information on our revenue recognition policies, see “Note 2. Summary of significant accounting policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and development expenses
We substantially rely on third parties to conduct our preclinical studies, clinical trials and manufacturing. We estimate research and development expenses based on estimates of services performed, and rely on third party contractors and vendors to provide us with timely and accurate estimates of expenses of services performed to assist us in these estimates. Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates and costs associated with identifying compounds through our discovery platform, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with third-party contract organizations, investigative clinical trial sites that conduct research and development activities on our behalf, and consultants;
•costs related to production of clinical and preclinical materials, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•laboratory and vendor expenses related to the execution of discovery programs, preclinical and clinical trials;
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation; and
•facilities and other expenses, which include allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation and amortization expense, information technology and other supplies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators and third-party service providers. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and recorded as prepaid assets. The prepaid amounts are then expensed as the related goods are delivered or as services are performed.
Sanofi is responsible to reimburse us all internal and external costs and expenses to perform our activities under approved development plans, except for 50% of the RMC-4630-03 study and any future RevMed Study. Additionally, Sanofi is responsible to reimburse us for all internal and external costs and expenses incurred to perform activities under approved research plans for RMC-4630, with the exception of internal and external research costs and expenses under the approved research plans for 2019 and 2020, for which Sanofi was obligated to reimburse us for 80% of such costs. We were responsible for 20% of all internal and external research costs incurred under the research plans for 2019 and 2020. Sanofi was responsible to reimburse us for all internal and external costs and expenses incurred under the research plan for 2021. These reimbursements from Sanofi are recorded as collaboration revenue.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in discovering and developing product candidates and advancing product candidates into later stages of development, which may include conducting larger clinical trials. The process of conducting the necessary research and development and clinical trials to seek regulatory approval for product candidates is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As
a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or clinical trials or if and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs, consultants and professional services expenses, including legal, audit, accounting and human resources services, insurance, allocated facilities and information technology costs, and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses. Personnel-related costs consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. Facilities costs consist of rent, utilities and maintenance of facilities. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future due to anticipated increases in headcount and as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Nasdaq Global Select Market, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Interest income
Interest income primarily consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest expense
Interest expense primarily consists of interest related to our finance lease and interest on other outstanding obligations.
Benefit from income taxes
Benefit from income taxes relates to net changes in the deferred tax liability associated with our Warp Drive acquisition resulting from changes in the effective state tax rate and changes in our valuation allowance.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue, consists of revenue under the Sanofi Agreement. In August 2021, we entered into a Letter Agreement with Sanofi to include RMC-4630-03 under the development plan for RMC-4630 ceased enrollment of new patients in RMC-4630-02. As a result of these development plan adjustments, we revised our estimate of the accounting transaction price and our percentage of
completion under the agreements with Sanofi, which resulted in a cumulative catch-up adjustment that reduced collaboration revenue by $8.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Collaboration revenue decreased by $13.6 million, or 32%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The decreases are primarily due to the cumulative catch-up adjustment and lower reimbursed manufacturing costs.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $54.7 million, or 41%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $34.5 million increase in third party costs for our preclinical research portfolio, primarily driven by higher chemistry contract research organization, material sourcing and manufacturing costs; a $9.2 million increase in salaries and other employee-related expenses due to increased headcount to support our research and development programs, a $7.0 million increase in stock-based compensation and a $5.4 million increase in facilities and other allocated expenses as a result of higher rent, utilities and information technology expenses associated with increased headcount.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $9.0 million, or 42%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to an increase of $4.8 million in stock-based compensation expense; an increase of $2.3 million in salaries and other employee-related expenses due to increased headcount; and an increase of $0.8 million in insurance.
Interest income
Interest income decreased by $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020 due to lower interest rates.
Interest expense
Interest expense was less than $0.1 million for both years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Benefit from income taxes
Benefit from income taxes was zero for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and relate to net changes in the valuation allowance resulting from the Warp Drive acquisition.
On March 27, 2020, the United States enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, as a result of the Coronavirus pandemic, which contains among other things, numerous income tax provisions. Some of these tax provisions are expected to be effective retroactively for years ending before the date of enactment. We have evaluated the current legislation and at this time, do not anticipate the CARES Act to have a material impact on its financial statements.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Collaboration revenue
Collaboration revenue decreased by $7.1 million, or 14%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The decrease in collaboration revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower research and development costs incurred by us for our SHP2 program under the Sanofi Agreement resulting from lower manufacturing costs, which were partially offset by higher clinical trial costs. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we incurred upfront manufacturing costs related to the supply of RMC-4630 for our clinical trials.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $40.5 million, or 44%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a $36.1 million increase in third party costs for our preclinical research portfolio, primarily driven by higher chemistry contract research organization, material sourcing and manufacturing costs for our pre-clinical activities; a $5.6 million increase in salaries and other employee-related expenses due to increased headcount to support our research and development programs; a $3.1 million increase in stock-based compensation; a $1.3 million increase in facilities and other allocated expenses as a result of higher rent, utilities and information technology expenses associated with increased headcount; offset by a decrease of $5.9 million in third-party expenses for our SHP2 program resulting from lower manufacturing costs as we incurred upfront manufacturing costs related to the supply of RMC-4630 for our clinical trials.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $9.0 million, or 73%, during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $2.8 million in insurance costs as a result of becoming a public company; an increase of $2.7 million in stock-based compensation expense; an increase of $2.0 million in salaries and other employee-related expenses due to increased headcount; and an increase of $0.8 million in legal and accounting expenses.
Interest income
Interest income increased by less than $0.1 million the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. The increase was due to interest income earned from higher average investment balances resulting from the net proceeds from our Series C preferred stock financing in 2019, initial public offering in February 2020 and follow-on public offering in July 2020 offset by lower interest rates.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $0.1 million for both years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Benefit from income taxes
Benefit from income taxes was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and relates to a reduction in the effective state tax rate and the resulting impact on the deferred tax liabilities from the Warp Drive acquisition. Benefit from income taxes was $4.4 million the year ended December 31, 2019 and relates to net changes in the valuation allowance resulting from the Warp Drive acquisition.
Liquidity and capital resources
In February 2020, we closed our IPO and issued 16,100,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $17.00 per share for net proceeds of approximately $250.7 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $19.2 million and expenses of $3.8 million.
In July 2020, we issued 6,900,000 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $26.00 per share for net proceeds of $167.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.8 million and offering expenses of $0.8 million.
In February 2021, we issued 6,666,666 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering at a price of $45.00 per share for net proceeds of $281.3 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $18.0 million and offering expenses of $0.7 million.
In November 2021, we entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (Cowen) to sell shares of our common stock, from time to time, with aggregate gross proceeds of up to $250 million, through an at-the-market equity offering program (ATM) under which Cowen agreed to act as our sales agent. From November 2021 to December 31, 2021, we sold an aggregate of 339,302 shares of common stock under the ATM resulting in gross proceeds to us of $10.4 million. After deducting commissions and expenses of $0.3 million, net proceeds to us were $10.1 million.
Our operations have been financed primarily by our public offerings of common stock, net proceeds of $230.6 million from the issuance of our preferred stock and $154.8 million received under the Sanofi Agreement for upfront payments and for research and development cost reimbursement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $577.1 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $452.6 million. Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures related to our product candidates and our pre-clinical research portfolio, and to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. We expect our expenses to continue to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to advance our product candidates and pre-clinical research portfolio.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our planned operations for at least 12 months following the date of this report.
The timing and amount of our future funding requirements depends on many factors, including:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing our product candidates and programs, and of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining marketing approvals for product candidates we develop if clinical trials are successful;
•the success of our collaboration with Sanofi, including the continued reimbursement by Sanofi of substantially all of our research costs and all of our development costs for our SHP2 program under the Sanofi Agreement (other than for the RMC-4630-03 study or any RevMed Studies);
•whether we achieve certain clinical and regulatory milestones under the Sanofi Agreement, each of which would trigger additional payments to us;
•the cost of commercialization activities for RMC-4630, to the extent not borne by Sanofi, and any other future product candidates we develop, whether alone or in collaboration, including marketing, sales and distribution costs if RMC-4630 or any other product candidate we develop is approved for sale;
•the cost of manufacturing our current and future product candidates for clinical trials in preparation for marketing approval and in preparation for commercialization;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic licenses or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, expanding, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, profit share or royalties on, our future products, if any;
•the emergence of competing cancer therapies or other adverse market developments; and
•any plans to acquire or in-license other programs or technologies.
We expect to need to obtain substantial additional funding in the future for our research and development activities and continuing operations. Sanofi reimburses us for almost all of our research and development expenses associated with our SHP2 program, however Sanofi has the right to terminate the Sanofi Agreement for any reason, upon prior notice to us within certain specified time periods and upon any such termination by Sanofi with respect to any product or country, all licenses to Sanofi with respect to such product or country shall automatically terminate and all rights generally revert back to us. If we need to raise additional capital to fund our operations, funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our clinical trials, research and development programs or commercialization efforts. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings and collaborations or licensing arrangements. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, and if the debt is convertible into our common stock, the ownership interest of our stockholders may be diluted. If we are unable to raise capital, we may need to delay, reduce or terminate planned activities to reduce costs. Doing so will likely harm our ability to execute our business plans.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities of $147.2 million was attributable to a net loss of $187.1 million partially offset by a net change of $31.2 million in non-cash charges and by net change of $8.7 million in our operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $20.7 million, depreciation and amortization of $4.2 million, and amortization of operating lease right-of-use asset of $3.2 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to $11.0 million increase in accrued expenses and accounts payable partially offset by $1.7 million decrease in deferred revenue associated with the Sanofi Agreement and $1.5 million decrease in operating lease liability.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities of $100.1 million was attributable to a net loss of $108.2 million and a net change of $8.3 million in our operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a net change of $16.4 million in non-cash charges. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation expense of $8.9 million, depreciation and amortization of $2.6 million, and amortization of operating lease right-of-use asset of $2.9 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $11.3 million decrease in deferred revenue associated with the Sanofi Agreement partially offset by a $4.9 million increase in accrued expenses and other current assets.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in operating activities of $49.6 million was attributable to a net loss of $47.7 million and a net change of $8.8 million in our operating assets and liabilities, partially offset by a net change of $6.9 million in non-cash charges. The non-cash charges consisted of depreciation and amortization of $2.9 million, stock-based compensation expense of $3.2 million, a loss on disposal of held for sale assets of $0.6 million and a loss on disposal of property and equipment of $0.2 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a $13.4 million decrease in deferred revenue associated with the Sanofi Agreement, a $4.4 million decrease in deferred tax liability related to the net change in valuation allowance resulting from the Warp Drive acquisition, a $1.4 million increase in receivable from a related party resulting from the Sanofi Agreement and a $0.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily resulting from the timing of prepayments made for research and development activities, partially offset by a $11.3 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities resulting from increases in spend for research and development activities.
Cash used in investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities of $142.1 million, was primarily comprised of purchases of marketable securities of $671.3 million and purchases of property and equipment of $6.5 million, offset by cash provided by maturities of marketable securities of $526.8 million and sale of marketable securities of $9.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of $234.2 million, was primarily comprised of purchases of marketable securities of $544.1 million and purchases of property and equipment of $2.9 million, partially offset by cash provided by maturities of marketable securities of $309.8 million and sale of marketable securities of $3.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in investing activities of $102.0 million, was primarily comprised of purchases of marketable securities of $172.3 million and purchases of property and equipment of $2.5 million, partially offset by cash provided by maturities of marketable securities of $55.5 million; sales of marketable securities of $11.2 million, proceeds from sale of held for sale assets of $6.0 million; and proceeds from sales of property and equipment of $0.2 million.
Cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities of $294.2 million was comprised of $281.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our public offering in February 2021, $10.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our ATM facility, $1.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the employee stock purchase plan and $ 1.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of $422.8 million was comprised of $420.1 million in net proceeds from the issuance of common stock related to our IPO in February 2020 and our public offering in July 2020, $1.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and $0.8 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock under the employee stock purchase plan.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by financing activities of $98.7 million was comprised primarily of $100.0 million in net cash proceeds received from the issuance of our Series C redeemable convertible preferred stock and $0.3 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options; partially offset by $1.6 million in payments of deferred offering costs related to the IPO which closed in February 2020.
Contractual obligations and commitments
We have contractual obligations related to office and laboratory space leases in Redwood City, California and Cambridge, Massachusetts, described in “Note 7. Commitments and contingencies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for clinical trials, contract manufacturing organizations to provide clinical trial materials and with vendors for preclinical studies and other services and products for operating purposes which are generally cancelable at any time by us upon 30 to 90 days prior written notice.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K.
Indemnification agreements
We enter into standard indemnification arrangements in the ordinary course of business. Pursuant to these arrangements, we indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party, in connection with any trade secret, copyright, patent or other intellectual property infringement claim by any third party with respect to its technology. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual any time after the execution of the agreement. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is not determinable. We have never incurred costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification agreements. As a result, we believe the fair value of these agreements is minimal.
Critical accounting policies, significant judgments and use of estimate
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue recognition
We recognize revenue is accordance with Accounting Standards Codification Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which such entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under arrangements, we perform the following steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies the performance obligation. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
We enter into collaboration agreements under which we may obtain upfront license fees, research and development funding, and development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments and royalty payments. Our performance obligations under these arrangements may include licenses of intellectual property, sales and distribution rights, research and development services, delivery of manufactured product and/or participation on joint steering committees.
Licenses of intellectual property: If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue from upfront license fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring proportional performance for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, upfront fees. We evaluate the measure of proportional performance each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
Research, development and regulatory milestone payments: At the inception of each arrangement that includes research, development, or regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price. We use the most likely amount method for research, development and regulatory milestone payments. Under the most likely amount method, an entity considers the single most likely amount in a range of possible consideration amounts. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price.
Sales-based milestones and royalties: For arrangements that include sales-based milestone or royalty payments based on the level of sales, and in which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the sales-based milestone or royalties relate to, we recognize revenue in the period in which the sales-based milestone is achieved and in the period in which the sales associated with
the royalty occur. To date, we have not recognized any sales-based milestone or royalty revenue resulting from our collaboration arrangements.
The transaction price for each collaboration agreement is determined based on the amount of consideration we expect to be entitled for satisfying all performance obligations within the agreement. Significant judgment may be required in determining the amount of variable consideration to be included in the transaction price. We use the most likely amount method to determine variable consideration and will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period and as uncertain events are resolved or other changes in circumstances occur.
Revenue is recognized based on actual costs incurred as a percentage of total estimated costs to be incurred over the performance obligation as we fulfill our performance obligations. A cost-based input method of revenue recognition requires management to make estimates of costs to complete our performance obligations. In making such estimates, significant judgment is required to evaluate assumptions related to cost estimates. The cumulative effect of revisions to estimated costs to fulfill our performance obligations will be recorded in the period in which changes are identified and amounts can be reasonably estimated.
Accrued research and development expenses
We record accrued expenses for estimated preclinical studies and clinical trial expenses. Estimates are based on the services performed pursuant to contracts with research institutions and contract research organizations and clinical manufacturing organizations that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf based on actual time and expenses incurred by them. Further, we accrue expenses related to clinical trials based on the level of patient enrollment and activity according to the related agreement. We monitor patient enrollment levels and related activity to the extent reasonably possible and make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. If we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates. To date, we have not experienced significant changes in our estimates of preclinical studies and clinical trial accruals.
Stock-based compensation
We maintain an equity incentive plan as a long-term incentive for employees, consultants and members of our board of directors. The plan allows for the issuance of non-statutory options, or NSOs, incentive stock options, or ISOs, restricted stock unit awards, or RSUs to employees and NSOs and RSUs to nonemployees.
Stock-based compensation is measured using estimated grant date fair value and recognized as compensation expense over the service period in which the awards are expected to vest. The grant date fair value of an RSU award is based on our stock price on the date of grant. For options, we estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation, using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and we use the straight-line method for expense attribution. The Black-Scholes model requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculations, including the expected term (weighted-average period of time that the options granted are expected to be outstanding), the expected volatility of our common stock, the related risk-free interest rate and the expected dividend. We have elected to recognize forfeitures of stock-based awards as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•Expected Term- The expected term is calculated using the simplified method, which is available where there is insufficient historical data about exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior. The simplified method is based on the vesting period and the contractual term for each grant, or for each vesting-tranche for awards with graded vesting. The mid-point between the vesting date and the maximum contractual expiration date is used as the expected term under this method.
•Expected Volatility- Given that we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average volatility of the Company and comparable publicly traded biotechnology companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle or area of specialty.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the option.
•Expected Dividend-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Recent accounting pronouncements
For a description of the expected impact of recent accounting pronouncements, see “Note 2. Summary of significant accounting policies” in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” contained in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.