ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements and other disclosures included in this Report. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Report, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” Our audited consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and are presented in U.S. dollars.
Overview
Revance is a commercial stage biotechnology company focused on innovative aesthetic and therapeutic offerings, including its next-generation, long-acting, neuromodulator product, DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection combines a proprietary stabilizing peptide excipient with a highly purified botulinum toxin that does not contain human or animal-based components. We have successfully completed Phase 3 programs for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection across two different treatment categories, aesthetics and therapeutics. In the aesthetics category, we completed our Phase 3 program for the treatment of moderate to severe glabellar (frown) lines and are pursuing United States (“U.S.”) regulatory approval. In the therapeutics category, we completed our Phase 3 program for the treatment of cervical dystonia in November 2021 and plan to pursue U.S. regulatory approval following the FDA approval of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for glabellar lines. We are also evaluating additional aesthetic and therapeutic indications for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection including the full upper face, which includes glabellar lines, forehead lines and crow’s feet, and adult upper limb spasticity. To complement DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, we own a unique portfolio of premium products and services for U.S. aesthetics practices, including the exclusive U.S. distribution rights to the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers, the first and only range of FDA approved fillers for correction of dynamic facial wrinkles and folds, and OPUL™. We have also partnered with Viatris to develop an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, which would compete in the existing short-acting neuromodulator marketplace.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Operations
The full extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our future operational and financial performance will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including variant strains of the virus and the degree of their vaccine resistance and as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19, the actions taken to contain or treat it, and the duration and intensity of the related effects. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to negatively affect global economic activity, the regulatory approval process for our product candidates, our supply chain, research and development activities, end user demand for our products and services and commercialization activities. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused delays in the regulatory approval process for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. In November 2020, the FDA deferred a decision on the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines. The FDA reiterated that an inspection of our manufacturing facility was required as part of the BLA approval process, but the FDA was unable to conduct the required inspection due to the FDA’s travel restrictions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the inspection has been completed, in October 2021, we received a CRL due to deficiencies related to the FDA’s onsite inspection at our manufacturing facility. Resubmission of the BLA requires the remediation of the deficiencies identified by the FDA during the inspection, and a reinspection is required. We cannot be certain of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the regulatory approval process for the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines, including the timing of the FDA's reinspection of the manufacturing facility, or the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing of the regulatory approval process for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection in indications outside of glabellar lines or on any supplemental BLAs we may file.
Our supply of and our ability to commercialize the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers has been impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The product supply of the Current RHA® Collection of dermal fillers was delayed by our distribution partner Teoxane as they temporarily suspended production in Geneva, Switzerland as a precaution in early 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Teoxane resumed manufacturing operations at the end of April 2020 and delivered
the first shipment of the Current RHA® Collection of dermal fillers to us in June 2020. As a result, our initial product launch of the Current RHA® Collection of dermal fillers was delayed by one quarter to September 2020. We have taken steps to build sufficient levels of inventory to help mitigate potential future supply chain disruptions, but we cannot be certain of whether we will experience additional delays in the future. In addition, port closures and other restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic have and may continue to disrupt our supply chain or limit our ability to obtain sufficient materials for the production of our products and the sale of our services. The global chip shortage is currently impacting our third-party partners’ ability to provide us with the point of sale (“POS”) hardware terminals that are provided to customers as a part of the OPUL™ service offering. If our third-party partner cannot provide enough POS terminals to meet OPULTM demand or we are unable to provide a substitute device, we may be unable to timely board new customers or fulfill orders for additional hardware from existing customers. If the shortage continues for an extended period of time, it could materially and adversely affect the Fintech Platform’s business.
Our clinical trials have been and may continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has and may further delay enrollment in and the progress of our current and future clinical trials. Even as some restrictions have been lifted and vaccines are widely available in the United States and certain other countries, the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to result in government imposed quarantines and consume hospital resources, especially if infection rates rise or more contagious variants develop and spread. Patients may not be able to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. Site initiation and patient enrollment may be delayed due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, enrollment in the JUNIPER Phase 2 adult upper limb spasticity trial was paused in March 2020 due to challenges related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The trial was originally designed to include 128 subjects. Due to COVID-19 challenges related to continued subject enrollment and the scheduling of in-person study visits, in June 2020, we announced the decision to end screening and complete the JUNIPER trial with the 83 patients enrolled at that time.
To ensure proper clinical trial coordination and completion, in line with the FDA-issued guidance on March 18, 2020 on the Conduct of Clinical Trials of Medical Products during the COVID-19 pandemic, we have evaluated and implemented risk-based approaches for remote clinical trial monitoring and activities, including remote patient assessment, for those subjects who cannot physically visit clinic sites, to ensure the full completion of trials.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused and may continue to cause general business disruption worldwide. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we curtailed employee travel and implemented a corporate work-from-home policy in March 2020. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, certain manufacturing, quality and laboratory-based employees continued to work onsite, and certain employees with customer-facing roles have been onsite for training and interfacing in-person with customers in connection with the product launch of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. We have resumed essential on-site corporate operations and have begun to transition employees back on-site in accordance with local and regional restrictions. Although many of our employees have returned to working on-site, if the severity, duration or nature of the COVID-19 pandemic changes, it may have an impact on our ability to continue on-site operations, which could disrupt our manufacturing operations, clinical trials, sales activities and other operations. See “Part I. Item 1A. Risk Factors-The current COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to, and other actual or threatened epidemics, pandemics, outbreaks, or public health crises may, adversely affect our financial condition and our business.”
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and we do not yet know the full extent of potential delays or impacts on our BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines, our manufacturing operations, supply chain, end user demand for our products and services, commercialization efforts, business operations, clinical trials and other aspects of our business, the healthcare systems or the global economy as a whole. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity and results of operations.
Regulatory Update on DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the Treatment of Glabellar Lines
On October 15, 2021, we received a CRL with respect to the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines. The FDA determined it was unable to approve the BLA in its present form due to deficiencies related to the onsite inspection at our manufacturing facility. The CRL did not identify any other deficiencies. In December 2021, we held a Type A meeting with the FDA to gain clarity and alignment on the requirements for approval of the BLA. Based on the meeting minutes, which we received on January 14, 2022, a complete response to address the outstanding
observations related to the working cell bank (“WCB”) and the drug substance manufacturing process will require us to qualify the new WCB by producing three consecutive drug substance lots and one drug product lot. We have completed the manufacturing of three consecutive drug substance lots and one drug product lot as part of the qualification of the new WCB and are actively working on completing the resubmission package for the BLA. A reinspection of our manufacturing facility will be required once the resubmission is accepted by the FDA.
RHA® Collection of Dermal Fillers
We launched the Current RHA® Collection in the U.S. in September 2020. We plan to launch RHA® Redensity, which was approved in December 2021 for the treatment of moderate to severe dynamic perioral rhytids (lip) lines, in the second half of 2022. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the first full year of commercialization, we recognized $70.8 million in product revenue and $23.1 million in cost of product revenue (exclusive of amortization) from the sale of the Current RHA® Collection of dermal fillers.
The Fintech Platform
On July 23, 2020, we completed the acquisition of all of the issued and outstanding shares of Hint, Inc. (d/b/a HintMD) (the “HintMD Acquisition”), and HintMD became a wholly owned subsidiary of Revance. Following our acquisition of HintMD, we began to operate in two reportable segments: our Product Segment and our Service Segment. Our Product Segment refers to the business that includes the research, development and commercialization of our product candidates and the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. Our Service Segment refers to the business that includes the development and commercialization of the OPUL™ Relational Commerce Platform (“OPUL™”) and HintMD platform (collectively, the “Fintech Platform”). For additional information about our business segments, see Part IV, Item 15. “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules-Notes to consolidated financial statements-Note 16-Segment Information.”
On October 11, 2021, we launched OPULTM, a Relational Commerce Platform that combines seamless, simple and smart payment solutions, 360-degree practice reporting and insights, and enhanced customer support to foster increased consumer loyalty and retention, specifically designed for aesthetic practices in the U.S. OPULTM will replace the HintMD platform, which will continue to be offered to existing HintMD customers with a phased migration to OPULTM.
OPULTM is a fully integrated payment facilitator pursuant to the Payment Facilitator Agreement with a third-party acquirer and sponsor bank. OPULTM enables practices to process payments for their patients and provides practice management solutions that support practices’ operations. Since OPULTM generates revenue as a percentage of credit card processing volumes, we use GPV as a key indicator of the ability of OPULTM to generate revenue. GPV measures the total dollar amount of all transactions processed in the period through the Fintech Platform, net of refunds. The Company also uses the Fintech Platform PayFac capabilities to process credit card transactions for products purchased from the Company; these transactions are not included in GPV. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Fintech Platform processed $506 million of GPV.
Presentation of revenue generated by the Fintech Platform may be impacted by the ongoing migration of customers from the HintMD platform to OPULTM. We have started migrating existing customers on the HintMD platform to OPUL™. While the ongoing migration of existing customers is not expected to have a material impact to the gross margin generated by the Fintech Platform, it is expected to cause a gross-up effect to service revenue and cost of service revenue (exclusive of amortization) due to the gross vs. net presentation difference in revenue accounting between the HintMD Platform and OPUL™.
Preservation of Capital and Expense Management
Beginning in October 2021, we took measures to defer or reduce costs in the near term in order to preserve capital and increase financial flexibility as a result of the delay in the potential approval of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines. These measures include but are not limited to: pausing non-critical hires; deferring the Phase 3 clinical program for upper limb spasticity and other therapeutics pipeline activities; and deferring international regulatory and commercial investment for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, with the exception of supporting our partnership with Shanghai Fosun Pharmaceutical Industrial Development Co., Ltd. (“Fosun”).
The commercial launch delay and its impact on our capital resources has raised substantial doubt with respect to our ability to meet our obligations to continue as a going concern. Our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will not allow us to fund our operations for at least 12 months following the filing of this Report. In order to mitigate the substantial doubt to continue as a going concern, we will be required to raise additional capital to fund our operations. If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we will be required to take additional actions beyond the cost preservation measures previously initiated to address our liquidity needs, including to continue to further reduce operating expense and delay, reduce the scope of, discontinue or alter our research and development activities for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, the RHA® Pipeline Products and our onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar program; the development of OPUL™; our sales and marketing capabilities or other activities that may be necessary to continue to commercialize the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers, OPUL™ and our product candidates, if approved, and other aspects of our business plan. See Part IV, Item 15. “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules-Notes to consolidated financial statements-Note 1-The Company.”
We expect our operating expenses to remain flat or decrease in the near-term as a result of these cost preservation measures. If we raise additional capital or the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines is approved, we expect our operating expenses to increase as we scale back our cash preservation measures or increase sales and marketing activities to commercialize DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines, increase our sales force or take other actions to prepare for the commercialization of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources” for additional information on our cost preservation measures.
At-The-Market (“ATM”) Offerings
In November 2020, we terminated our Controlled Equity Offering Sale Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (the “2018 ATM Agreement”) and entered into a separate sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”) as sales agent (the “2020 ATM Agreement”). Under the 2020 ATM Agreement, we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Cowen, shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $125.0 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 761,526 shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM Agreement at a weighted average price of $29.09 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $21.6 million after sales agent commissions and offering costs. As of December 31, 2021, we had $32.6 million available under the 2020 ATM Agreement.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 is presented below. For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the same period in 2019, see Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, as filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021.
Revenue
Product Revenue
We have only generated product revenue from the sale of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. The formal launch of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers took place in September 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our product revenue increased compared to the same period in 2020 due to higher sales volumes of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and due to one quarter of commercial sales of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers in 2020 compared to a full year of commercial sales in 2021.
Collaboration Revenue
We are in the continuation phase of the onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar program and are moving forward with characterization and product development work.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our collaboration revenue increased compared to the same period in 2020, due to increased development activities from the Viatris Collaboration.
Service Revenue
Our service revenue is generated from the Fintech Platform, which earns revenues through payment processing fees, generally net of costs, and certain value-added services. In our HintMD Platform service offerings, we generally recognize service revenue net of costs as an accounting agent. In our OPUL™ service offerings, we generally recognize service revenue on a gross basis as the accounting principal because we maintain control of the service offerings to our customers as the payment facilitator (“PayFac”).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our service revenue increased compared to the same periods in 2020 primarily because we did not begin to recognize service revenue until the completion of the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020.
We have started migrating existing customers on the HintMD platform to OPUL™, which was commercially launched in October 2021. While the ongoing migration of existing customers is not expected to have a material impact to the gross margin generated by the Fintech Platform, it is expected to cause a gross-up effect to service revenue and cost of service revenue (exclusive of amortization) due to the gross vs. net presentation difference in revenue accounting between the HintMD Platform and OPUL™.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of costs of product revenue (exclusive of amortization), cost of service revenue (exclusive of amortization), selling, general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, and amortization. The largest component of our operating expenses is our personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, which is a subset of our selling, general and administrative and research and development expenses.
Cost of Product Revenue (exclusive of amortization)
Cost of product revenue (exclusive of amortization) primarily consists of the cost of inventory and distribution expenses related to the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. We did not incur cost of product revenue (exclusive of
amortization) until the first delivery of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers in June 2020 in connection with the PrevU program, and we did not incur meaningful cost of product revenue until formal launch in September 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our cost of product revenue (exclusive of amortization) increased compared to the same period in 2020 due to higher sales volumes of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers.
Cost of Service Revenue (exclusive of amortization)
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of service revenue (exclusive of amortization) consists of interchange and various fees from the beta launch of OPUL™ and other miscellaneous fulfillment costs related to the HintMD Platform.
We expect the cost of service revenue (exclusive of amortization) to increase in the future as we expand the general availability of OPUL™ for existing and new customers and due to the change to the gross accounting presentation of revenue and costs associated with OPUL™.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of the following:
•Personnel and professional service costs in our finance, information technology, commercial, investor relations, legal, human resources, and other administrative functions, including related stock-based compensation costs;
•Costs of sales and marketing activities and sales force compensation related to the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and the Fintech Platform;
•DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection pre-commercial activities such as market research and public relations; and
•Depreciation and amortization of certain assets used in selling, general and administrative activities.
Selling, general and administrative expenses before stock-based compensation and depreciation and amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2021, selling, general and administrative expenses increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to an increase in sales and marketing expenses, of which $30.2 million and $1.0 million was attributed to the Product Segment and the Service Segment, respectively.
The increases in sales and marketing expenses in the Product Segment were primarily related to incremental sales force headcount, the promotional, professional education, and sales and marketing activities for the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and pre-commercial activities for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. The increases in sales and marketing expenses in the Service Segment were primarily related to the increase in headcount from the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020. The remaining increases were attributed to general and administrative expenses, which were primarily related to increased compensation costs from onboarded HintMD team members and other personnel and costs related to investment in information technology infrastructure and administrative functions to support our continued growth as a commercial company with an expanding portfolio of products and services.
Stock-based compensation
For the year ended December 31, 2021, stock-based compensation included in selling, general and administrative expenses increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to more stock award grants related to increased employee headcount in selling, general and administrative functions.
Research and Development Expenses
N/M - Percentage not meaningful
In the Product Segment, we do not believe that allocation of all costs by product candidate would be meaningful; therefore, we generally do not track these costs by product candidates unless contractually required by our business partners. In the Service Segment, our research and development expenses relate to the development and introduction of new functionalities and features of OPUL™ that are not subjected to capitalization.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related expenses for personnel in research and development functions, including stock-based compensation;
•expenses related to the initiation and completion of clinical trials and studies for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, future innovations related to the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, including expenses related to the production of clinical supplies;
•fees paid to clinical consultants, contract research organizations (“CROs”) and other vendors, including all related fees for investigator grants, patient screening fees, laboratory work and statistical compilation and analysis;
•expenses related to medical affairs, medical information, publications and pharmacovigilance oversight;
•other consulting fees paid to third parties;
•expenses related to the establishment and maintenance of our manufacturing facilities;
•expenses related to the manufacturing of supplies for clinical activities, regulatory approvals, and pre-commercial inventory;
•expenses related to license fees, milestone payments, and development efforts under in-licensing agreements;
•expenses related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements in the U.S. and other foreign jurisdictions;
•expenses related to the development of new features and functionalities of OPUL™ and services that are not subjected to capitalization;
•depreciation and other allocated expenses; and
•charges from the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers asset acquisition related to in-process research and development.
Our research and development expenses are subject to numerous uncertainties, primarily related to the timing and cost needed to complete our respective projects. In our Product Segment, the development timelines, probability of success and development expenses can differ materially from expectations, and the completion of clinical trials may take several years or more depending on the type, complexity, novelty and intended use of a product candidate. Accordingly, the cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of differences arising during clinical development. We expect our research and development costs to decrease in the near term, primarily due to capital preservation measures which includes deferring the Phase 3 clinical program for upper limb spasticity and other therapeutics pipeline activities, offset by continued product development related to OPUL™ not subjected to software capitalization, and certain shared development costs with Teoxane related to future dermal filler innovations and indications.
When we conduct additional clinical trials, we expect our research and development expenses to fluctuate as projects transition from one development phase to the next. Depending on the stage of completion and level of effort related to each development phase undertaken, we may reflect variations in our research and development expenses. We expense both internal and external research and development expenses as they are incurred.
Manufacturing and quality
Manufacturing and quality expenses include personnel and occupancy expenses, external contract manufacturing costs, and pre-approval manufacturing of drug products used in preparation for our regulatory activities and anticipated commercial launch with respect to DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines and research and development activities for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. Manufacturing and quality expenses also include raw materials, lab supplies, and storage and shipment of our products to support quality control and assurance activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, manufacturing and quality expenses were 41%, and 29% respectively, of the total research and development expenses for the respective periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, manufacturing and quality expenses increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to expenses related to pre-commercial manufacturing and quality activities, including hiring additional personnel in anticipation and support of FDA inspections and the approval process of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines. We expect that our manufacturing and quality expenses will remain at least at the current level until the potential approval of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. Certain amounts of the manufacturing and quality expenses, among other costs, are expected to be treated as inventory costs if approval of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines is obtained.
Clinical and regulatory
Clinical and regulatory expenses include costs related to personnel, external clinical sites for clinical trials, clinical research organizations, central laboratories, data management, contractors and regulatory activities associated with the clinical development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, clinical and regulatory costs were 23%, and 41%, respectively, of the total research and development expenses for the respective periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, clinical and regulatory expenses decreased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the completion of multiple clinical trials in 2020, offset by ongoing support of the regulatory approval process for the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines. We expect clinical and regulatory expenses to decrease in the near term primarily due to capital preservation measures which includes deferring the Phase 3 clinical program for upper limb spasticity and other therapeutics pipeline activities.
Stock-based compensation
For the year ended December 31, 2021, stock-based compensation included in research and development expenses increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to more stock award grants related to increased employee headcount in research and development related functions.
Platform and software development
Platform and software development include expenses associated with research and development activities in the Service Segment, which primarily represent the costs of developing new functionality or features of OPUL™ that are not subject to capitalization. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, platform and software development expenses were 11% and 2%, respectively, of the total research and development expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, platform and software development expenses increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily related to the timing of the HintMD Acquisition. We did not begin to incur platform and software development expenses until after the HintMD Acquisition in July 2020.
Other research and development expenses
Other research and development expenses include expenses for personnel, CROs, consultants, and supplies used to conduct preclinical research and development of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection and an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, other research and development expenses were 10% and 8%, respectively, of the total research and development expenses for the respective periods.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, other research and development expenses increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to additional activities related to the onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar program.
In-process research and development
In connection with the Teoxane Agreement entered into in January 2020, $11.2 million of the aggregate purchase consideration was recognized as in-process research and development expense in the first quarter of 2020, which was allocated to RHA® Pipeline Products. This was a one-time non-recurring charge.
Amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2021, amortization increased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the amortization of distribution rights from the Teoxane Agreement beginning in the second quarter of 2020, and the amortization of developed technology resulting from the HintMD Acquisition beginning in the third quarter of 2020. Additionally, in the second quarter of 2021, the in-process research and development assets as well as the platform software were placed in service. As a result, we started to record amortization expense related to these assets.
Net Non-Operating Income and Expense
Interest Income
Interest income primarily consists of interest income earned on our deposit, money market fund, and investment balances. We expect interest income to vary each reporting period depending on our average deposit, money market fund, and investment balances during the period and market interest rates.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily includes cash and non-cash components from the 2027 Notes. The cash component of the interest expense represents the contractual interest charges. In 2020, the non-cash component of the interest expense represented the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs for our 2027 Notes. In 2021, we adopted ASU 2020-06, which eliminated the recognition and amortization of debt discount as a non-cash interest expense component for our 2027 Notes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, interest expense decreased compared to the same period in 2020, primarily due to the aforementioned adoption of ASU 2020-06 in 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
The derivative liability on our consolidated balance sheets is remeasured to fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding gain or loss recorded. We will continue to record adjustments to the fair value of derivative liability until paid.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net primarily consists of miscellaneous tax and other expense items.
Income Taxes
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we have only generated domestic pretax losses.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we have a net tax benefit of $2.6 million, which consisted of a tax benefit of $2.7 million offset by a tax provision of $0.1 million. The tax benefit of $2.7 million was due to a change in our valuation allowance related to the post-combination effect from the net deferred tax liability assumed from the HintMD Acquisition, and the tax provision of $0.1 million was related to foreign withholding taxes. There was no provision or benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our financial condition is summarized as follows:
Sources and Uses of Cash
We hold our cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments in a variety of non-interest bearing bank accounts and interest-bearing instruments subject to investment guidelines allowing for certain lower-risk holdings such as, but not limited to, money market accounts, commercial paper, and corporate bonds. Our investment portfolio is structured to provide for investment maturities and access to cash to fund our anticipated working capital needs.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $225.1 million and $436.5 million, respectively, which represented a decrease of $211.4 million. The decrease was primarily due to cash and restricted cash used in operating activities of $223.1 million, finance lease prepayments of $7.7 million, net settlement of restricted stock awards for employee taxes of $8.2 million, purchase of property and equipment of $10.4 million, and payments of offering costs of $0.3 million. These decreases were primarily offset by the issuance of shares of our common stock in connection with the at-the-market offering program, net of commissions, of $21.7 million, and the proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the purchase of shares of our common stock under the 2014 ESPP of $16.7 million.
We derived the following summary of our consolidated statement of cash flows for the periods indicated from our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our cash used in operating activities is primarily driven by personnel, manufacturing and facility costs, clinical development, and sales and marketing activities. The changes in net cash used in operating activities are primarily related to our net loss, working capital fluctuations and changes in our non-cash expenses, all of which are highly variable. Our cash flows from operating activities will continue to be affected principally by our working capital requirements and the extent to which we increase spending on personnel, commercial activities, and research and development activities as our business grows.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $221.5 million, which was primarily due to personnel and compensation costs of approximately $122.3 million; professional services and consulting fees of approximately $89.9 million; rent, supplies and utilities expenses of approximately $56.2 million; clinical trials expenses of approximately $9.6 million; legal and other administrative expense of approximately $13.0 million; and the 2027 Notes interest paid of $5.0 million, offset by approximately $74.5 million from product and service revenue.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $178.5 million, which was primarily due to personnel and compensation costs of approximately $72.6 million; professional services and consulting fees of approximately $70.8 million; clinical trials expenses of approximately $37.4 million; rent, supplies and utilities expenses of approximately $28 million; legal and other administrative expense of approximately $9.7 million, and the 2027 Notes interest paid of $2.5 million; offset by a $30.0 million payment received from Viatris in connection with the Viatris Collaboration, $11.5 million from product and service revenue, and a $0.9 million milestone payment received from Fosun pursuant to the Fosun License Agreement.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to fluctuations in the timing of purchases, sale and maturities of investments, purchases of property and equipment, prepayments for a finance lease, and in 2020, the purchase of intangible assets as well as the net cash paid in connection with the HintMD Acquisition.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was driven by the at-the-market offering program, net of commissions, and proceeds from the exercise of stock options and employee stock purchase plan. The inflows were offset by the net settlement of restricted stock awards for employee taxes and payments of offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was driven by proceeds from issuance of the 2027 Notes (as described below), net proceeds from the issuance of our common stock in connection with at-the-market offering program, proceeds from the issuance of shares of our common stock in January 2020 in connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option from the December 2019 follow-on public offering (described below), net of underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, and proceeds from the exercise of stock options, common stock warrants, and the purchase of shares of our common stock under the 2014 ESPP. The inflows were offset by payment of capped call transactions, offering costs and convertible senior notes transaction costs, and net settlement of restricted stock awards for employee taxes.
ATM Programs
In March 2018, we entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sale Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald (the “2018 ATM Agreement”). Under the 2018 ATM Agreement, we had the ability to offer and sell common stock having aggregate proceeds of up to $125.0 million from time to time through Cantor Fitzgerald as our sales agent. Sales of common stock through Cantor Fitzgerald under the 2018 ATM Agreement was made by means of ordinary brokers’ transactions on the Nasdaq or otherwise at market prices prevailing at the time of sale, in block transactions, or as otherwise agreed upon by us and Cantor Fitzgerald. Cantor Fitzgerald sold the common stock from time to time, based upon instructions from us. We agreed to pay Cantor Fitzgerald a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of any common stock sold through Cantor Fitzgerald under the 2018 ATM Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we sold 687,189 shares of common stock under the 2018 ATM Agreement at a weighted average price of $16.26 per share resulting in net proceeds of $10.9 million after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses.
In November 2020, we terminated the 2018 ATM Agreement and entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”) as sales agent (the “2020 ATM Agreement”). Under 2020 ATM Agreement, we may offer and sell, from time to time, through Cowen, shares of our common stock, par value $0.001 per share, having an aggregate offering price of up to $125.0 million. We are not obligated to sell any shares under the 2020 ATM Agreement. Subject to the terms and conditions of the 2020 ATM Agreement, Cowen will use commercially reasonable efforts, consistent with its normal trading and sales practices, applicable state and federal law, rules and regulations and the rules of The Nasdaq Global Market, to sell shares from time to time based upon our instructions, including any price, time or size limits specified by us. We pay Cowen a commission of up to 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares, reimburse legal fees and disbursements and provide Cowen with customary indemnification and contribution rights. The 2020 ATM Agreement may be terminated by Cowen or us at any time upon notice to the other party, or by Cowen at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material and adverse change in our business or financial condition that makes it impractical or inadvisable to market the shares or to enforce contracts for the sale of the shares. For the year ended December
31, 2020, we sold 2,585,628 shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM Agreement at a weighted average price of $27.18 per share resulting in net proceeds of $68.2 million after sales agent commissions and offering costs. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 761,526 shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM Agreement at a weighted average price of $29.09 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $21.6 million after sales agent commissions and offering costs. As of December 31, 2021, we had $32.6 million available under the 2020 ATM Agreement.
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 14, 2020, we issued $287.5 million aggregate principal amount of the 2027 Notes, pursuant to the Indenture. The 2027 Notes are senior unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2020. The 2027 Notes will mature on February 15, 2027, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased. In connection with issuing the 2027 Notes, we received $278.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, commissions, and other issuance costs.
The 2027 Notes may be converted by the holders at any time prior to the close of business on the business day immediately preceding November 15, 2026 only under the following circumstances: (1) during any fiscal quarter commencing after the fiscal quarter ending on June 30, 2020 (and only during such fiscal quarter), if the last reported sale price of our common stock for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during a period of 30 consecutive trading days ending on, and including, the last trading day of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter is greater than or equal to 130% of the conversion price on each applicable trading day; (2) during the five business day period after any ten consecutive trading day period (the “measurement period”) in which the trading price (as defined in the Indenture) per $1,000 principal amount of the 2027 Notes for each trading day of the measurement period was less than 98% of the product of the last reported sale price of our common stock and the conversion rate on each such trading day; (3) if we call any or all of the 2027 Notes for redemption, at any time prior to the close of business on the scheduled trading day immediately preceding the redemption date; or (4) upon the occurrence of specified corporate events. On or after November 15, 2026 until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert all or any portion of their 2027 Notes at any time, regardless of the foregoing circumstances. Upon conversion, we will pay or deliver, as the case may be, cash, shares of our common stock or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election.
The conversion rate will initially be 30.8804 shares of our common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the 2027 Notes (equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $32.38 per share of our common stock). The conversion rate is subject to adjustment in some events but will not be adjusted for any accrued and unpaid interest. In addition, following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if we deliver a notice of redemption, we will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its 2027 Notes in connection with such a corporate event or notice of redemption, as the case may be.
We may not redeem the 2027 Notes prior to February 20, 2024. We may redeem for cash all or any portion of the 2027 Notes, at our option, on or after February 20, 2024 if the last reported sale price of our common stock has been at least 130% of the conversion price then in effect for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period (including the last trading day of such period) ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which we provide notice of redemption at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2027 Notes to be redeemed, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the redemption date. No sinking fund is provided for the 2027 Notes.
If we undergo a fundamental change (as defined in the Indenture), holders may require us to repurchase for cash all or any portion of their 2027 Notes at a fundamental change repurchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2027 Notes to be repurchased, plus any accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the fundamental change repurchase date.
We used $28.9 million of the net proceeds from the 2027 Notes to pay the cost of the capped call transactions. The capped call transactions are expected generally to reduce the potential dilutive effect upon conversion of the 2027 Notes and/or offset any cash payments we are required to make in excess of the principal amount of converted 2027 Notes, as the case may be, with such reduction and/or offset subject to a price cap of $48.88 of our common stock per share, which represents a
premium of 100% over the last reported sale price of our common stock on February 10, 2020. The capped calls have an initial strike price of $32.38 per share, subject to certain adjustments, which corresponds to the conversion option strike price in the 2027 Notes. The capped call transactions cover, subject to anti-dilution adjustments, approximately 8.9 million shares of our common stock.
Follow-On Public Offerings
During December 2019 and January 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of an aggregate of 7,475,000 shares of common stock at $17.00 per share, which included the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 975,000 additional shares of common stock, for net proceeds of $119.2 million, after underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses, of which $103.6 million was received in December 2019 and $15.6 million was received in January 2020.
Common Stock and Common Stock Equivalents
As of February 17, 2022, outstanding shares of common stock were 71.5 million, outstanding stock options were 4.7 million, unvested restricted stock awards and performance stock awards were 3.2 million, and the number of underlying shares from the 2027 Notes at the initial conversion price is 8.9 million.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements - Going Concern
Since inception, we have devoted substantial efforts to identifying and developing product candidates for the aesthetic and therapeutic pharmaceutical markets, recruiting personnel, raising capital, conducting preclinical and clinical development of, and manufacturing development for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, DaxibotulinumtoxinA Topical, the onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar, development of the Fintech Platform and the commercial launch of our products and services. As a result, we have incurred losses and negative cash flows from operations. We have not generated substantial revenue to date, and will continue to incur significant research and development, sales and marketing, and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. In connection with the Teoxane Agreement, we must make specified annual minimum purchases of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers and meet annual minimum expenditures in connection with the commercialization of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. We have incurred substantial transaction expenses in order to complete the HintMD Acquisition. Further, to grow the Fintech Platform business, we must develop features, products and services that reflect the needs of customers and the changing nature of payments processing software and continually modify and enhance the Fintech Platform to keep pace with changes in updated hardware, software, communications and database technologies and standards. In addition, we have dedicated manufacturing capacity, buyback obligations, cost sharing arrangements and related minimum purchase obligations under our manufacturing and supply agreements in connection with the manufacture and supply of our product candidates. In addition, other unanticipated costs may arise from disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of common stock, convertible senior notes, payments received from collaboration arrangements, and sales of the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers. Our capital requirements and operating plan may change as a result of many factors, the most significant of which relates to the timing of potential approval of the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines.
On October 15, 2021, the FDA issued a CRL regarding our BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines. The FDA indicated it was unable to approve the BLA in its present form due to deficiencies related to the FDA’s onsite inspection at our manufacturing facility. As a result, the potential commercial launch of DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines has been delayed. The commercial launch delay and its impact on our capital resources has raised substantial doubt with respect to our ability to meet our obligations to continue as a going concern. Our existing cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments will not allow us to fund our operations for at least 12 months following the filing of this Report.
In order to mitigate the substantial doubt to continue as a going concern, we will be required to raise additional capital to fund our operations. We will seek additional capital through public or private equity or debt financings, royalty financings or other sources, such as strategic collaborations. Additional capital may not be available when needed, on terms that are acceptable to us or at all. If adequate funds are not available to us on a timely basis, or at all, we will be required to
take additional actions beyond the cost preservation measures previously initiated to address our liquidity needs, including to continue to further reduce operating expense and delay, reduce the scope of, discontinue or alter our research and development activities for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection, the RHA® Pipeline Products and our onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar program; the development of OPUL™; our sales and marketing capabilities or other activities that may be necessary to continue to commercialize the RHA® Collection of dermal fillers, OPUL™ and our product candidates, if approved, and other aspects of our business plan.
If we raise additional capital through marketing and distribution arrangements, royalty financings or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may need to relinquish certain valuable rights to our product candidates, technologies, future revenue streams or research programs or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted and the terms of any new equity securities may have a preference over our common stock. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to specified financial covenants or covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or pursuing certain transactions, any of which could restrict our ability to commercialize our product candidates or operate as a business.
If the BLA for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for the treatment of glabellar lines is approved, following approval, we expect to increase operating expenditures with respect to: activities required to support the preparation for and commercialization for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection; internal and external manufacturing capabilities; the development and continued commercialization of OPUL™; the completion of clinical trials and associated programs relating to DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for various indications, an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar and our investment in future innovations in the RHA® Pipeline Products; and the procurement of regulatory approval for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection for various indications and an onabotulinumtoxinA biosimilar.
See “Part 1. Item 1A. Risk Factors-We will require substantial additional financing to continue to operate our business and achieve our goals” for additional information."
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires our management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the applicable periods. We base our estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis.
The critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments that we believe have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements are described below.
Goodwill Impairment
At the acquisition date, we measure goodwill as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition-date fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level in the fourth quarter of each calendar year, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the reporting unit might be impaired. In assessing goodwill for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. Such qualitative factors generally include, but not limited to, macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, sustained decrease in our share price, and other relevant changes specific to our company. If we conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a
quantitative impairment test is performed. If we conclude that goodwill is impaired, an impairment charge is recorded to the extent that the reporting unit’s carrying value exceeds its fair value.
The estimated fair value is determined using an income approach. The income approach is based on discounted future cash flows and requires the use of significant assumptions, including estimates regarding revenue growth rates and discount rate. As a result of the assessment performed during this annual period, we noted that the estimated fair value of the Service reporting unit was determined to be in excess of the carrying value and as such, there were no impairment charges for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Collaboration Revenue
Upon adoption of ASC 606 in 2018, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration we are entitled to in exchange for the goods or services we transfer to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
At the inception of each arrangement that includes development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered more likely than not of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price. ASC 606 provides two alternatives to use when estimating the amount of variable consideration: the expected value method and the most likely amount method. Under the expected value method, an entity considers the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts. Under the most likely amount method, an entity considers the single most likely amount in a range of possible consideration amounts. Whichever method is used should be consistently applied throughout the life of the contract; however, it is not necessary for us to use the same approach for all contracts. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation (as determined to be appropriate) on a relative stand-alone selling price basis. We recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of each such milestone and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjusts our estimates of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment.
Contractual Obligations
Our contractual commitments will have an impact on our future liquidity. We will not be able to meet these obligations with our existing cash balances and cash generated from sales of our products and services unless we are able to raise additional capital to fund our operations to mitigate our ability to continue as a going concern. For a discussion of these objectives, see “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Lease Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we had commenced operating lease obligations totaling $60.9 million over 12 years, of which $8.4 million was attributed to short-term obligations, and the remainder was attributed to long-term obligations.
Under the ABPS Amendment, as of December 31, 2021, we are subject to short-term minimum purchase obligations of up to $30 million for 2022, and long-term minimum purchase obligations of up to $60 million in the aggregate until 2024. Each party has the right to terminate the ABPS Amendment, without cause, with an 18-month written notice to the other party.
Pursuant to the LSNE Agreement, we are responsible for certain costs associated with the design, equipment procurement and validation, and facilities-related costs, monthly payments and minimum purchase obligations throughout the initial term of the LSNE Agreement. Based on our best estimate as of December 31, 2021, our total short-term commitment under the LSNE Agreement will be $20 million for 2022, and our total long-term commitment will be $220 million in the aggregate until 2030.
For details of the leases not yet commenced as of December 31, 2021, refer to Part IV, Item 15. - “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 9-Leases.”
Convertible Senior Notes
On February 14, 2020, we issued the 2027 Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $287.5 million, pursuant to the Indenture. The 2027 Notes are senior unsecured obligations and bear interest at a rate of 1.75% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on February 15 and August 15 of each year, beginning on August 15, 2020. The 2027 Notes will mature on February 15, 2027, unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased earlier. The 2027 Notes are convertible into cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination of cash and shares of our common stock, at our election. In connection with issuing the 2027 Notes, we received $278.3 million in net proceeds, after deducting the initial purchasers’ discount, commissions, and other issuance costs. Contractually, we may not redeem the 2027 Notes prior to February 20, 2024, and no sinking fund is provided for the 2027 Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, our total obligation for the principal and interest of the 2027 Notes was $310.3 million over 6 years, of which $2.0 million consisted of short-term obligations and the remainder consisted of long term obligations. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note 10-Convertible Senior Notes” for details of the convertible senior notes.
Purchase Commitments
Under the Teoxane Agreement, we are required to meet certain minimum purchase obligations during each year of the term and are required to meet certain minimum expenditure requirements in connection with commercialization efforts unless prevented by certain conditions, such as manufacturing delays. Either party may terminate the Teoxane Agreement in the event of the insolvency of, or a material breach by, the other party, including certain specified breaches that include the right for Teoxane to terminate the Teoxane Agreement for our failure to meet the minimum purchase requirements or commercialization expenditure during specified periods, or for our breach of the exclusivity obligations under the Teoxane Agreement. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 15-Commitments and Contingencies” for detail” for details of the Teoxane Agreement.
Contingencies
We have the following milestone or royalty payments, which may become payable to third parties under agreements, as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known.
•We have one future milestone payment of $4.0 million upon the achievement of regulatory approval for DaxibotulinumtoxinA for Injection. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 13-Fair Value Measurement” for details.
•We are obligated to pay a $2.0 million milestone payment to List Laboratories, which is a developer of botulinum toxin, when a certain regulatory milestone is achieved. We are also obligated to pay royalties to List Laboratories on future sales of botulinum toxin products. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 15-Commitments and Contingencies” for details.
•Under the BTRX Purchase Agreement, we are obligated to pay up to $16.0 million to BTRX upon the satisfaction of milestones relating to our product revenue, intellectual property, and clinical and regulatory events. Refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements -Note 15-Commitments and Contingencies” for details of the BTRX Purchase Agreement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Part IV, Item 15. “Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules-Notes to consolidated financial statements-Note 2-Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in this Report.