Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENT WARNING
Certain statements included by reference in this filing containing the words “could,” “may,” “believes,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “expects,” and similar such words constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Any forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Such factors include, among others, the impact of COVID-19 on all facets of logistics and operations, as well as costs, our ability to scale up production volumes in response to an increase in demand, potential tariffs, our ability to maintain liquidity, our maintenance of patent protection, our ability to maintain favorable third party manufacturing and supplier arrangements and relationships, foreign trade risk, our ability to access the market, production costs, the impact of larger market players, specifically Becton, Dickinson and Company ("BD"), in providing devices to the safety market, and other factors referenced in Item 1A. Risk Factors. Given these uncertainties, undue reliance should not be placed on forward-looking statements.
Overview
We have been manufacturing and marketing our products since 1997. VanishPoint® syringes comprised 93.6% of our sales in 2021. EasyPoint® products accounted for 5.1% of sales in 2021. We also manufacture and market a blood collection tube holder, IV safety catheter, and VanishPoint® Blood Collection Set.
Our products have been and continue to be distributed nationally and internationally through numerous distributors. Some of our popular syringe products provide low dead-space. Low dead-space syringes reduce residual
medication remaining in the syringe after the dose has been administered. In some instances, the low dead-space allows for additional doses of medication to be obtained from the vials.
On May 1, 2020, we were awarded a delivery order under an existing contract by the Department of Health and Human Services of the United States to supply automated retraction safety syringes for COVID-19 vaccination efforts, which order was in the amount of $83.8 million plus $10 million in expedited freight costs. The period of performance for this order ended in March 2022.
The Department of Health and Human Services awarded us another contract on February 12, 2021 to supply low dead-space safety syringes for COVID-19 vaccination efforts. The base price for the contract and purchase order was $54.2 million for the five-month base period of performance (February 15, 2021 to July 14, 2021). We received notice that the contract would be extended for seven additional months beyond the base period of performance with a total contract price during such period of approximately $92.8 million plus an additional $6 million in air freight costs. To date, we have received a commitment to exercise the first four option periods which extended through the end of December 2021. The remaining three periods are open but have not yet - and may not - materialize. For each period, the freight reimbursement cost is included in total overall contract value and is estimated at approximately 25% of the overall price.
Our sales under both of the foregoing orders from the U.S. government were $113.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, representing 60.3% of our total sales for the year. Both of the above-mentioned orders as well as the TIA from the U.S. government are material events particular to the COVID-19 pandemic and may not be indicative of future operations. We have not received new orders beyond the 2021 order option periods. While we continue to work with the Department of Health and Human Services, significant new orders are uncertain. In the absence of new U.S. government orders and/or an increase in our domestic orders, we would expect our revenues to be materially affected. The addition of manufacturing equipment and facilities will greatly increase our production capacity. If future orders are not placed by the U.S. government and orders from new and existing customers do not materialize, we would have significant excess productive capabilities.
Effective July 1, 2020, we entered into a TIA with the United States Government Department of Defense, U.S. Army Contracting Command-Aberdeen Proving Ground, Natick Contracting Division & Edgewood Contracting Division (ACC-APG, NCD & ECD) on behalf of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) for $53.7 million in government funding for expanding our domestic production of needles and syringes to meet ongoing and future U.S. COVID-19 medical countermeasures demands. Effective May 12, 2021, we entered into an amendment to the TIA providing an additional $27.4 million in funding to add 12,500 square feet of controlled environment and two additional assembly lines to increase our existing domestic manufacturing capabilities. The amended completion date is August 29, 2022. As of March 8, 2022, we have negotiated contracts for the purchase of automated assembly equipment, molds, and molding equipment, as well as portions of auxiliary equipment, for approximately $63.8 million. We have also received a temporary certificate of occupancy for the $6.7 million 27,800 square foot controlled environment which was funded by the U.S. government under the original agreement. In addition, we have substantially completed the additional controlled environment space required under the May 12, 2021 amendment. Finally, we have received the certificate of occupancy for the new $5.9 million 55,000 square foot warehouse which is our financial responsibility.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented certain safety precautions at our facility to reduce the risk of the potential spread of the novel coronavirus. All of our employees are required to be vaccinated. We continue to monitor the evolving situation and will work to further mitigate risks to staff and to customers. We are continuing to evaluate the ever-changing circumstances surrounding this pandemic as it relates to our ability to continue to source materials and products, maintain a workforce, and operate our business effectively and efficiently. We have faced and continue to deal with the logistical challenges of sourcing raw materials and finished goods, particularly finished goods from China. We utilize multiple transportation providers to ensure we can meet our delivery schedules, but we are subject to the global supply chain and its complexities. To date, the freight challenges have neither caused a loss of customers nor a cessation of production.
On April 17, 2020, we entered into the PPP Loan in the principal amount of $1.4 million in favor of Independent Bank pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (“SBA”). On May 13, 2021, we were informed that the SBA
granted our request for loan forgiveness for the entire original principal amount and accrued interest, for a total of $1.4 million.
We have entered into an agreement to expand our existing administrative offices by 14,000 square feet. We currently expect that the cost of expansion will be approximately $5.6 million. The expected substantial completion date for the new office space is October 2022. To date, we have spent approximately $1 million.
As detailed in Note 4 to the financial statements, we held $13.3 million in debt and equity securities as of December 31, 2021, which represented 12.7% of our current assets. We continually monitor our invested balances.
In response to, among other factors, the global COVID-19 pandemic, our delivery orders from the U.S. government, and the TIA, employee headcount and related salary and benefits costs have increased significantly. As of December 31, 2021, the Company employed approximately 239 full-time, part-time, and temporary employees. This represents approximately a 44.0% increase in our workforce since December 31, 2020.
On March 16, 2021, the Board approved the 2021 Stock Option Plan (the “Plan”) and set aside and reserved 2,000,000 shares of Common Stock for issuance pursuant to the Plan. The Plan was approved by the shareholders at the May 11, 2021 shareholder meeting. The Plan provides for the granting of incentive stock options and non-qualified stock options at a price equal to at least 100% of the fair market value of the Company’s Common Stock as of the date of grant. Participants in the Plan may include employees, consultants, and non-employee Directors. On March 16, 2021, the Compensation and Benefits Committee approved option grants to purchase 1,000,000, 250,000, and 100,000 shares of Common Stock to our chief executive officer, general counsel, and chief financial officer, respectively. These shares will vest in their entirety three years from the grant date.
On March 16, 2021, the Compensation and Benefits Committee modified the annual salaries of our chief executive officer, general counsel, and chief financial officer to $1,000,000, $400,000, and $300,000, respectively. Such salaries were retroactively effective as of January 1, 2021. On March 16, 2021, the Compensation and Benefits Committee also approved issuances of cash bonuses of $300,000, $100,000, and $100,000 to our chief executive officer, general counsel, and chief financial officer, respectively.
In addition to periodic quarterly payments of dividends to preferred shareholders as detailed in Note 12 to the financial statements, on June 4, 2021, the Board of Directors approved payment to Class B Convertible Preferred shareholders of all current dividends, dividends in arrears, as well as dividends still owed to shareholders who converted their preferred stock in the past in the total amount of $5.1 million.
Effective June 4, 2021, we entered into a repurchase plan (the “Plan”) for the purchase of up to $10 million of our Common Stock. Under the Plan, open market purchases of our Common Stock commenced June 18, 2021 and 899,899 shares were purchased as of March 11, 2022 for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $7.2 million.
Historically, unit sales have increased during the flu season. Seasonal trends have been less pronounced due to demand related to the COVID-19 vaccine.
Product purchases from our Chinese manufacturers have enabled us to increase manufacturing capacity with little capital outlay and have provided a competitive manufacturing cost. In 2021, our Chinese manufacturers produced approximately 92% of our products. In the event that we become unable to purchase products from our Chinese manufacturers, we would need to find an alternate manufacturer for the blood collection set, IV catheter, Patient Safe® syringe, 0.5mL insulin syringe, 0.5mL autodisable syringe, and 2mL, 5mL, and 10mL syringes and we would increase domestic production for the 1mL and 3mL syringes and EasyPoint® needles.
In 1995, we entered into a license agreement with Thomas J. Shaw for the exclusive right to manufacture, market, and distribute products utilizing his patented automated retraction technology and other patented technology. This technology is the subject of various patents and patent applications owned by Mr. Shaw. The license agreement generally provides for quarterly payments of a 5% royalty fee on gross sales of products subject to the license and he receives fifty percent (50%) of the royalties paid to the Company by certain sublicensees of the technology subject to the license.
We have experienced significant cost pressure with respect to transportation costs, particularly freight costs for importing products from our overseas manufacturers. These costs contribute significantly to the cost of manufactured products and have significantly reduced our gross margins for the last half of 2021. In addition, we have experienced an increase in raw materials costs, principally the cost of petroleum-based plastics used in our molded components. Although we experienced certain cost increases in raw materials, those costs primarily affected our domestic manufacturing because the finished goods we purchased from China (being 92% of our products) did not change in price during 2021. Other factors that could affect our unit costs include increases in tariffs, costs by third party manufacturers, and changing production volumes. Increases in such costs may not be recoverable through price increases of our products.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion may contain trend information and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties. Our actual future results could differ materially from our historical results of operations and those discussed in any forward-looking statements. All period references are to our fiscal years ended December 2021 and 2020. Dollar amounts have been rounded for ease of reading.
Comparison of Year Ended
December 31, 2021 and Year Ended December 31, 2020
Domestic sales, including sales to the U.S. government, accounted for 88.9% and 90.2% of the revenues in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Domestic revenues increased 127.0% principally due to increased volumes primarily attributable to orders from the U.S. government. Domestic unit sales increased 111.3%. Domestic unit sales were 83.7% of total unit sales for 2021. Domestic unit sales excluding U.S. government orders rose approximately 28.6%. International revenues increased 158.5% due to an increase in orders from existing international customers, particularly in North (excluding the U.S.) and South America. Our international orders may be subject to significant fluctuation over time. Overall unit sales increased 116.9% and our overall revenues increased by 130.1%. Other than sales to the U.S. government, our increased sales are predominantly attributable to existing customers as well as several new smaller customers who do not operate as distributors. Our sales to the U.S. government were approximately $114 million in 2021.
Cost of manufactured product increased 107.5% principally due to an increase in unit volumes. Royalty expense increased 106.7% due to increased gross sales. Gross profit margins increased from 45.2% in 2020 to 50.6% in 2021 principally due to an overall increase in units sold to the U.S. government, accompanied by freight cost reimbursements.
Operating expenses increased 75.9% from the prior year. This is substantially due to increased headcount and other employee-related expenses, as well as consulting expenses. These increases are due to the growth in order volume and expansion activities required by the TIA. Included in the increased employee expenses were bonuses and retroactive salary increases for the named executive officers of approximately $650 thousand, $2.2 million in other employee bonuses, and $3.7 million of share-based compensation expense. Sales and marketing expenses increased due to employee bonuses and an increase of GPO fees on the basis of the increase in sales.
Income from operations was $72.6 million in 2021 compared to income from operations of $24.1 million in 2020. The increase was due to the increase in net revenues and resulting gross profit, primarily driven by the orders from the U.S. government.
Interest and other income decreased 65.5% from the prior year principally due to unrealized losses from our investments. Interest expense for year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by approximately 12.7% from the prior year. The decrease is primarily attributable to the expiration of certain operating leases and an overall decrease in our loan and private stock purchase installment payments.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $18.9 million. For a detailed description of the determination and components of calculating the provision, please refer to Note 11 of the financial statements.
A comparison of the results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 is omitted from this discussion. Such comparison was included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 31, 2021 in Item 7 of Part II thereof.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Discussion of Statement of Cash Flow Items
Cash flow from operations was $32.8 million in 2021, principally due to our net income for the year. The increase in cash was offset by an increase in accounts receivable, largely driven by orders from the U.S. government. There was also an increase in inventory. Additionally, we have recorded deferred taxes of $9.2 million which is material to the adjustments to total cash flow from operations. The deferred tax asset represents amounts available to reduce income taxes payable on taxable income in future years. The determination and calculation of such asset is further discussed in Note 11 of the financial statements.
Cash used by investing activities was $63.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due primarily to the purchase of property, plant and equipment and the purchase of equity securities. The $58.4 million impact to cash from the purchase of fixed assets primarily reflects down payments on orders for certain assets as discussed in Note 22 to the financial statements. Of the $58.4 million, $11.1 million was spent on additional assembly equipment and a new warehouse outside the TIA reimbursement provisions. In 2021, we increased our invested cash position by $4.7 million.
Cash provided by financing activities was $41.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to proceeds from the government under the TIA for down payments on our orders for fixed assets, but was offset by the repurchase of both preferred and Common Stock and the payment of dividends. Our repurchase of common stock in the amount of $5.3 million was a significant use of cash in 2021. As stated herein in Item 5 of Part II, the exact dollar amount to be purchased under the plan prior to the plan’s termination cannot be predicted, though the total repurchase amount is capped at $10 million.
Internal Sources of Liquidity
We have historically funded operations primarily from the proceeds from revenues, private placements, litigation settlements, and loans. We expect to fund operations going forward from revenues, cash reserves, and investments available for sale if the need to access those funds arises. We do not, and historically have not, utilized lines of credit to fund operations.
Margins
The mix of domestic and international sales affects the average sales price of our products. Generally, the higher the ratio of domestic sales to international sales, the higher the average sales price will be. Some international sales of our products are shipped directly from China to the customer. The number of units produced by us versus manufactured in China can have a significant effect on the carrying costs of Inventory as well as Cost of sales. Generally, an overall increase in units sold can positively affect our margins. The cost of raw materials used in manufacturing and transportation costs can also significantly affect our margins. We will continue to evaluate the appropriate mix of products manufactured domestically and those manufactured in China to achieve economic benefits as well as to maintain our domestic manufacturing capability.
Cash Requirements
We believe we will have adequate means to meet our short-term needs to fund operations for at least 12 months. Besides cash reserves and expected income from operations, we also have access to our investments which may be liquidated in the event that we need to access the funds for operations. Expected short-term uses of cash include payroll and benefits, royalty expense, inventory purchases, contractual obligations, capital expenditures, payment of income taxes, repurchase of shares, quarterly preferred stock dividends, and other operational priorities. Our long-term plans involving material cash requirements for capital expenditures are detailed in this section below under “Capital Resources” and our
year-end liabilities are detailed in our financial statements, including Notes 7 through 9 to the financial statements. We believe we will have adequate means to meet our currently foreseeable long-term liquidity needs.
Contracts with the U.S. Government
As discussed above, we were awarded a material delivery order by the Department of Health and Human Services of the United States in the total amount of approximately $83.8 million, plus certain expedited freight expenses. In February 2021, we received another material contract from the Department of Health and Human Services for additional safety syringes representing expected revenues and reimbursable freight costs of $54.2 million for a five-month period ending July 14, 2021 and approximately $92.8 million (plus an additional $6 million in air freight costs) for seven monthly option periods. To date, we have received a commitment to exercise the first four option periods which extended through the end of December 2021. As previously stated, we have not received additional orders beyond the first four option periods. While we continue to work with the Department of Health and Human Services, significant future orders are uncertain.
As discussed above, we entered into a TIA with the U.S. government for a total value of approximately $81.0 million in government funding for expanding our domestic production of needles and syringes. As of March 8, 2022, we have received approximately $67.2 million for down payments on the purchase of certain fixed assets. As of March 8, 2022, we have contributed approximately $5.9 million towards the completion of the new 55,000 square foot warehouse as a portion of the cost sharing agreement. The Company will continue to fund the expansion efforts primarily through providing the necessary workforce to implement the addition of new assets, as well as provide the ongoing necessary support.
External Sources of Liquidity
We received a PPP Loan in the principal amount of $1.4 million. On May 13, 2021, we were informed that the entire original principal amount of $1.4 million would be forgiven.
We consider our investment portfolio a source of liquidity as well. As of December 31, 2021, $13.3 million was invested in third party securities.
Capital Resources
Since the execution of the TIA on July 1, 2020, we have begun construction for significant expansion to our facilities. As of March 8, 2022, we have received a temporary certificate of occupancy for the approximately 27,800 square feet of additional controlled environment within existing properties and a certificate of occupancy for the 55,000 square feet of new warehouse space. We have substantially completed an additional 12,500 square feet of controlled environment space. As of March 8, 2022, we have negotiated contracts for the purchase of automated assembly equipment, molds, and molding equipment, as well as portions of auxiliary equipment, under the original TIA and the modification for approximately $63.8 million. To fund the purchase of the automated assembly equipment, auxiliary equipment, and construction of the controlled environment, we are reimbursed by the U.S. government according to the terms in the TIA. The TIA also allows us to request an advance of funds for larger purchases when necessary. The expenditures which are not reimbursable from the U.S. government under the TIA are funded with cash from operations. The capital assets funded by us under the TIA include the construction of the new warehouse as well as certain accessory equipment.
We have entered into an agreement to expand our existing administrative offices by 14,000 square feet. We currently expect that the cost of expansion will be approximately $5.6 million which we will fund from cash from operations. The expected substantial completion date for the new office space is October 2022. To date, we have spent approximately $1 million.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We are responsible for developing estimates for amounts reported as assets and liabilities, and revenues and expenses in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). Those estimates require that we
develop assumptions of future events based on past experience and expectations of economic factors. Among the more critical estimates management makes is the estimate for customer rebates. The amount reported as a contractual allowance for rebates involves examination of past historical trends related to our sales to customers and the related credits issued once contractual obligations of the customers have been met. The establishment of a liability for future claims of rebates against sales in the current period requires that we have an understanding of the relevant sales with respect to product categories, sales distribution channels, and the likelihood of contractual obligations being satisfied. We examine the results of estimates against actual results historically and use the determination to further develop our basis for assumptions in future periods, as well as the accuracy of past estimates. While we believe that we have sufficient historical data, and a firm basis for establishing reserves for contractual obligations, there is an inherent risk that our estimates and the underlying assumptions may not reflect actual future results. In the event that these estimates and/or assumptions are incorrect, adjustments to our reserves may have a material impact on future results.