Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results together with our financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company pioneering a precision medicine approach to the discovery, development, and commercialization of novel therapeutic and companion diagnostic products for the treatment of immune-mediated diseases, starting first with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). We leverage our proprietary precision medicine platform, Prometheus360™, which includes one of the world’s largest gastrointestinal (GI) bioinformatics database and sample biobank, to identify novel therapeutic targets and develop therapeutic candidates to engage those targets. In parallel, we are developing companion diagnostic tests designed to identify patients more likely to respond to our therapeutic candidates. We have generated a robust pipeline of therapeutic development programs for the treatment of immune-mediated diseases.
Our lead product candidate, PRA023, is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) that has been shown to block the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-like ligand 1A (TL1A), a target associated with both intestinal inflammation and fibrosis that was clinically validated in Pfizer’s Phase 2a clinical trial in ulcerative colitis (UC). PRA023 has the potential to substantially improve outcomes for moderate-to-severe IBD patients, especially those predisposed to increased TL1A expression.
In 2021, we completed our Phase 1 clinical trial of PRA023 in normal healthy volunteers and advanced PRA023 into a Phase 2 randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial in patients with moderate-to-severe UC and an open-label Phase 2a clinical trial in patients with moderate-to-severe Crohn’s disease (CD), each utilizing our genetics-based companion diagnostic candidate designed to classify patients who are predisposed to increased expression of TL1A and therefore potentially more likely to respond to PRA023. We are currently enrolling patients in these clinical trials of PRA023 for UC and CD and expect to provide topline results from both of these clinical trials in the fourth quarter of 2022.
PRA023’s dual mechanism of action, targeting both inflammation and fibrosis, provides strong support for investigating the potential applicability of TL1A modification in areas outside IBD including indications in dermatology, pulmonary or hepatobiliary disease. In December 2021, we announced our plans to expand our pipeline beyond IBD into other immune-mediated diseases and plan to initiate a Phase 2 clinical trial for PRA023 in Systemic Sclerosis-associated Interstitial Lung Disease (SSc-ILD) by the end of the first quarter of 2022. In January 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted fast track designation for PRA023 for the treatment of SSc-ILD.
Our PR600 program targets a member of the TNF super family implicated in the function of memory T cells and T follicular helper cells in immune-mediated diseases. This target, expressed by immune cells, drives downstream biological pathways distinct from those activated by TNF or TL1A. It has been shown that blocking this target inhibits disease in multiple IBD animal models. In June 2021, we selected a clinical candidate for PR600 and initiated investigational new drug application (IND) enabling studies. We expect to submit an IND for this clinical candidate in the third quarter of 2022.
In 2020, we entered into a co-development and manufacturing agreement (the Falk Agreement) with Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH (Falk) for our PR600 program, in order to leverage Falk’s experience in GI drug development and commercialization in Europe. Under this agreement, we granted to Falk exclusive commercialization rights in Europe, Australia and New Zealand for PR600 and its companion diagnostic, while we retained commercialization rights in the United States and the rest of the world. In 2021, we earned both pre-clinical milestone payments from Falk related to our selection of a clinical candidate and our development of a companion diagnostic candidate for the PR600 program.
We continue to explore additional potential indications for our development programs and evaluate numerous other drug targets identified through Prometheus360 for therapeutic utility for potential drug discovery development. The research and development of therapeutic product candidates and companion diagnostics comprises our therapeutics business segment.
On June 30, 2019, we acquired from Nestlé Prometheus Laboratories, Inc. (PLI), which marketed and conducted several laboratory developed tests useful to gastroenterologists in monitoring their IBD patients’ disease state. Prior to our acquisition of PLI in June 2019, we had devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing our Prometheus360 platform, discovering and identifying potential product candidates, establishing our intellectual
property portfolio and conducting research and preclinical studies, and providing other general and administrative support for these operations.
On December 31, 2020, we completed the spinoff of PLI by making an in-kind distribution of 100% of our interest in PLI to our stockholders of record on December 30, 2020. Except as specifically indicated, the discussion of our operations excludes the operations of PLI, which are reported as a discontinued operation in the accompanying consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the following discussion.
We do not expect to generate any revenue from therapeutic product sales until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our therapeutic product candidates and companion diagnostics, which we expect will take a number of years and may never occur.
We have incurred operating losses in each year since inception. Our net losses, including those generated from PLI, were $90.2 million and $37.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $189.3 million. We expect our expenses and operating losses will continue to increase substantially as we conduct our ongoing global Phase 2 clinical trials of PRA023 and planned preclinical studies and clinical trials of PR600, continue our research and development activities, develop and validate companion diagnostics, utilize third parties to manufacture our product candidates and related raw materials, hire additional personnel, protect our intellectual property and incur additional costs associated with being a public company, including audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our preclinical studies and clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities, as well as the generation of any services and collaboration revenue.
From inception and to the date of our initial public offering (IPO) in March 2021, we had raised a total of $175.6 million to fund our operations from gross proceeds from the sale and issuance of convertible preferred stock and $7.5 million from proceeds under our loan and security agreement (Loan Agreement) with Oxford Finance LLC and its affiliates (Oxford). In March 2021, we completed our IPO with the sale of 11,500,000 shares of common stock, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 1,500,000 additional shares, at an initial public offering price of $19.00 per share and received net of approximately $199.8 million. In July 2021, we voluntarily prepaid the aggregate outstanding principal balance of the Oxford Loan of $7.5 million plus an additional $0.5 million consisting of the prepayment penalty, accrued interest, and final payment due under the terms of the Loan Agreement and Oxford released all liens against our assets and terminated our other applicable obligations. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $257.3 million.
Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditures for at least the next 12 months. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our therapeutic product candidates and companion diagnostics, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. As we continue to advance our pipeline of diagnostic products, we expect to incur additional costs associated with conducting clinical studies to demonstrate the utility of our products and support reimbursement efforts. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential additional collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
COVID-19
The COVID-19 worldwide pandemic has presented substantial public health and economic challenges and is affecting our employees, patients, physicians and other healthcare providers, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. and global economies and financial markets. International and U.S. governmental authorities in impacted regions are taking actions in an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19, including issuing varying forms of “stay-at-home” orders, restricting business functions outside of one’s home, and implementing vaccination requirements. While it is not possible at this time to estimate the impact that COVID-19 could have on our business in the future, particularly as we continue enrolling global clinical trials and advance other product candidates into clinical development, the continued spread of COVID-19 and the measures taken by the governmental authorities could disrupt the supply chain and the manufacture or shipment of drug substances and finished drug products for our product candidates for use in our research, preclinical studies and clinical trials, delay, limit or prevent our employees and CROs from continuing research and development activities, impede our clinical trial initiation and recruitment and the ability of patients to continue in clinical trials, impede testing, monitoring, data collection and analysis and other related activities, any of which could
delay our preclinical studies and clinical trials and increase our development costs, and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations. The COVID-19 outbreak could also potentially affect the business of the FDA, European Medicines Agency (EMA) or other regulatory authorities, which could result in delays in meetings related to our ongoing and planned clinical trials. The COVID-19 pandemic and mitigation measures have had and may continue to have an adverse impact on global economic conditions which could have an adverse effect on our business and financial condition, including impairing our ability to raise capital when needed. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our results will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the virus and the actions to contain its impact.
License and Collaboration Agreements
Our Collaboration with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
In September 2017, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center (Cedars-Sinai), as amended and restated (the Cedars-Sinai Agreement), pursuant to which Cedars-Sinai granted us an exclusive, worldwide license with respect to certain patents, information and materials related to therapeutic targets and companion diagnostic products, to conduct research, develop, and commercialize therapeutic and diagnostic products for human use. The licensed technology includes information and materials arising out of Cedars-Sinai’s database and biobank, as well as exclusive access to this database and biobank, which is an integral part of our Prometheus360 platform. As upfront consideration for the license agreement, we issued to Cedars-Sinai 257,500 shares of fully vested common stock and 335,000 shares of restricted common stock, which shares fully vested in September 2020. We are obligated to pay Cedars-Sinai low- to mid-single digit percentage royalties on net sales of therapeutic and diagnostic products covered under the agreement, including any related companion diagnostic products, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Cedars-Sinai Agreement. In August 2021, we amended and restated the Cedars-Sinai Agreement to, among other things, add a joint steering committee and cover new intellectual property.
Our Collaboration with Dr. Falk Pharma
In July 2020, we entered into a co-development and manufacturing agreement (the Falk Agreement) with Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH (Falk), pursuant to which we will co-develop and commercialize, exclusively in our respective territories, our PR600 therapeutic product candidate and companion diagnostic test. Under the Falk Agreement, we are obligated to use commercially reasonable efforts to conduct such development activities under an agreed development plan and we are responsible for regulatory approvals and commercialization of any products in the United States and the rest of the world, other than the Falk territory. Falk is responsible for regulatory approvals and commercialization of any products in the European Union, United Kingdom, Switzerland, the countries of the European Economic Area (excluding Malta and the Republic of Cyprus), Australia and New Zealand (Falk territory). Falk has agreed to fund 25% of our third party development costs set forth in the development plan. In June 2021, Falk made a milestone payment of $10 million to us upon the selection of a clinical candidate for our PR600 program and, in December 2021, Falk made the final milestone payment of $5 million to us, based on our development of a companion diagnostic candidate for the PR600 program. Falk is also obligated to pay us a mid-single to low-double digit royalty on net sales of all products incorporating antibodies covered by the agreement in the Falk territory and we agreed to pay Falk a low-single digit royalty on net sales for such products in our territory, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Falk Agreement.
Our Collaboration with Takeda
In March 2019, we entered into a Companion Diagnostic Development and Collaboration Agreement (the Takeda Agreement) with Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Takeda, pursuant to which we agreed to develop a companion diagnostic product (Diagnostic Product) for drug targets selected by Takeda, and Takeda agreed to develop and commercialize any therapeutic clinical candidates that it develops directed against any selected drug targets for the treatment of IBD (Takeda Drugs). Takeda agreed to reimburse us for certain research and development expenses and in the event the parties agree on any drug targets to advance under the agreement we would be eligible to receive various payments, including future development and regulatory milestone payments, commercial milestone payments, sales milestone payments, and royalties on net sales of Takeda Drugs, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the Takeda Agreement.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Collaboration revenue
We currently derive all of our revenue from our collaboration agreements. For the foreseeable future, we expect to generate revenue from services performed under the Falk Agreement and Takeda Agreement. We may receive a combination of upfront payments and milestone payments under our current and/or future collaboration agreements.
We do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of therapeutic products unless and until such time that our therapeutic product candidates and companion diagnostics have advanced through clinical development and regulatory approval, if ever. We expect that any revenue we generate, if at all, will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter as a result of the timing and amount of payments relating to such services and milestones and the extent to which any of our therapeutic product candidates are approved and successfully commercialized. If we fail to complete preclinical and clinical development of therapeutic product candidates or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenues, and our results of operations and financial position would be adversely affected.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist of external and internal costs associated with our research and development activities, including our discovery and research efforts, the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates and the development and validation of our companion diagnostics. Our research and development expenses include:
•
external costs, including expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as CROs, contract manufacturers, consultants and our scientific advisors; and
•
internal costs, including:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation; the costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study materials; and
•
facilities, information technology and depreciation, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and depreciation of equipment.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate for the periods indicated (in thousands):
We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to progress our Phase 2 clinical trials of PRA023 globally, advance PR600 through IND-enabling studies and initiate a Phase 1a clinical trial, develop companion diagnostics, and continue to advance several preclinical research and development programs. The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. We may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
The timelines and costs with research and development activities are uncertain and can vary significantly for each product candidate and development program and are difficult to predict. We anticipate we will make determinations as to which programs to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program on an ongoing basis in response to preclinical and clinical results, regulatory developments, ongoing assessments as to each program’s commercial potential, and our ability to maintain or enter into new collaborations, to the extent we determine the resources or expertise of a collaborator would be beneficial for a given program. We will need to raise substantial additional capital in the future. In addition, we cannot forecast which development programs may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Our development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•
the number and scope of preclinical and IND-enabling studies;
•
per patient trial costs;
•
the number of trials required for approval;
•
the number of sites included in the trials;
•
the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•
the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•
the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•
the number of doses that patients receive;
•
the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•
the number, costs and timing of developing companion diagnostics and scope of validation studies;
•
potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•
the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•
the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
•
the phase of development of our product candidates; and
•
the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates and effectiveness of our companion diagnostics.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, for employees in our finance, accounting, legal, human resources, business development and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include allocated facility, information technology and depreciation related costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses and professional fees for auditing, tax, intellectual property and legal services. Costs related to filing and pursuing patent applications are recognized as general and administrative expenses as incurred since recoverability of such expenditures is uncertain.
We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase for the foreseeable future to support our increased research and development activities and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increased costs will likely include increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory and tax services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance premiums and investor relations costs associated with operating as a public company.
Interest and Other Income (Expense)
Interest income
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense incurred in connection with our borrowings under the Loan Agreement and non-cash interest expense associated with the deferred purchase payments for PLI.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
Loss on early extinguishment of debt consists of the unamortized debt issuance costs, prepayment penalty and final payment due under the terms of the Loan Agreement.
Change in fair value of preferred stock purchase liability
In connection with the issuance of our Series D convertible preferred stock in 2020, the investors agreed to buy, and we agreed to sell, additional shares of such preferred convertible stock at the original issue price upon the achievement of pre-defined milestones. These contractual obligations were required to be accounted for as liabilities and remeasured to fair value at each reporting date, with any change in the fair value reported as a component of other income (expense). In January 2021, with the issuance of the Series D-2 convertible preferred stock, this contractual obligation was settled and the preferred stock purchase right liability was remeasured to fair value on the purchase date and reclassified to permanent equity.
Change in fair value of preferred stock warrant liability
Changes in the fair value of preferred stock warrant liabilities relates to warrants for the purchase of convertible preferred stock issued in connection with our Loan Agreement. These warrants were converted into warrants for the purchase of common stock in connection with our IPO and were reclassified into stockholders’ equity. Accordingly, no further fair value adjustments for these warrants are expected.
Loss From Discontinued Operations
On December 31, 2020, we completed the spinoff of PLI by making an in-kind distribution of 100% of our interest in PLI to our stockholders of record on December 30, 2020. The results of PLI have been classified as discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Revenue
Revenue was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1.9 million is mainly due to the increase in development activities for the PR600 program under the collaboration with Falk.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $62.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $43.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a $13.4 million increase in clinical trial expenses related to our Phase 1a clinical trial of
PRA023 and the initiation of our global Phase 2 clinical trials of PRA023, a $9.3 million increase in expense related to our contract manufacturing activities to support our clinical trials for PRA023 and pre-IND activities for PR600, a $6.8 million increase in expenses related to personnel costs due to increased headcount to support increased development and clinical trial activities, a $2.2 million increase in expenses associated with our Enroll360 platform, $2.1 million increase in expenses associated with the startup activities for our Phase 2 clinical trial for PRA023 in SSc-ILD, with the remainder due to increases in expenses related to research and development expenses for our other pre-clinical development programs and for ongoing development activities associated with our two main targets PRA023 and PR600.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $28.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $17.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a $8.3 million increase in stock compensation expense, out of which $4.7 million related to equity awards modification in connection with the passing of the Company’s former Chairman of the board of directors, a $3.5 million increase in expenses related to personnel costs due to increased headcount and one-time transaction costs indirectly related to our IPO of $1.8 million, with the remainder due to an increase in expenses related to operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest expense
Interest expense was $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to interest expense of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to reduction of non-cash interest expense incurred in connection with the deferred purchase price of PLI that was settled through conversion into Series D-2 preferred stock in January 2021 as well as the repayment of debt under the Loan Agreement in the third quarter of 2021.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
Loss on early extinguishment of debt of $0.6 million consists of the unamortized debt issuance costs, prepayment penalty and final payment due under the terms of the Loan Agreement.
Loss from discontinued operations
For the year ended December 31, 2020, revenue from PLI totaled $36.6 million and operating expenses totaled $42.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From our inception and to the date of our IPO, we received aggregate gross proceeds of $175.6 million from the sale of convertible preferred stock, $7.5 million from borrowings under our Loan Agreement with Oxford and $8.2 million from amounts received under the Falk and Takeda Agreements. In March 2021, we completed our IPO with the sale of 11,500,000 shares of common stock, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 1,500,000 additional shares, at an initial public offering price of $19.00 per share and received gross proceeds of $218.5 million, which resulted in net proceeds to us of approximately $199.8 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $15.3 million and offering-related transaction costs of approximately $3.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $257.3 million.
Oxford Loan and Security Agreement
In January 2020, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Oxford, which provided for total borrowings of up to $25.0 million, of which $7.5 million was drawn upon execution of the agreement. No additional amounts remain available for borrowing. Interest accrued at an annual rate equal to the sum of (I) the greater of (a) the 30-day U.S. LIBOR rate reported the last business day of the month that immediately preceded the month in which the interest will accrue, and (b) 2.01%, plus (II) 5.98%. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the annual rate was at no time to be less than 7.99%. From March 1, 2020 through February 28, 2023, we were required to make interest only payments. Beginning March 1, 2023, in addition to interest payments, the monthly payments were to include an amount equal to the outstanding principal divided by 24 months. At maturity (or earlier prepayment), we were also required to make a final payment equal to 4.0% of the original principal amount borrowed and 3% of the future amount to be funded.
The Loan Agreement was collateralized by substantially all of our assets, excluding intellectual property, which was subject to a negative pledge. The Loan Agreement contained customary affirmative and negative covenants and events of default applicable to us. The affirmative covenants included, among others, covenants requiring us to maintain governmental approvals, deliver certain financial reports, maintain insurance coverage and protect material intellectual property. The negative covenants included, among others, restrictions on us transferring collateral, incurring additional indebtedness, engaging in mergers or acquisitions, paying cash dividends or making other distributions, making investments, creating liens, selling assets and making any payment on subordinated debt, in each case subject to certain exceptions.
In July 2021, we voluntarily prepaid the aggregate outstanding principal balance of $7.5 million plus an additional $0.5 million consisting of the prepayment penalty, final payment, and accrued interest due under the terms of the Loan Agreement, and the Loan Agreement was terminated in accordance with its terms. All liens and security interests securing the Oxford Loan were released upon termination.
In connection with execution of the Loan Agreement, we issued Oxford a warrant to purchase 112,500 shares of our Series C convertible preferred stock at an exercise price of $1.00 per share, exercisable at any time following issuance. The preferred stock warrant has a term of ten years. The warrant became exercisable for an aggregate of 14,884 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $7.558 per share upon the completion of our IPO.
Future Capital Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $257.3 million. Based upon our current operating plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. However, our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect. Additionally, the process of conducting preclinical studies and testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress and expenses in these studies and trials is uncertain.
Our future capital requirements are difficult to forecast and will depend on many factors, including but not limited to:
•
the type, number, scope, progress, expansions, results, costs and timing of, discovery, preclinical studies and clinical trials of our product candidates which we are pursuing or may choose to pursue in the future;
•
the costs and timing of manufacturing for our product candidates and commercial manufacturing if any product candidate is approved;
•
the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•
the costs and timing of developing our companion diagnostics, and the outcome of regulatory review;
•
the success of our current and any future collaborations, including the timing and amount of the milestone or other payments made to us under the Takeda Agreement, the Falk Agreement or any future collaboration agreements;
•
the costs of obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our patents and other intellectual property rights;
•
the additional costs we may incur as a result of operating as a public company, including our efforts to enhance operational systems and hire additional personnel, including enhanced internal controls over financial reporting;
•
the timing and amount of payments that we must make to the licensors and other third parties from whom we have in-licensed intellectual property rights related to our Prometheus360 platform and product candidates;
•
the costs associated with hiring additional personnel and consultants as our preclinical and clinical activities increase;
•
the costs and timing of maintaining our sales and marketing capabilities and any expansion thereof, including if any product candidate is approved;
•
our ability to achieve sufficient market acceptance, coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party payors and adequate market share and revenue for any approved products and companion diagnostics;
•
the terms and timing of establishing and maintaining collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements; and
•
costs associated with any products or technologies that we may in-license or acquire.
Other than our collaboration agreements, we have no other committed sources of capital. Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, if ever, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potential collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be or could be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Any future debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other collaborations or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash used by operating activities from continuing operations was $63.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to cash used in operating activities of $29.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $33.6 million was primarily the result of the increase in net loss between the two periods of $59.1 million offset by increases in operating assets and liabilities of $14.1 million and stock compensation expense of $10.0 million.
Investing Activities
Including the operations of PLI, net cash used by investing activities was $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due to purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $267.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $79.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received proceeds of $218.5 million from the sale of our common stock in our IPO, net of issuance costs, proceeds of $73.7 million from the sale of shares of our Series D-2 convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs, and proceeds of $0.4 million from the issuance of common stock under the employee stock purchase plan offset by $8.0 million used in repayment of debt and $17.3 million in financing costs. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $73.8 million from the issuance of our Series C and D-1 convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs, and $7.3 million from proceeds under the Loan Agreement with Oxford offset by $1.5 million in financing costs related to our IPO.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
This management discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities revenue and expenses.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the recording of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies and estimates to be most critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
To date, all of our revenue has been derived from our collaboration agreements with Falk and Takeda. The terms of these arrangements include payments to us for the following: non-refundable, upfront license fees; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; payments for research, and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (ASC 606). In accordance with ASC 606, we perform the following steps in determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as we fulfill our obligations under each of these agreements: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when, or as satisfy each performance obligation. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
With respect to our assessment of the Falk and Takeda Agreements, we identified one performance obligation for each deliverable under the agreement since the delivered elements are not distinct within the context of the contract. Accordingly, we will recognize revenue for the transaction price in an amount proportional to the collaboration expenses incurred and the total estimated collaboration expenses over the period over which it expects to deliver its performance obligations. We included certain milestones in the transaction price as they were deemed not probable of significant reversal at the inception of the agreement. Due to the uncertainty in the achievement of the developmental and commercial milestones, the variable consideration associated with these future milestone payments has been fully constrained (excluded) from the transaction price until such time that we conclude that it is probable that a significant reversal of previously recognized revenue will not occur.
Amounts received prior to satisfying the above revenue recognition criteria were recognized as deferred revenue until all applicable revenue recognition criteria were met. Deferred revenue represented the portion of payments received that have not been earned. Refer to Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for quantitative disclosures related to revenue recognition.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation expense represents the cost of the grant date fair value of equity awards recognized over the requisite service period of the awards (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. We estimate the fair value of stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and recognize forfeitures as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions, including the risk-free interest rate, the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of stock options, the expected dividend yield and the fair value of the underlying common stock on the date of grant. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require judgment to develop. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options
granted in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Stock-based compensation totaled approximately $10.7 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to stock options was $45.4 million which is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 3.6 years.
Common Stock Valuations
Prior to our IPO in March 2021, the fair value of the common stock underlying our equity awards was determined on each grant date by our board of directors, taking into account input from management and independent third-party valuation analyses. Following the completion of our IPO, the fair value of our common stock is based on the closing price as reported on the date of grant on the Nasdaq Global Select Market.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We are required to make estimates of our accrued expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with CROs, manufacturers, vendors and consultants, in connection with conducting research and development activities. The financial terms of these contracts vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. We reflect research and development expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended.
We account for these expenses according to the progress of the preclinical study as measured by the timing of various aspects of the study or related activities. In accruing for these activities, we obtain information from various sources and estimates level of effort or expense allocated to each period. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for a description of recent accounting pronouncements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In March 2021, we executed a non-cancellable lease agreement for office and laboratory space in San Diego, California. The lease has an initial term of ten years, following the commencement date with an option to extend the lease for an additional five-year term. The lease provides for initial monthly rental payments of approximately $0.2 million with rent escalation and we are also responsible for certain operating expenses and taxes throughout the lease term. In October 2021, we executed an amendment to the lease agreement, which allows for the occupancy of an additional floor. The amended lease extends the initial term of the original lease to 127 months following the commencement date of the expansion premises, with an option to extend the lease term for an additional five-year term. The amended lease provides for initial monthly rental payments for the expansion premises of an additional approximately $0.2 million with rent escalation and we are also responsible for certain operating expenses and taxes throughout the lease term. We currently expect the lease to commence in 2022. The total future minimum lease payments under the amended lease are $47.1 million as of December 31, 2021. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
In July 2021, we voluntarily prepaid the aggregate outstanding principal balance of $7.5 million plus an additional $0.5 million consisting of the prepayment penalty, final payment and accrued interest due under the terms of the Loan Agreement, and the Loan Agreement was terminated in accordance with its terms. All liens and security interests securing the Oxford Loan were released upon termination. See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business for contract research services, contract manufacturing services, professional services and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a
notice period, and, therefore, are cancelable contracts. Any related cancellation fees are not reasonably possible to estimate if and when these provisions would be triggered and, therefore, the amounts are not fixed and determinable at this time.
JOBS Act
As an emerging growth company under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (JOBS Act), we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, will not be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of Sarbanes-Oxley. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the consummation of our IPO, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year, or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.