Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us,” “we” or “RXR” refer to RXR Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1.A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes
forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 5, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies. Our sponsor is RXR Acquisition Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Sponsor”).
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on March 3, 2021.
On March 8, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 30,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $17.1 million, of which $10.5 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. We granted the underwriter a 45-day option
to purchase up to an additional 4,500,000 Units at the Initial Public Offering price to cover over-allotments, if any. The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full on March 16, 2021, purchasing an additional 4,500,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”), generating gross proceeds of $45.0 million. We incurred additional offering costs of approximately $2.5 million, of which approximately $1.6 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Each Unit consists of one share of Class A common stock and one-fifth of
one redeemable warrant (each redeemable warrant, a “Public Warrant”). Each Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. Such shares of Class A common stock and Public Warrants may trade as separate financial instruments.
Simultaneous with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 5,333,333 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of $8.0 million. Simultaneous with the closing of the sale of Over-Allotment Units, we consummated the second closing of the Private Placement, resulting in the purchase of an aggregate of an additional 600,000 Private Placement Warrants by our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $900,000.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the sale of Over-Allotment Units and the Private Placement, $345.0 million ($10.00 per Unit) of net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, the Sale of Over-Allotment Units and the Private Placement were placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. “government securities,” within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated
under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully. We must complete one or more initial Business Combinations having an aggregate fair market value of at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable on the income earned on the Trust Account) at the time of the agreement to enter into the initial Business Combination. However, we only intend to complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the issued and outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 8, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), and our stockholders have not amended the Certificate of Incorporation to extend such Combination Period, we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than 10 business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price,
payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and which interest shall be net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $200,000 in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $400,000 (not taking into account franchise tax obligations of $200,000 that may be paid using investment income earned in the Trust Account)
Our liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our Sponsor to purchase Founder Shares (as defined below), and loan proceeds from our Sponsor of $150,000 under a promissory note. We repaid the promissory note in full on March 8, 2021. Our liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the sale of Over-Allotment Units and the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account.
Going Concern and Management’s Plan
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering, the Company lacked the liquidity it needed to sustain operations for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statements. The Company has since competed its Initial Public Offering at which time capital in excess of the funds deposited in the Trust Account and/or used to fund offering expenses was released to the Company for general working capital purposes totaling $2.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $200,000 remains available to use for general working capital purposes. Management has since reevaluated the Company’s liquidity and financial condition and determined that it may not be sufficient to meet the Company’s obligation over the period of twelve months from the issuance date of the financial statements. The Company’s sponsor has agreed to provide support to enable the Company to continue its operations and meet its potential obligations over a period of one year from the issuance date of these financial statements. Management believes current working capital, and the support from its Sponsor, provides sufficient capital to sustain operations for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statements and therefore substantial doubt has been alleviated.
We continue to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic and have concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income from investments held in the Trust Account. We will continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses. Additionally, we recognize non-cash
gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our derivative warrant liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from January 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $3.0 million, which consisted of a non-operating gain
resulting from a change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities of approximately $4.7 million and approximately $21,000 of income from investments held in the Trust Account, partially offset by a loss from operations of approximately $1.2 million comprised of approximately $931,000 general and administrative expenses, approximately $99,000 in general and administrative expenses to a related party and approximately $200,000 of franchise tax expense, and a non-operating loss
of approximately $424,000 for offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on Nasdaq through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination and our liquidation, we agreed to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services.
The Sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses
incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to the Sponsor, our directors, our officers or any of their affiliates.
The Company incurred approximately $99,000 in related party general and administrative expenses in the accompanying statement of operations for the period from January 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option
from the date of the final prospectus relating to the Initial Public Offering to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the Initial Public Offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full and on March 16, 2021, purchasing an additional 4,500,000 Units.
The underwriters are entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $6.9 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and sale of Over-Allotment Units. An additional fee of $0.35 per Unit, or approximately $12.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Derivative warrant liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be accounted for as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at
the end of each reporting period.
We issued 6,900,000 Public Warrants to investors in our Initial Public Offering and issued 5,933,333 Private Placement Warrants. All of our outstanding warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at
each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants were estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The fair value of the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants have subsequently been measured based on the listed market price of such warrants or inputs derived from Public Warrants.
Class A common shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 34,500,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period as calculated using the treasury stock method. At December 31, 2021, we had outstanding warrants to purchase up to 12,833,333 Class A common shares. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net income (loss) per common share since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common share is the same as basic net income (loss) per common share for the period from January 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
We have two classes of common shares, Class A common shares and Class B common shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common shares.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic
470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic
815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity
(“ASU 2020-06”),
which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The ASU 2020-06 also
removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on
January 5, 2021 (inception). Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did
not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance
sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth
public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.