Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following is a discussion and analysis of the financial condition of Recursion Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (Recursion, the Company, we, us or our) and the results of operations. This commentary should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes appearing in Item 8, “Financial Statements.” This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading "Note About Forward-Looking Statements" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading "Risk Factors" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company industrializing drug discovery by decoding biology. Central to our mission is the Recursion Operating System (OS), a platform built across diverse technologies that enables us to map and navigate hundreds of billions of biological and chemical relationships within one of the world’s largest proprietary biological and chemical datasets, the Recursion Data Universe. Scaled ‘wet-lab’ biology and chemistry tools are organized into an iterative loop with ‘dry-lab’ computational tools to rapidly translate map-based hypotheses into validated insights and novel chemistry, unconstrained by published literature or human bias. Our focus on novel technologies spanning target discovery through translation, as well as our ability to rapidly iterate between wet lab and dry lab in-house and at scale, differentiates us from other companies in our space. Further, our balanced team of life scientists and computational and technical experts creates an environment where empirical data, statistical rigor and creative thinking are brought to bear on our decisions. To date, we have leveraged our Recursion OS to enable three value drivers: i) an expansive pipeline of internally-developed programs, including several clinical-stage assets, focused on genetically-driven rare diseases and oncology with significant unmet need and market opportunities, in some cases expected to be in excess of $1.0 billion in annual sales; ii) strategic partnerships with leading biopharma companies to map and navigate intractable areas of biology, including fibrosis with Bayer and neuroscience with Roche and Genentech, to identify novel targets and translate potential new medicines to resource-heavy clinical development overseen by our partners; and iii) Induction Labs, a growth engine created to explore new extensions of the Recursion OS both within and beyond therapeutics. We are a biotechnology company scaling more like a technology company.
Recursion finished the fourth quarter of 2021 with a portfolio of clinical stage, preclinical, late discovery and early discovery programs and continued scaling the total number of phenomic experiments to approximately 115 million, the size of its proprietary data universe to approximately 13 petabytes, and the number of biological and chemical relationships to over 200 billion. Data have been generated on the Recursion OS across 38 human cell types, an in-house chemical library of approximately 1.0 million compounds, and an in silico library of 12 billion small molecules, by a growing team of approximately 400 Recursionauts that is balanced between life scientists and computational and technical experts.
Summary of Business Highlights
Clinical Programs
•Cerebral cavernous malformation (CCM) (REC-994): In March 2022, we enrolled the first patient in our Phase 2 SYCAMORE clinical trial, which is a double-blind, placebo-controlled safety, tolerability and exploratory efficacy study of this drug candidate in 60 subjects with CCM.
•Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) (REC-2282): We plan to initiate our Phase 2/3 POPLAR-NF2 clinical trial, which is a parallel group, two stage, randomized, multicenter study of this drug candidate in the second quarter of 2022.
•Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) (REC-4881): We plan to initiate a Phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate safety, pharmacokinetics and efficacy of this drug candidate in the third quarter of 2022.
Preclinical and Discovery Programs
•Clostridium difficile colitis (REC-3964): We made progress in IND-enabling studies for REC-3964 and plan to initiate a Phase 1 study in the second half of 2022.
•Small molecule inhibitor of a target with a novel link to CDK12 biology: A small molecule inhibitor of a novel target not otherwise known to be related to CDK12, discovered using our next generation mapping and navigating technology, has demonstrated robust single-agent and combination activity with olaparib in an HRD-negative ovarian cancer PDX model, achieving 100% complete and durable response.
•Cancer immunotherapy target 'alpha': We expanded the in vivo dataset of target alpha, where a small molecule inhibitor of target alpha, discovered using our next generation mapping and navigating technology, demonstrated robust combination activity with an anti-PD1 therapy in an EMT6 mouse model and achieved 80% complete response.
•Oncology pipeline: We continued to make progress expanding and advancing numerous oncology programs, discovered using our next generation mapping and navigating technology, through scientific milestones including the programs mentioned above as well as programs related to immune checkpoint resistance in STK11-mutant non-small cell lung cancer, small molecule MYC inhibition, cancer immunotherapy target ‘beta,’ hepatocellular carcinoma, ovarian cancer and other indications.
Roche-Genentech
In December 2021, we announced a transformational collaboration with Roche and Genentech (collectively referred to as Roche) to advance novel potential medicines in neuroscience and an indication in gastrointestinal oncology by mapping complex biology using the Recursion OS. In this collaboration, Recursion received an upfront payment of $150.0 million in January 2022, is eligible for milestones for map-building and data-sharing that could exceed $500.0 million, as well as research and development, commercialization and net sales milestones on up to 40 programs that could exceed $300.0 million per program and mid- to high-single digit tiered royalties on net sales for products commercialized from this work together.
Bayer AG
In December 2021, we announced the expansion of our collaboration with Bayer to include the use of Recursion’s biological mapping and navigating capabilities to discover small molecule drug candidates with the potential to treat fibrotic diseases. In this expanded collaboration, Recursion and Bayer may now work on more than a dozen programs of relevance to fibrotic diseases.
Recursion OS
•Closed Loop Automated Synthesis Suite (CLASS): We began designing CLASS, our automated chemical microsynthesis system, which will further enable novel chemical formulation and profiling across our maps of biology and chemistry.
•Total Observations : In the fourth quarter of 2021, we surpassed the milestone of executing 100 million total phenotypic experiments and producing 1 billion proprietary biological images.
Financing and Operations
We were incorporated in November 2013. On April 20, 2021, we closed our Initial Public Offering (IPO) and issued 27,878,787 shares of Class A common stock at a price of $18.00 per share, raising gross and net proceeds of $501.8 million and $462.4 million, respectively. Prior to our IPO, we had raised approximately $448.9 million in equity financing from investors in addition to $30.0 million in an upfront payment from our collaboration with Bayer AG (Bayer). In December 2021, we announced a collaboration with Roche and received an upfront payment of $150.0 million in January 2022. See Note 18, “Subsequent Events” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
We use the capital we have raised to fund operations and investing activities across platform research operations, drug discovery, clinical development, digital and other infrastructure, creation of our portfolio of intellectual property and administrative support. We do not have any products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenues from product sales. We had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $516.6 million as of December 31, 2021, which excludes the recent $150.0 million upfront payment associated with our collaboration with Roche. Based on our current operating plan, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net losses were $186.5 million, $87.0 million and $61.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $400.1 million. We anticipate that our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially over the foreseeable future. The expected increase in expenses will be driven in large part by our ongoing activities, if and as we: continue to advance our platform; continue preclinical development of our current and future product candidates and initiate additional preclinical studies; commence clinical studies of our current and future product candidates; establish our manufacturing capability, including developing our contract development and manufacturing relationships and building our internal manufacturing facilities; acquire and license technologies aligned with our platform; seek regulatory approval of our current and future product candidates; expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our preclinical and clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization efforts; continue to develop, grow,
perfect and defend our intellectual property portfolio; and incur additional legal, accounting, or other expenses in operating our business, including the additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We anticipate that we will need to raise additional financing in the future to fund our operations, including the commercialization of any approved product candidates. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate significant product revenue, we expect to finance our operations with our existing cash and cash equivalents, any future equity or debt financings and upfront, milestone and royalty payments, if any, received under current or future license or collaboration agreements. We may not be able to raise additional capital on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations and financial condition may be adversely affected.
Components of Operating Results
Revenues
To date, our business has generated revenue from two sources: (i) grant revenue and (ii) operating revenue.
Grant Revenue-We recognize grant revenue in the period in which the revenue is earned in accordance with the associated grant agreement, which is the period in which corresponding reimbursable expenses under the grant agreement are incurred.
Operating Revenue-Operating revenue is primarily generated through research and development agreements derived from strategic alliances. We are entitled to receive variable consideration as certain milestones are achieved. The timing of revenue recognition is not directly correlated to the timing of cash receipts.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Research and development expenses consist of costs incurred in performing activities including:
•costs to develop and operate our platform;
•costs of discovery efforts which may lead to development candidates, including research materials and external research;
•costs for clinical development of our investigational products;
•costs for materials and supplies associated with the manufacture of active pharmaceutical ingredients, investigational products for preclinical testing and clinical trials;
•personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, bonuses and stock-based compensation for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•costs associated with operating our digital infrastructure; and
•other direct and allocated expenses incurred as a result of research and development activities, including those for facilities, depreciation, amortization and insurance.
We monitor research and development expenses directly associated with our clinical assets at the program level to some degree, however, indirect costs associated with clinical development and the balance of our research and development expenses are not tracked at the program or candidate level.
We recognize expenses associated with third-party contracted services as they are incurred. Upon termination of contracts with third parties, our financial obligations are generally limited to costs incurred or committed to date. Any advance payments for goods or services to be used or rendered in future research and product development activities pursuant to a contractual arrangement are classified as prepaid expenses until such goods or services are rendered.
General and Administrative
The Company expenses general and administrative costs as incurred. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries; employee benefits; stock-based compensation; and outsourced labor for personnel in executive, finance, human resources, legal and other corporate administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees for corporate and patent matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and administrative consulting services, insurance costs, facilities and depreciation expenses.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support personnel in research and development and to support our operations as we increase our research and development activities and activities related to the potential commercialization of our drug candidates.
Other Income (loss), net
Other income (loss), net consists of interest earned primarily from investments, interest expense incurred under our loan agreements, gains and losses from investments, changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities and debt extinguishment costs.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes the Company’s results of operations:
Revenue
The following table summarizes Recursion’s components of revenue:
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the increase in revenue compared to prior year was due to revenue recognized from our strategic partnership with Bayer entered into in August 2020.
Research and Development
The following table summarizes Recursion’s components of research and development expense:
Significant components of research and development expense include the following allocated by development phase: Platform, which refers primarily to expenses related to screening of product candidates through hit identification; Discovery, which refers primarily to expenses related to hit identification through development of candidates; and Clinical, which refers primarily to expenses related to development of candidates and beyond.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the increase in research and development expenses compared to prior year was due to an increased number of experiments screened on our platform, an increased number of pre-clinical assets being validated and increased clinical costs as studies progressed.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes Recursion’s general and administrative expense:
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the increase in general and administrative expenses compared to prior year was due to the growth in size of the Company’s operations including an increase in salaries and wages of $16.4 million and $2.7 million, respectively, equipment costs, human resources costs, facilities costs and other administrative costs associated with operating a growth-stage company.
Other loss (income), net
The following table summarizes Recursion’s components of other loss (income), net:
n/m = Not meaningful
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the increase in expense compared to the prior year was primarily due to an increase in interest expense due to the fair value of the Series A and B warrants. See Note 12, “Stock-Based Compensation” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the warrants.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the increase in expense compared to the prior year was due to a decrease in interest earned on cash and an increase in expense due to the Company’s convertible note and Midcap loan. See Note 7, “Notes Payable” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the convertible note.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
The Company has not yet commercialized any products and does not expect to generate revenue from the sales of any product candidates for at least several years. Cash, cash equivalents and investments totaled $516.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and $262.1 million as of December 31, 2020.
The Company has incurred operating losses and experienced negative operating cash flows and we anticipate that the Company will continue to incur losses for at least the foreseeable future. Recursion’s net loss was $186.5 million, $87.0 million and $61.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, Recursion had an accumulated deficit of $400.1 million and $213.6 million, respectively.
Recursion has financed its operations through the private placements of preferred stock and an IPO. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had received proceeds of $448.9 million from the sale of its preferred stock. The Company received net proceeds of $462.4 million from the IPO. See Note 10, “Common Stock” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the IPO.
In October 2020, the Company received a $30.0 million upfront payment from the Company’s strategic partnership with Bayer. In December 2021, the Company announced a collaboration with Roche and received an upfront payment of $150.0 million in January 2022. See Note 18, “Subsequent Events” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information on an additional upfront payment received in January 2022.
Midcap Credit and Security Agreement
In September 2019, the Company entered into a Credit and Security Agreement with Midcap Financial Trust (Midcap) and the other lenders party thereto (the Midcap loan agreement). The Midcap loan agreement provided for a term loan facility that included an initial tranche of $11.9 million. In July 2021, the Company paid the balance due on the loan outstanding with Midcap. See Note 7, “Notes Payable” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Cash Flows
The following table is a summary of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for each of the periods presented below:
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities increased during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as a result of higher costs incurred for research and development and general and administrative expenses due to the Company’s growth.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of investment purchases of $301.1 million and property and equipment purchases of $39.8 million, which included $17.9 million for the purchase of a Dell EMC supercomputer. The cash outflows were partially offset by proceeds of $69.2 million from the sales and maturities of investments.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 included $2.6 million for the acquisition of Vium, Inc (Vium) and $5.8 million of capital expenditures primarily for the purchase of lab equipment and leasehold improvements. Additionally, the Company purchased other intangible assets for $904 thousand. The cash outflows were partially offset by the proceeds from the note receivable. See Note 3, “Acquisitions” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on the Vium acquisition.
Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 included capital expenditures primarily for the purchase of lab equipment.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily included $462.4 million of net proceeds from the IPO. Financing cash flows also included an outflow of $12.7 million for the repayment of long-term debt on the Midcap loan.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily included proceeds from the sale of preferred stock of $239.1 million. Financing cash flows also included $6.4 million of proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily included proceeds from the sale of preferred stock of $119.9 million. Financing cash flows also included an outflow of $11.2 million for the repayment of long-term debt on the Pacific loan.
Contractual Obligations
The Company’s material cash requirements include the following contractual obligations:
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $723 thousand of debt outstanding. This balance is related to notes payable for tenant improvement allowances. See Note 7, “Notes Payable” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $61.9 million of future lease commitments. See Note 8 “Commitments and Contingencies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional detail on future lease commitments. In addition to leases that have commenced, this amount includes $1.8 million for leases that have been executed but not yet commenced.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $61.2 million of future purchase obligations, $36.7 million of which are expected to be payable within the next year. These commitments primarily related to third-party research services, materials and supplies for research and development activities and capital expenditures.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We have generated revenue from our strategic alliances. Our alliances with strategic collaborators may contain multiple elements, including research and development services, licenses, options to obtain development and commercialization rights, obligations to develop and manufacture preclinical and clinical material and options to obtain additional research and development services, preclinical and clinical material. Such arrangements may provide for various types of payments to us, including upfront fees, funding of research and development services and preclinical and clinical material, technical, development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments, licensing fees, option exercise fees and royalty and milestone payments on product sales. These payments are often not commensurate with the timing of revenue recognition and therefore result in the deferral of revenue recognition.
Our operating revenue has primarily been generated through funded research and development agreements. Revenue for research and development agreements is recognized as the Company satisfies a performance obligation by transferring the promised services to the customer. The Company recognizes revenue over time by measuring the progress toward complete satisfaction of the relevant performance obligation using an appropriate input or output method based on the services promised to the customer. This method of recognizing revenue requires the company to make estimates to determine the progress towards completion. A significant change in these estimates could have a material effect on the timing and amount of revenue recognized in future periods.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, clinical research organizations and consultants. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment terms that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate expenses in our financial statements by matching those expenses with the period in which services are performed and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the timing of various aspects of the expenses and determine accrual estimates by taking into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress of clinical trials, or the services completed. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accruals are dependent upon the timely and accurate reporting of contract research organizations and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the anticipated status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and non-employees based on their fair value on the date of grant and recognize the compensation expense over the requisite service period. We recognize the impact of forfeitures on stock-based compensation expenses as forfeitures occur. We generally apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to awards.
The grant date fair value of stock options is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires inputs for the expected term, stock price volatility, dividend yield and the risk-free interest rate of the options. If any assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model change significantly, stock-compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.
Emerging Growth Company
The Company is an emerging growth company (EGC), as defined by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the JOBS Act). The JOBS Act, among other things, exempts EGCs from compliance with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply. Recursion has elected to use the extended transition period for new or revised financial accounting standards during the period in which we remain an EGC. However, the Company may adopt certain new or revised accounting standards earlier. This could make comparisons of the Company’s financial statements with other public companies difficult because of the potential differences in applicable accounting standards.
Recursion may remain an EGC until the earlier of (1) December 31, 2026; (2) December 31 of the year in which we (a) become a “large accelerated filer;” or (b) have annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; or (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt over a three-year period.