Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a commercial-stage medical technology company dedicated to improving the vision of patients following cataract surgery. Our proprietary RxSight system, comprised of our LAL, LDD and accessories, is the first and only commercially available IOL technology that enables doctors to customize and optimize visual acuity for patients after cataract surgery. Our LAL is made of proprietary photosensitive material that changes shape in response to specific patterns of ultraviolet light generated by our LDD. With the RxSight system, the surgeon performs a standard cataract procedure to implant the LAL, determines refractive error with patient input after healing is complete, and then uses the LDD to modify the lens with the exact amount of visual correction needed to achieve the patient’s desired vision outcomes. Alternative IOL technologies, in contrast, are not adjustable following the procedure and therefore require patients to make pre-operative choices about their visual preferences, which can often result in patient dissatisfaction when visual outcomes fail to meet expectations. We designed our RxSight system to maximize patient and doctor satisfaction through superior visual outcomes. In the pivotal study that formed the basis for our FDA approval, the observed rate of eyes with 20/20 or better uncorrected distance visual acuity for our LAL was 70.1%. This compares favorably to the results of pivotal studies with similar study designs and patient populations that supported FDA approval of Alcon’s Acrysof Toric (38.4%), and J&J’s Tecnis Toric (43.6%). We began commercializing our solution in the United States in the third quarter of 2019 and are focused on establishing the RxSight system as the standard of care for premium IOL procedures. As of December 31, 2021, we had an installed base of 206 LDDs in ophthalmology practices, and since our inception, surgeons have performed almost 17,000 surgeries with our RxSight system.
We compete in the IOL market in the U.S. The LAL is a premium IOL which is partially reimbursable under Medicare, and in some cases by private payors. Premium IOLs are sold at a higher price point than conventional IOLs, as they provide refractive correction of vision unlike a conventional IOL that only replaces the natural lens with a clear lens (which is the standard for Medicare reimbursement). Our products are also approved for sale in Europe and Mexico. We are not actively marketing our products for sale in Europe or Mexico; however, we have approval in both for improving uncorrected visual acuity by adjusting the LAL power to correct residual postoperative refractive error. We have one customer in Germany and one in Mexico, both of which have participated in our clinical studies and perform commercial cases. We are a Delaware corporation, headquartered in Aliso Viejo, California, and have one wholly owned subsidiary. Our subsidiary is located in Amsterdam, Netherlands, which itself has one wholly owned subsidiary in Germany and a registered branch in the United Kingdom.
Our commercial strategy is focused on a “razor and razor blade” model through which we aim to drive new customer adoption, which generally begins with the sale of an LDD, and then helps the customer incorporate the LAL into their practice to drive utilization and premium procedure growth. We believe this commercial strategy over time may provide a degree of predictability in terms of our commercial growth and a consumable revenue stream from sales of our LALs. We are currently focused on driving adoption with surgeons performing a high volume of premium cataract procedures. MarketScope estimates that there are approximately 10,000 surgeons that perform cataract surgeries in the United States as of 2021, and we estimate that as many as 3,000 surgeons performed approximately 70% to 80% of the premium procedures in the United States in 2021. We believe this provides an attractive and concentrated market opportunity addressable with a focused sales force. We currently employ a sales team that, as of December 31, 2021 includes 18 LDD sales personnel, 14 LAL sales personnel, and a group of over 55 clinical specialists, field service, customer service, and marketing personnel. We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization. We believe increasing the number of sales representatives, practice development personnel and clinical trainers will help facilitate further adoption of our products among existing customer accounts as well as broaden awareness of our products to new accounts. While we intend to initially focus our growing commercial efforts in the U.S., in the future, we may selectively pursue
commercial expansion in Asia, Europe, Australia or other geographies with significant market opportunity for premium IOLs, leveraging our CE and FDA approvals.
Our near-term research and development activities are focused on enhancements to the RxSight system to improve the patient and doctor experience, expand the range of patients that can be treated, as well as expand its indications and drive adoption. We believe that over time, our adjustable lens solution can be used to address a broad range of cataract surgery patients, including those that would otherwise elect for a conventional cataract procedure today. Additional development and clinical studies that are designed to provide clinical evidence of the safety and effectiveness of our existing and future generations of products are also anticipated. Finally, we may in the future seek to acquire or invest in additional businesses, products or technologies that we believe could complement or expand our portfolio, enhance our technical capabilities or otherwise offer growth opportunities.
On July 29, 2021, we completed our IPO, which resulted in the issuance and sale of 8,248,549 shares of common stock, including 898,549 shares sold pursuant to the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option at the IPO price of $16.00 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $119.6 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriters’ discounts and commissions of $9.2 million and offering costs of $3.2 million.
Prior to our IPO, our primary sources of capital have been private placements of preferred stock, a structured transaction with a strategic partner, debt financing and revenue from sales of our products. Since inception, we have raised a total of $191.3 million in net proceeds from private placements of preferred stock, $120 million from a strategic partner, approximately $40.0 million in net proceeds from a credit facility, and approximately $11.0 million from issuance of common stock primarily from stock option exercises. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $24.4 million, short-term investments of $135.0 million, long-term debt of $39.8 million and accumulated deficit of $479.3 million. We generated sales of $22.6 million and had a net loss of $48.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to sales of $14.7 million and net income of $27.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
We intend to continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization, primarily sales representatives, clinical applications specialists and technical service personnel to support new customers and upgrades and practice development personnel to facilitate adoption of use of our LALs among existing accounts. We will expand our marketing efforts with additional advertising and customer tools to expand their local advertising. We will also continue to make significant investments in research and development and clinical expenses to make enhancements in our current products. As a public company, we will incur costs that we have not previously incurred or have previously incurred at lower rates, including increased costs for employee-related expenses, director and officer insurance premiums, audit and legal fees, investor relations fees, fees to members of our Board of Directors and expenses for compliance with public-company reporting requirements. Because of these and other factors, we expect to continue to incur substantial net losses and negative cash flows from operations for at least the next several years.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure and meet our term loan covenant requirements for at least the next 12 months from the date of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We may also seek additional financing opportunistically. We may seek to raise any additional capital by entering into partnerships or through public or private equity offerings or debt financings, credit or loan facilities or a combination of one or more of these funding sources. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders may experience dilution.
Facility lease agreements
We currently lease four facilities housing our headquarters, manufacturing, research and development and administrative offices in Aliso Viejo, California. The facility leases are for approximately 121,000 square feet in the aggregate. The leases terminate, respectively, on (i) September 30, 2024, with one option to extend for five years; (ii) January 31, 2026, with three options to extend for five years each; (iii) March 31, 2023 with two options to extend for five years each; and (iv) August 31, 2024, with one option to extend for five years. See Note 15 - Leases and Note 18 - Subsequent Events in the “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” section in our consolidated financial statements included in Part II - Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
COVID-19 pandemic
We are subject to the continuing risks related to the public health crises, primarily the global pandemic associated with COVID-19. In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China. Since then, SARS-CoV-2, and the resulting disease COVID-19, has spread to most countries, and all 50 states within the United States. The COVID-19 outbreak has negatively impacted and may continue to negatively impact our operations and revenues and overall financial condition, similar to other medical device manufacturers, by decreasing the number of our products sold. RxSight has a limited commercial history, as all but eight months of commercial history has occurred during the COVID-19 crisis. Total IOL procedure volume dropped 17% in the US and 25% globally from 2019 to 2020 due principally to the COVID-19 pandemic, as health care organizations globally have prioritized the treatment of patients with COVID-19. In the United States, governmental authorities had recommended, and in certain cases required, that elective, specialty and other procedures and appointments, be suspended or canceled to avoid non-essential patient exposure to medical environments and potential infection with COVID-19 and to focus limited resources and personnel capacity toward the treatment of COVID-19. These measures and challenges may continue for the duration of the pandemic, which is uncertain, and will reduce our revenue while the pandemic continues.
Numerous state and local jurisdictions imposed, and in the future may impose, “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar government orders and restrictions for their residents to control the spread of COVID-19. Starting in mid-March 2020, the governor of California, where our headquarters is located, issued “shelter-in-place” or “stay at home” orders restricting non-essential activities, travel and business operations for an indefinite period of time, subject to certain exceptions for necessary activities. Such orders or restrictions have resulted in our headquarters closing, work stoppages, slowdowns and delays, travel restrictions and cancellation of training and other events, among other effects, thereby negatively impacting our operations. Other disruptions or potential disruptions to our business and supply chain include restrictions on our personnel and personnel of partners to travel and access customers for training and case support; delays in approvals by regulatory bodies; delays in product development efforts; and additional government requirements or other incremental mitigation efforts that may further impact our capacity to manufacture, sell and support the use of our RxSight system. In addition, even after the “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar government orders and restrictions for their residents to control the spread of COVID-19 were significantly reduced in the second quarter of 2021, we continue to experience disruptions to our business, including patients and customers continuing to be cautious in restarting elective procedures in light of the continued risk posed by the virus.
As we continue to actively advance our clinical, discovery and research programs, we are in close contact with the third parties we engage with, who are primarily located in the United States, and are assessing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on each of our programs, expected timelines and costs on an ongoing basis. In light of ongoing developments relating to the COVID-19 pandemic, the focus of healthcare providers on fighting the virus, and consistent with the FDA’s industry guidance for conducting clinical trials, we and our contract research organizations have made certain adjustments to the operation of our clinical trials in an effort to ensure the monitoring and safety of patients and minimize risk to trial integrity during the pandemic and generally. Other COVID-related guidance recently released by the FDA includes statistical considerations for clinical trials conducted during the COVID-19 public health emergency and post marketing adverse event reporting for medical products during a pandemic. We may need to make further adjustments in the future, including implementation of new policies and procedures.
While the potential economic impact brought by and the duration of COVID-19 may be difficult to assess or predict, the widespread pandemic has resulted in, and may continue to result in, significant disruption of global financial markets, reducing our ability to access capital, which could in the future negatively affect our liquidity. We expect any further shelter-in-place policies and restrictions on elective surgical procedures worldwide to have a substantial near-term impact on our revenue. During the COVID-19 pandemic, our customers, including doctors, have experienced financial hardship and some of them may not fully recover. This could lead to some of these customers temporarily or permanently shutting down, filing for bankruptcy or being acquired by larger health systems, leading to reduced procedures and/or additional pricing pressure on our products. The COVID-19 pandemic has also resulted in a significant increase in unemployment in the United States which may continue even after the pandemic. The occurrence of any such events may lead to reduced disposable income and access to health insurance which could adversely affect the number of our RxSight systems sold after the pandemic has ended.
Key business metrics
We regularly review several operating and financial metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our business plan and make strategic decisions. We believe the number of LDDs installed, LALs implanted and the number of doctors performing surgery with our products are indicators of our ability to drive adoption and generate revenue. We believe these are important metrics for our business. Due to our limited commercial history, all but eight months of which have occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic, we are not yet able to assess seasonality and other trends, and we will continue to evaluate our business in the future using these and other financial metrics as we observe trends in our business.
We believe the number of LDDs sold in each quarter and our LDD installed base at the end of each period are important metrics as they represent an installed base into which we can sell our LALs.
* One LDD converted from clinical to commercial use in Q3 2020.
We believe the number of LALs sold (reported as implanted in a patient) in each quarter is an important metric indicative of adoption and utilization of our RxSight system. While an important metric, the COVID-19 pandemic and severe weather periodically impacted trends in our business. In the second quarter of 2020, the number of our LALs sold decreased as compared to the first quarter of 2020 as ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs), where most cataract surgeries are performed, were closed for elective surgeries for six or more weeks. In the third quarter 2020, LALs sold increased as compared to the second quarter of 2020, reflecting, we believe, some resurgence of surgeries when ASCs re-opened, with sales of LALs in the fourth quarter of 2020 continuing to increase sequentially, despite seasonal holidays. During the first quarter of 2021, however, the U.S. saw a resurgence in COVID-19 cases attributed to holiday travel and gatherings and severe weather in Texas and other southern states, resulting in reduced LAL sales for such period. During 2021, we saw increased LDD sales of 41 and increased LAL sales of 3,857 from strong adoption of our RxSight technology by practices and doctors combined with an increased LDD installed base.
Components of results of operations
Sales
Our sales consists of the sale of LALs used in cataract surgeries, the LDDs for delivering light to the LALs to adjust the lens post-surgery, as needed, and service and accessories. Revenue is derived from sales of products primarily in the U.S. and sales to a single customer in each of Germany and Mexico. Customers are primarily comprised of ophthalmic practices (LDD sales) and ambulatory surgery centers (LAL sales). We expect revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales organization and sales territories, add customers, expand the base of doctors that are trained to use our products, and expand awareness of our products with new and existing customers and as doctors perform more procedures using our products.
LALs are held at customer sites on consignment. The single performance obligation is satisfied, and revenue is recognized for LALs upon customer notification that the LALs have been implanted in a patient.
Our LDD contracts contain multiple performance obligations bundled into one transaction price, with all obligations generally satisfied within one year. The LDD capital asset and related components revenue is recognized upon installation and customer acceptance, training revenue is recognized upon completion of training by at least one doctor and the initial warranty and service agreement are recognized ratably over the service period. After the first year, service contracts can be purchased separately on a standalone basis. As of December 31, 2021, the Company recorded contract liabilities of $540,000 related to such service agreements and $345,000 as of December 31, 2020. Revenue for such service agreements will be recognized over the term of each contract.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenue from contracts with customers consisted of the following:
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had no customers who individually accounted for more than 10% of revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had one customer who individually accounted for approximately 27% of revenue.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales consists of materials, labor and manufacturing overhead internally to produce the Company’s products as well as the cost of shipping and handling. Overhead costs include the cost of quality assurance, material procurement, inventory control, facilities, equipment and operations supervision and management, including stock-based compensation. Cost of sales also includes depreciation expense for production equipment and certain direct costs such as shipping costs and royalty and license fee expense. Shipping costs billed to customers are included in sales. We expect cost of sales to increase in absolute dollars as our revenue grows and more of our products are sold.
We calculate gross margin as gross profit/loss divided by sales. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including average selling prices, product sales mix, production and ordering volumes, manufacturing costs, product yields, headcount and cost-reduction strategies. Our gross margin could fluctuate from quarter to quarter as we introduce new products, and as we adopt new manufacturing processes and technologies.
Our LDD, as is typical of many medical device capital equipment products, has a low gross margin, as the material cost of the LDD is significant, representing close to 50% of the total cost to manufacture. In addition, we do not mark up our LDD substantially, as LDDs, as sold, generate LAL procedures. Our LAL gross margin is higher, with low material cost but high fixed overhead costs. As our manufacturing volume of the LAL increases, we expect the gross margin may improve significantly.
Operating expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative, or SG&A, expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including wages, incentive bonuses, stock-based compensation and benefits related to administrative, selling and marketing functions, education programs for doctors, commercial operations and analytics, finance, information technology and human resource functions. Other SG&A expenses include sales commissions, travel expenses, promotional activities, marketing initiatives, market research and analysis, conferences and trade shows, training for doctors, professional services fees such as legal, patent registration costs, accounting, audit and tax fees, board of directors’ expenses, insurance costs, general corporate expenses and facilities-related expenses. We expect SG&A expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our sales and marketing organization and infrastructure to both drive and support the anticipated growth in revenue and due to additional legal, accounting audit and tax fees, insurance and other expenses associated with being a public company.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist of expenses incurred in performing research and development and engineering activities for new products and technology, clinical studies and regulatory submissions and compliance. The expenses include personnel-related expenses, including wages, incentive bonuses, stock-based compensation and benefits, costs incurred at clinical trial sites, regulatory and manufacturing engineering costs, including those related to various laboratory and research equipment and supplies, expense of pre-approved inventory utilized for clinical trial and research purposes, costs incurred in the development of manufacturing processes in excess of
capitalizable value, fees paid to consultants and contract clinical organizations and direct FDA related costs and costs related to FDA premarket approval submission preparation. Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred. We expect R&D expenses as a percentage of revenue to vary over time depending on the level and timing of our new product development efforts, as well as our clinical development, clinical trials and registries and other related activities.
Change in fair value of warrants
Change in fair value of warrants consists of gains and losses resulting from the remeasurement of the fair value of our preferred stock warrant liabilities at each balance sheet date. We continued to record adjustments to the estimated fair value of the preferred stock warrants until the conversion of the underlying convertible preferred stock into common stock which occurred immediately prior to the completion of our IPO in July 2021.
Interest expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest incurred on our outstanding indebtedness and non-cash interest related to the amortization of debt discount and issuance costs associated with our indebtedness.
Interest and other income, net
Interest and other income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents.
Accretion to redemption value of redeemable preferred stock and preferred stock options
Due to the Special Redemption provision in place in our Articles of Incorporation and until the unexercised Series W Warrant expiration on March 31, 2021, all equity instruments were redeemable and evaluated as probable of redemption through early December 2020. No accretion was calculated during the year ended December 31, 2021. For common and preferred stock, the value of the accretion was calculated as the estimated future redemption amount accreted to the estimated redemption date using the effective interest rate. For stock options the value of accretion was calculated at the estimated future redemption amount less the strike price, recognized over the same period as the corresponding service period for which stock-based compensation is recognized.
Earnings allocated to redeemable preferred stock
Prior to our IPO in July 2021, the Company had two classes of common stock and participating securities, which include convertible preferred stock. The Company’s participating securities did not have a contractual obligation to share in the Company’s losses. Basic and diluted net income (loss) per share attributable to common stockholders is presented in conformity with the two-class method required for participating securities. In periods of net income, after adjusting for accretion and dividends, net income is attributed to both common stockholders and participating security holders, as if all of the earnings for the period had been distributed. Diluted earnings per share under the two-class method is calculated using the more dilutive of the treasury stock or the two-class method.
Comprehensive (Loss) income
All components of comprehensive income, including net income (loss), are reported in the consolidated financial statements in the period in which they are recognized. Comprehensive income (loss) is defined as the change in equity during a period from transactions and other events and circumstances from non-owner sources, including unrealized gains and losses on short-term investments and foreign currency translation adjustments.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar increase or decrease and percentage change in those items:
Sales
Sales increased by $7.9 million to $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $14.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales was due to sales of 41 more LDDs and 3,857 more LALs.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales increased by $5.1 million, or 39.3%, to $18.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the increase in the number of products sold and by the recording of a $2.4 million reserve for excess LAL inventory as a result of the recent introduction of an updated LAL including our ActivShield technology. Gross margin increased to 20.0% in the year ended December 31, 2021 from 11.6% due to improved operating leverage on a higher volume of units sold.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $17.6 million, or 116.2%, to $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $15.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was
primarily attributable to an increase in selling and marketing personnel costs of $9.3 million due mainly to additional headcount as well as increased travel costs of $1.0 million and increased trade show costs of $0.7 million when compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to temporary reduction in travel costs caused by COVID-19 for the year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative personnel expenses increased by $6.6 million due primarily to $2.4 million of increased costs related to operating as a public company, and $3.6 million related to increased headcount, reinstatement of incentive bonuses and increased stock-based compensation. Selling, general and administrative expenses reflected temporary reductions in salaries that were in place for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $2.6 million to $24.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 11.7%. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $2.4 million in personnel costs due primarily to increased personnel headcount and reinstatement of incentive bonuses and an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $0.7 million.
Loss on sale of equipment
Loss on sales of equipment was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $7.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other income (expense)
Other income, net, decreased by $58.9 million to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $63.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the revaluation of the fair value of warrant liabilities of $63.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of interest expense of $3.2 million from increased borrowings partially offset by a gain on expiration of preferred stock warrants classified as liabilities of $5.0 million.
Accretion to redemption value of redeemable preferred stock and redeemable stock options
No accretion to redemption value of redeemable preferred stock and redeemable stock options was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2021 due the determination that the redemption of these equity instruments was no longer probable in December 2020 when accretion ceased and the expiration of the Common W warrant on March 31, 2021. Accretion to redemption value of redeemable preferred stock and redeemable stock options was $24.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other comprehensive income (loss)
Other comprehensive loss decreased by $32.0 thousand to a loss of $17.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 from a loss of $49.0 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 due primarily to a decrease of $42.0 thousand in unrealized loss on short-term investments.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of liquidity
We have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception, and we anticipate that we will incur significant losses for at least the next several years. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $159.3 million. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our net losses from operations were $52.8 and $35.4 million, respectively, and our net cash used in operating activities was $44.7 million and $35.2, respectively. We had an accumulated deficit of $479.3 million as of December 31, 2021.
Prior to our IPO, which we completed in July 2021, our primary sources of capital were private placements of preferred stock, a structured transaction with a strategic partner, debt financing and from sales of our products.
On July 29, 2021, the Company completed its IPO through an underwritten sale of 7,350,000 shares of its common stock at a price of $16.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds from the offering, inclusive of an additional 898,549 common shares sold upon the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, after deducting
underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses, were approximately $120.0 million. On July 29, 2021, the Company restated its certificate of incorporation and bylaws which provide for, among other things, the Company’s authorized capital stock to consist of 900,000,000 shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share, and 100,000,000 shares of convertible preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share. The restated certificate define the voting rights, dividends, liquidation, rights and preferences of each class of stock.
Funding requirements
Our future liquidity and capital funding requirements will depend on numerous factors, including:
•our revenue growth;
•our research and development efforts;
•our sales and marketing activities;
•our ability to raise additional funds to finance our operations;
•the outcome, costs and timing of any clinical trial results for our current or future products;
•the emergence and effect of competing or complementary products;
•our ability to maintain, expand, enforce and defend our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, maintenance, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•our ability to retain our current employees and the need and ability to hire additional management, sales, research and development, scientific and customer support personnel;
•the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing or other arrangements that we have or may establish;
•debt service requirements;
•operating and finance lease payments for our facilities;
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies; and
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our current cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months after the date our most recent financial statements were issued. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to successfully secure sources of financing from equity or debt securities, loans or collaborative agreements and ultimately achieve profitable operations. In the long-term it is likely we will require additional financing from debt or equity to satisfy our liquidity requirements, fund working capital and pay our obligations. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us, if at all. If adequate funds are not available on acceptable terms when needed, we may be required to significantly reduce operating activities, which may have a material adverse effect on our business and/or results of operations and financial condition. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity or convertible debt offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all.
See Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements and .Note 15 - Leases and Note 18 - Subsequent Events in the “Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements” section titled “Leases” in Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II - Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Summary statement of cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash for each of the periods presented below:
Cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $44.7 million, consisting primarily of a net loss of $48.7 million, a non-cash gain on expiration of an unexercised warrant of $5.0 million, an increase in operating assets and liabilities of $2.7 million, offset by non-cash stock-based compensation of $7.6 million and depreciation and amortization of $4.0 million and the provision for obsolete and excess inventory of $2.4 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $35.2 million, consisting primarily loss from operations of $35.4 million, an increase in operating assets and liabilities of $7.8 million and offset by non-cash stock-based compensation of $4.2 million and depreciation and amortization of $3.9 million.
Cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $81.9 million, consisting of net purchases of short-term investments of $80.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $1.9 million.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $15.6 million, consisting of net maturities in short-term investments of $18.1 million, offset by net purchases of property and equipment of $2.5 million.
Cash from financing activities
Net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $137.3 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds from the IPO of $119.6 million and a draw on the Company’s term loan of $15.0 million and proceeds from stock options exercised of $1.6 million.
Net cash from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $25.2 million, consisting of a draw on the Company’s term loan of $25.0 million, net, proceeds of stock options and warrants exercised of $1.1 million, offset in part by principal payments on finance lease liabilities of $0.1 million.
Term Loan
In October 2020, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or the (“Term Loan”), with Bank of America, as collateral agent, and Oxford Finance LLC, or Oxford Finance, as lender. The Term Loan provides for a tranche one loan advance in the amount of $25.0 million, which was fully funded on the closing date by the lender, a second tranche of $5.0 million in the first quarter of 2021, which was advanced on March 29, 2021, and a third tranche of $10.0 million in the second quarter of 2021, which was advanced on June 28, 2021. The Term Loan also provides for an additional two tranches in the amount of $5.0 million each in 2021, which were not advanced. A final tranche in an amount of $10.0 million is available in the first quarter of 2022, which we do not intend to borrow. We refer
to our tranche one loan advance, tranche two loan advance and tranche three loan advance collectively as our credit facility.
The Term Loan is secured by substantially all of our personal property other than our intellectual property, but includes any accounts receivable, other amounts owed and any proceeds of intellectual property. We also entered into a negative pledge arrangement with the collateral agent and lenders where we agreed not to encumber any of our intellectual property. Outstanding borrowings under the credit facility bear interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of (i) the Wall Street Journal 30-day LIBOR plus 9.09% and 0.16% or (ii) 9.25%. At our election, we may also switch to an interest rate equal to 10.25% plus the greater of (i) The Wall Street Journal Prime rate or (ii) 7%. The interest rate resets monthly on the last day of the month prior to the month in which interest accrues, and an actual/360-day convention applies. If we are considered to be in default, additional interest of 5% applies. Through December 1, 2023, which is the interest-only period, we are required to make interest-only payments. The interest- only period may be extended to December 1, 2024.
The Term Loan requires 36 months of interest-only payments, followed by 23-months of amortization. If the Company is in compliance with the Performance to Plan covenant through October 31, 2023, the interest-only period is extended by 12 months, and the amortization period is reduced by 11 months. Payments are due on the first day of each month in arrears. All unpaid amounts under the Term Loan mature on October 1, 2025.
Borrowings under the credit facility are pre-payable at any time without penalty; however, the loan must be prepaid in full or in part one time in an amount not less than $5.0 million and amounts prepaid may not be subsequently reborrowed. The Company did not fully prepay the loan by December 31, 2021, and accordingly became subject to an additional fee (the “Exit Fee”). The fee is 3% of the original loan amount if prepaid between January 1, 2022, and October 31, 2022 ($750 thousand); 4% if prepaid between November 1, 2022 and October 31, 2023 ($1.0 million); and 5% ($1.25 million) if paid subsequently, including at maturity. The loan may be accelerated by Oxford in the event of a default. The Term Loan also includes certain customary affirmative and negative covenants, including certain financial covenants if the lenders make us the additional tranche advances. We were in compliance with all covenants under the Term Loan as of December 31, 2021.
We also have a standby letter of credit, expiring September 30, 2024, issued by a financial institution as a required security for one operating lease. The aggregate amount of the letter of credit was $0.3 million and $0.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Critical accounting policies, significant judgments and use of estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions, which may affect our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
There were no material changes to our critical accounting policies or in the methodology used for estimates from those described in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Prospectus filed with the SEC in accordance with Rule 424(b) of the Securities Act on July 29, 2021 in connection with our IPO. We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, stock-based compensation and determination of fair value of common stock have the most significant impact on our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the following accounting policies we use are the most critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and understanding and evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue recognition
Our revenues from sales are generated from the sale of light adjustable intraocular lenses, the LAL, used in cataract surgery along with a specifically designed machine for delivering light to the eye, the Light Delivery Device (“LDD”), to adjust the lens post-surgery, as needed. Revenue from sales is recognized from products sold in the U.S. and Europe. Customers are primarily comprised of ambulatory surgery centers, hospitals, and physician private practices.
We recognize revenue from sales when promised goods or services are transferred to customers at a transaction price that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods and services. Specifically, we apply the following five steps to recognize revenue from sales: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue from sales when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation. We apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that it will collect the consideration to which it is entitled in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, we assess the goods promised within each customer contract to determine the individual deliverables in its product offerings as separate performance obligations and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration expected to be received, based either on the stated value in contractual arrangements or the estimated cash to be collected in non-contracted arrangements. We recognize revenue from sales as the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied, considering whether or not this occurs at a point in time or over time. We elected to account for shipping costs as fulfillment costs rather than a promised service and exclude from revenue any taxes collected from customers that are remitted to government authorities.
Our LDD contracts contain multiple performance obligations bundled for one transaction price, with all obligations generally satisfied within one year. For these bundled arrangements, we account for individual products and services as separate performance obligations if they are distinct, that is, if a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package, and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. Our LDD contracts include a combination of the following performance obligations: (1) LDD capital asset and related components, (2) training and (3) device service (initial year). Each of these three performance obligations are considered distinct. The LDD capital asset is distinct because the customer can benefit from it together with other resources that are readily available to the customer. Training on the use of the machine is offered as a distinct activity after installation of the LDD to enhance the customer’s ability to utilize the machine by having an industry professional provide best practices and customize training to the specific needs of the customer. Each LDD comes with a twelve-month manufacturer’s warranty (service-type) that includes preventative maintenance, unscheduled service (labor and parts) and software updates. After the first year, service contracts can be purchased separately on a standalone basis. We recognize revenue as performance obligations are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to a customer. Specifically, revenue for the LDD capital asset is recognized at a point in time at installation. Revenue for training is also recorded at a point in time, generally 30 days after installation. Revenue for the device service is recognized ratably over time after installation, generally 12 months. We have determined that the transaction price is the invoice price, net of adjustments, if any. The allocation to the separate performance obligations is based upon the relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which we separately sell the products or services. We estimate the standalone selling price using the market assessment approach considering market conditions and entity-specific factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the products and services, geographies, type of customer and market conditions. The Company regularly reviews and updates standalone selling prices as necessary.
LALs are held at customer sites on consignment. The single performance obligation is satisfied, and revenue from sales is recognized for LALs upon customer notification that the LALs have been implanted in a patient. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, credits related to returns and rebates on list prices were not significant.
The Company adopted the practical expedient permitting the direct expensing of costs incurred to obtain contracts where the amortization of such costs would occur over one year or less, and it applied to substantially all the Company’s contracts.
Stock-based compensation
We account for stock-based payments at fair value. For stock-based awards that vest subject to the satisfaction of a service requirement, the fair value measurement date for such awards is the date of grant and the expense is recognized on a straight-line basis, over the expected vesting period. For stock-based awards that vest subject to a performance condition, we recognize compensation cost for awards if and when we conclude that it is probable that the awards with a performance condition will be achieved on an accelerated attribution method. We account for forfeitures as they occur.
We calculate the fair value measurement of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and assumptions discussed below. Each of these inputs is complex, subjective and generally requires significant judgment.
Fair value of common stock-see the subsection titled “Determination of fair value of common stock” below.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that we expect our stock-based awards to be outstanding. We used the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term) to determine the expected term.
Expected Volatility-Since we were privately held and did not have any trading history for our common stock, nor do we have a long trading history since the IPO in July of 2021, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average historical volatilities for comparable publicly traded medical device companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle and area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our stock price becomes available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
Dividend Yield-We have never paid dividends on common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
See Note 12 - Stock Based Compensation Expense to our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Determination of fair value of common stock
We are required to estimate the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based awards. Prior to our IPO in July 2021, the fair value of our common stock underlying share-based awards was estimated on each grant date by our Board of Directors. In order to determine the fair value of our common stock underlying option grants, our Board of Directors considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Prior to the IPO, we considered an input to the pricing models in determining the fair value of our common stock, a critical accounting estimate.
For all grants subsequent to our IPO in July 2021, the fair value of common stock was determined by using the closing price per share of common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Global Market.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined by applicable regulations of the SEC, that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Indemnification agreements
We enter into standard indemnification arrangements in the ordinary course of business. Pursuant to these arrangements, we indemnify, hold harmless and agree to reimburse the indemnified parties for losses suffered or incurred by the indemnified party, in connection with any trade secret, copyright, patent or other intellectual property infringement, misappropriation or other violation claim by any third party with respect to its technology. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual any time after the execution of the agreement. The maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make under these arrangements is not determinable. We have never incurred costs to defend lawsuits or settle claims related to these indemnification agreements. As a result, we believe the fair value of these agreements is minimal.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See the section titled “Summary of Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II - Item 8 in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Emerging growth company and smaller reporting company status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. As such, we are eligible for exemptions from various reporting requirements applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies, including, but not limited to, presenting only two years of audited financial statements in addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” disclosure in this Annual Report, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation, and an exemption from the requirements to obtain a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements. We have elected to take advantage of certain of the reduced disclosure obligations in this Annual Report and may elect to take advantage of other reduced reporting requirements in our future filings with the SEC. As a result, the information that we provide to our stockholders may be different than you might receive from other public reporting companies in which you hold equity interests.
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. However, we have chosen to irrevocably “opt out” of such extended transition period, and as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the consummation of our initial public offering (i.e. December 31, 2026); (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion; (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year; or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined in the Exchange Act. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company even after we are no longer an emerging growth company. We may take advantage of certain of the scaled disclosures available to smaller reporting companies and will be able to take advantage of these scaled disclosures for so long as our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter, or our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and our voting and non-voting common stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million measured on the last business day of our second fiscal quarter.