ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited Consolidated Financial Statements of Ryerson Holding Corporation and Subsidiaries and the Notes thereto in Item 8. “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. See the section entitled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Overview
Business
Ryerson Holding Corporation (“Ryerson Holding”), a Delaware corporation, is the parent company of Joseph T. Ryerson & Son, Inc. (“JT Ryerson”), a Delaware corporation. Affiliates of Platinum Equity, LLC (“Platinum”) own approximately 21,037,500 shares of our common stock, which is approximately 55% of our issued and outstanding common stock.
We are a leading metals service center, value-added processor, and distributor of industrial metals with operations in the United States through JT Ryerson, in Canada through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary Ryerson Canada, Inc., a Canadian corporation (“Ryerson Canada”), and in Mexico through our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary Ryerson Metals de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V., a Mexican corporation (“Ryerson Mexico”). In addition to our North American operations, we conduct processing and distribution operations in China through an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, Ryerson China Limited, a Chinese limited liability company (“Ryerson China”). Unless the context indicates otherwise, Ryerson Holding, JT Ryerson, Ryerson Canada, Ryerson China, and Ryerson Mexico, together with their subsidiaries, are collectively referred to herein as “Ryerson,” “we,” “us,” “our,” or the “Company.”
Industry and Operating Trends
We are a metals service center providing value-added processing and distribution of industrial metals with operations in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and China. We purchase large quantities of metal products from primary producers and sell these materials in smaller quantities to a wide variety of metals-consuming industries. We carry a full line of nearly 75,000 products in stainless steel, aluminum, carbon steel, and alloy steels and a limited line of nickel and red metals in various shapes and forms. In addition to our metals products, we offer numerous value-added processing and fabrication services, and nearly 80% of the metals products we sell are processed by us by bending, beveling, blanking, blasting, burning, cutting-to-length, drilling, embossing, flattening, forming, grinding, laser cutting, machining, notching, painting, perforating, polishing, punching, rolling, sawing, scribing, shearing, slitting, stamping, tapping, threading, welding, or other techniques to process materials to a specified thickness, length, width, shape, and surface quality pursuant to specific customer orders.
Similar to other metals service centers, we maintain substantial inventories of metals to accommodate the short lead times and just-in-time delivery requirements of our customers. Accordingly, we purchase metals to maintain our inventory at levels that we believe to be appropriate to satisfy the anticipated needs of our customers based upon customer forecasts, historic buying practices, supply agreements with customers, mill lead times, and market conditions. Our commitments to purchase metals are generally at prevailing market prices in effect at the time we place our orders. At the request of our customers, we have entered into swaps in order to mitigate our customers’ risk of volatility in the price of metals and we have entered into metals hedges to mitigate our own risk of volatility in the price of metals. We have no long-term, fixed-price metals purchase contracts. When metals prices decline, customer demands for lower prices and our competitors’ responses to those demands could result in lower sale prices and, consequently, lower gross profits and earnings as we sell existing metals inventory. When metals prices increase, competitive conditions will influence how much of the price increase we may pass on to our customers.
The metals service center industry is cyclical and volatile in both demand and pricing, and difficult to predict. In 2021, Ryerson experienced both stronger pricing and demand compared to 2020, with average selling prices 57.0% higher and shipments 4.3% higher, as steel supply was limited throughout much of the year while end-market demand was strong. Changes in average selling
prices are primarily driven by commodity metals prices, which impact Ryerson’s selling prices over the subsequent three to six-month period.
Throughout 2021, indicators in the key steel industry end markets that had previously reported weakness as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, reported growth. This is evidenced by the Institute for Supply Management’s Purchasing Managers’ Index (“PMI”), which reported strength in each month of the year with readings above 50%, indicating general expansion in factory activity. This strength has continued into 2022 with a January reading of 57.6, which marks the twentieth consecutive month of expansion. Similarly, U.S. Industrial Production, which reports year-over-year industrial sector business output, reported growth in output for the eleventh consecutive month in January 2022.
According to the Metal Service Center Institute, North American service center volumes increased by 7.6% in 2021 compared to 2020. On a North American basis, this volume growth outpaced Ryerson’s, as Ryerson’s North American volumes increased by 4.5% over the same period. Ryerson’s demand growth was experienced most significantly in HVAC, commercial ground transportation, and construction sectors on a year-over-year basis.
COVID-19
At this time, our business, financial results, and the business of our customers continue to be impacted by COVID-19, including economic pressures, as well as supply chain disruptions and tightness stemming from COVID-19. This is perpetuated by increasing demand momentum. There is uncertainty in the nature and degree of COVID-19’s continued effects over time. Meanwhile, we remain committed to ensuring the safety of our employees and protecting the health and well-being of the communities in which we operate. We continue to operate our business under COVID-19 safety policies until we are certain that related risks have subsided.
2021 Performance Highlights
These key metrics illustrate Ryerson’s financial performance for the full year 2021 compared to 2020:
$5.7B
20.2%
$294M
Total Revenues
Gross Margin
Net Income Attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation
64% increase
230bps increase
$360M increase
$7.56
$7.46
$35M
Diluted EPS
Adjusted Diluted EPS
Cash from Operating Activities
$9.29 increase
$7.54 increase
$243M decrease
A reconciliation of diluted EPS to adjusted diluted EPS is provided below.
Domestic steel demand was strong in 2021 while supply remained limited throughout much of the year, driving significant increases in average selling prices. Compared to 2020, average selling prices increased by 57.0% and tons shipped increased by 4.3%, resulting in a year-over-year revenue increase of 63.7%. Gross margin expanded by 230 bps from 2020 as rapidly increasing market prices outpaced inventory costs. Warehousing, delivery, selling, general, and administrative expenses for 2021 increased by $156.9 million compared to 2020 driven by increased variable compensation. However, expenses as a percentage of sales decreased from 16.0% to 12.5% as the Company effectively managed inflationary pressures in labor, logistics, and operating supplies. As a result of the Company’s exceptional performance amidst the year’s supportive conditions, we generated record net income attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation of $294.3 million, or $7.56 per diluted share, in 2021. This compares to a net loss attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation of $65.8 million, or a loss of $1.73 per diluted share, for 2020.
To provide greater insight into the Company’s 2021 operating trends apart from the year’s one-time transactions, Ryerson provides adjusted net income (loss) and diluted adjusted earnings (loss) per share figures, which are not U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) financial measures, to compliment the reported GAAP net income (loss) and diluted earnings (loss) per share figures. Management uses these metrics to assess year-over-year performance excluding non-recurring transactions. Adjusted net income (loss) and adjusted diluted earnings (loss) per share do not represent, and should not be used as a substitute for, net income or earnings per share determined in accordance with GAAP. Illustrated in the below table, the 2021 net income attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation of $294.3 million includes a $109.6 million gain related to the sale-leaseback transactions
completed during the year. It also includes $5.5 million of expenses related to the redemption of $100.0 million of the 8.50% senior secured notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”), which was enabled by the sale-leaseback transaction proceeds, as well as a $50 million redemption utilizing cash on hand. Both of these 2028 Notes redemptions were exercised in-line with the optional redemption features secured in the Company’s 2020 bond issuance. 2021 net income additionally includes $98.3 million of nonrecurring pension settlement expenses driven by the third quarter partial annuitization of our pension liabilities. See “Pension Funding” discussion below for further details on this transaction. After adjusting for these non-core business transactions and the related provision for income taxes, the adjusted net income attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation for 2021 is $290.0 million, an increase of $293.1 million compared to the prior year’s adjusted net loss attributable to Ryerson Holding Corporation of $3.1 million which included adjustments for restructuring and other charges, loss on retirement of debt related to the redemption price paid to creditors as well as unamortized debt issuance costs written off related to the refinance of the 11.0% Senior Secured Notes, pension settlement charges related to a partial annuitization of pension liabilities, and a lump sum settlement offering in 2020, and related income taxes.
Ryerson generated cash from operating activities of $35 million in 2021, a decrease compared to $278 million generated in 2020 driven by increased working capital requirements amidst recovering demand and rising costs in the industry.
Ryerson’s 2021 Strategy Achievements
Ryerson’s market strategy focuses on providing excellent customer experiences consistently with speed at scale. Our culture is based on our trademarked “say yes, figure it out” mantra as we strive to grow volume and sustainably expand margins by increasing our fabrication business and improving our speed through our use of both tools and analytics.
Ryerson’s financial strategy includes a focus on generating strong cash from operating activities, enabled by industry-leading working capital management and an improved through the cycle operating model to effectively decrease both net debt and fixed cash commitments. In 2021, the Company continued to progress its financial strategy and recorded several milestone achievements. During the year, Ryerson successfully executed sale-leaseback transactions pursuant to which the Company sold thirteen properties and generated proceeds of $163 million. The Company subsequently utilized the proceeds to redeem $100 million of its 2028 Notes. In addition to this redemption, Ryerson also redeemed another $50 million of the 2028 Notes at a price of 103%. After these partial redemptions, $300 million aggregate principal amount of the 2028 Notes remains outstanding, a decrease of 40% compared to the $500 million in original principal issued in July of 2020. This $200 million reduction in the Notes decreased the Company’s annual interest expense by $17 million. As a result of the Notes redemptions, total debt decreased from $740 million as of December 31, 2020 to $639 million as of December 31, 2021 and net debt (defined as total debt less cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash from sales of property, plant, and equipment) decreased from $679 million to $588 million. Net debt is not a GAAP financial measure. We believe that net debt provides a clearer perspective of the Company’s overall debt situation. Net debt should not be used as a substitute for total debt outstanding as determined in accordance with GAAP. A reconciliation of debt to net debt is provided with the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” discussion below.
In addition, Ryerson furthered its financial transformation by completing another partial pension obligation annuitization in the third quarter of 2021. This $206 million annuitization not only reduced the Company’s legacy liability risks but is also expected to yield economic savings of approximately $5 million on a net present value basis.
In August, Ryerson’s Board of Directors declared a first-time quarterly cash dividend of $0.08 per share of common stock which was paid on September 16, 2021. At the same time, the Board also approved a share repurchase program authorizing the Company to purchase up to an aggregate of $50 million of the Company’s common stock over the following two years. These additions to Ryerson’s capital allocation plan reflect the Company’s commitment of delivering value to shareholders and underscore its confidence in its transformed balance sheet and improved operating model while also providing the ability to purchase shares below intrinsic value. Further underscoring this commitment and confidence, Ryerson’s Board of Directors approved a half-cent increase to the dividend in November 2021. The Company distributed this increased dividend of $0.085 per share of common stock to
holders on December 16, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had repurchased approximately 80,000 shares at an average price of $22.46, resulting in a return to shareholders of approximately $1.8 million. Combined with distributed dividend payments, Ryerson returned a total of $8.2 million to shareholders in 2021.  
In recognition of the Company’s substantially reduced debt, Ryerson received credit upgrades from each of its covering agencies in 2021. Moody’s upgraded Ryerson’s corporate rating to B1 from B2, Standard & Poor’s (“S&P”) upgraded it to B+ from B, and Fitch issued an upgrade to BB- from B+. The following table summarizes the Company’s ratings by agency as of December 31, 2021.
As a result of the July 2020 bond refinance and subsequent debt reductions, cash interest payments in 2021 totaled $51 million, compared to $62 million in 2020. Pension and retiree medical contributions increased compared to the prior year to $27 million as Ryerson paid an additional $12 million of pension contributions in 2021 that were deferred from 2020 as allowed under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“The CARES Act”). Additionally, given the improved operating environment of 2021, the Company increased its capital expenditure budget, driving cash contributions to maintenance capital expenditures up to $37 million for the year, which includes maintenance capital expenditures that were deferred from 2020 as spending was reduced due to uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. In all, fixed cash commitments totaled $115 million in 2021, an increase compared to $88 million in the previous year.
Industry Developments
On August 10, 2021, the Senate passed the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, a $1.2 trillion bill which features $550 billion in new federal spending over 5 years. Included in this spending is investment in roads, bridges, passenger and freight rail, electrical grid improvements, expansion of broadband access, transit systems, infrastructure for electric vehicles, and improvements to water systems. As of the date of this report, the bill is yet to receive passage by the House of Representatives. The Company believes that the additional government spending on infrastructure projects contemplated under the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, as proposed, may generate additional demand for our products especially within the industrial equipment, construction, green energy, and transportation industries. Accordingly, we would anticipate that the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act would be beneficial to the Company, but ultimately the impact on the Company’s operations is unclear.
On April 22, 2021, the U.S. International Trade Commission (“USITC”) confirmed the Department of Commerce’s affirmative antidumping duty determinations and injury determinations regarding US imports of common alloy aluminum sheet. As a result, the USITC has issued final antidumping duty orders on U.S. imports of common alloy aluminum sheet from the following sixteen countries: Bahrain, Brazil, Croatia, Egypt, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Oman, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Taiwan, and Turkey. Antidumping rates differ greatly depending on country of origin and producing mill and range from the low single digits to as high as 243%. Ryerson anticipates that the actions of the USITC will support the prices of domestically produced aluminum sheet and therefore benefit the Company’s average selling prices.
On March 1, 2018, the White House announced a 25% tariff on all imported steel products and 10% tariff on all imported aluminum products for an indefinite amount of time under Section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act (“Section 232”). These tariffs, while in effect, have discouraged metal imports from non-exempt countries and have had a favorable impact on the prices of the products we sell and our results of operations. Over the weekend of October 30th and 31st, 2021, the US and European Union agreed to revise Section 232 tariffs applied to the import of European steel and aluminum, allowing for the duty-free import of European steel and aluminum into the US, subject to tariff rate quotas. Specifically, the tariff rate quota includes the duty-free import of 3.3 million metric tons of steel melted and poured in the EU, 18 thousand metric tons of unwrought aluminum, and 366 thousand metric tons of semi-finished aluminum. The revision was to be applied on January 1, 2022. At this time, the scope of this agreement and its impact to Ryerson are unclear.
Acquisitions
On September 1, 2021, JT Ryerson acquired Specialty Metals Processing, Inc. (“SMP”), a toll processor located in Stow, Ohio, for $14.0 million, net of cash acquired. SMP processes stainless steel, aluminum, titanium, and nickel alloy products in a variety of industries including aerospace. SMP's expertise in buffing, grinding, and polishing finishes adds to Ryerson's value-added processing capabilities.
Components of Results of Operations
We generate substantially all of our revenue from sales of our metals products. The majority of revenue is recognized upon delivery of product to customers. The timing of shipment is substantially the same as the timing of delivery to customers given the proximity of our distribution sites to our customers. Revenues associated with products which we believe have no alternative use, and where the Company has an enforceable right to payment, are recognized on an over-time basis. Over-time revenues are recorded in proportion with the progress made toward completing the performance obligation.
Sales, cost of materials sold, gross profit, and operating expense control are the principal factors that impact our profitability:
Net Sales. Our sales volume and pricing are driven by market demand, which is largely determined by overall industrial production and conditions in specific industries in which our customers operate. Sales prices are also primarily driven by market factors such as overall demand and availability of product. Our net sales include revenue from product sales, net of returns, allowances, customer discounts, and incentives.
Cost of materials sold. Cost of materials sold includes metal purchase and in-bound freight costs, third-party processing costs, and direct and indirect internal processing costs. The cost of materials sold fluctuates with our sales volume and our ability to purchase metals at competitive prices. Increases in sales volume generally enable us to improve purchasing leverage with suppliers as we buy larger quantities of metals inventories.
Gross profit. Gross profit is the difference between net sales and the cost of materials sold. Our sales prices to our customers are subject to market competition. Achieving acceptable levels of gross profit is dependent on our acquiring metals at competitive prices, our ability to manage the impact of changing prices, and efficiently managing our internal and external processing costs.
Operating expenses. Optimizing business processes and asset utilization to lower fixed expenses such as employee, facility, and truck fleet costs, which cannot be rapidly reduced in times of declining volume, and maintaining low fixed cost structure in times of increasing sales volume, have a significant impact on our profitability. Operating expenses include costs related to warehousing and distributing our products as well as selling, general, and administrative expenses.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our condensed consolidated statements of operations data:
The following charts show the Company’s percentage of sales by major product lines for 2021 and 2020:
Comparison of the year ended December 31, 2021 with the year ended December 31, 2020
Net Sales
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased from the same period a year ago due to higher average selling prices caused by supply constraints in 2021 and higher tons sold as metals market conditions began to improve in the second half of 2020 after declining sharply at the beginning of 2020 due to the global outbreak of COVID-19. Compared to the year ago period, average selling price increased for all of our product lines in 2021 with the largest increases in our carbon plate, carbon flat, stainless flat, and stainless plate products. Tons sold increased in 2021 overall, with increases in our aluminum flat, stainless flat, and aluminum long product lines partially offset by decreases in our carbon plate, aluminum plate, and stainless plate product lines. Tons sold per ship day were 8,313 in 2021 as compared to 7,941 in 2020.
Cost of Materials Sold
The increase in cost of materials sold in 2021 compared to the year ago period is primarily due to an increase in average cost of materials sold per ton driven by supply constraints and the increase in tons sold. The average cost of materials sold increased across all of our product lines with the average cost of materials sold for our carbon plate, carbon flat, and carbon long product lines increasing more than our other product lines during 2021.
During 2021, LIFO expense was $366 million related to increases in pricing for all product lines with the largest impact from carbon products. During 2020, LIFO income was $12 million related to decreases in pricing for all product lines, which was muted by the impact of a reduction in tons in inventory, which led to the liquidation of older LIFO layers that were at a higher cost.
Gross Profit
Gross profit dollars increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due to an increase in volume as well as average selling price increasing faster than the increase in the average cost of materials sold, which resulted in an increase in gross margin.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses in 2021 were $45.1 million higher than in 2020. The increase in operating expenses in 2021 was primarily due to higher employee related costs as incentive compensation increased $76.3 million due to higher profitability, employee benefit expense increased by $21.0 million due to higher discretionary bonus program expenses, medical costs, and payroll taxes on higher incentive compensation, and salaries and wages expense increased by $16.2 million due to an increase in headcount, and higher salaries as 2020 included workforce and compensation reductions as a result of the pandemic, as well as higher overtime and temporary help due to labor shortages in some areas in 2021. In addition, expenses were impacted by changes in the following categories:
•
higher operating expenses of $25.4 million primarily due to increased operating supplies and higher rent expense after the sale and leaseback of 13 facilities in 2021;
•
higher selling, general, and administrative expenses of $12.1 million primarily due to increased use of outside technical services and increased travel and entertainment expenses;
•
higher delivery expenses of $11.4 million due to higher shipments and increased fuel and delivery costs; and
•
higher depreciation of $2.1 million.
Partially offsetting these increases were gains on the sale and leaseback of facilities in 2021. In the first quarter of 2021, we recognized a gain on sale of assets of $20.3 million from the sale and leaseback of our Renton, Washington, facility. In the second quarter of 2021, we recognized a gain of $87.4 million on the sale-leaseback of twelve of our facilities across the United States. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we recognized a gain of $1.9 million on the sale of a purchase option for a facility in Ohio.
In addition, reorganization costs were $9.6 million lower in 2021 compared to 2020. Included in the reorganization costs in 2020 was $3.7 million of system implementation costs and a restructuring charge of $2.2 million of severance costs for staff reductions.
On a per ton basis, operating expenses increased to $287 per ton in 2021 from $277 per ton in 2020.
Operating Profit
Our operating profit increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to increases in average selling prices and the increase in tons sold.
Other Expenses
Interest and other expense on debt decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the redemption of our 11.00% Senior Secured Notes due 2022 (the “2022 Notes”) which had an outstanding balance of $530.3 million at the redemption date of August 21, 2020 following the redemption of $57.6 million of the 2022 Notes during the first six months of 2020. The 2022 Notes were replaced by a lower level of debt at a lower interest rate with the issuance of $500.0 million of 8.50% senior secured notes due 2028 (the “2028 Notes”). In October 2020, $50.0 million of the 2028 Notes were redeemed and in July 2021, $150 million of the 2028 Notes were redeemed. In addition, interest and other expense on debt was lower in 2021 due to a lower level of borrowings outstanding under our $1.0 billion revolving credit facility (“the Ryerson Credit Facility”) compared to 2020 as excess funds were borrowed in 2020 to maintain access to cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. Interest expense in 2021 included a $2.8 million charge to write-off unamortized bond issuance costs related to the $150.0 million of 2028 Notes redeemed in July 2021. Interest expense in 2020 included a $1.0 million charge to write-off unamortized bond issuance costs related to the $50.0 million of 2028 Notes redeemed in October 2020 and a $0.4 million charge to write-off unamortized bond issuance costs related to the $57.6 million of 2022 Notes repurchased during the first six months of 2020.
The year 2021 includes a $98.7 million pension settlement loss due to the annuitization and lump-sum payouts of a portion of our pension liability and a $5.5 million loss on the repurchase of $150.0 million of the 2028 Notes. In addition, the other income and (expense), net in 2021 includes a $2.1 million loss from the change in the fair value of an embedded derivative within the 2028 Notes indenture, and a $0.7 million credit from net periodic benefit cost other than service cost. The year 2020 includes a $65.9 million pension settlement loss due the annuitization and lump-sum buyouts of a portion of our pension liability, a $16.2 million loss on the repurchase and redemption of the 2022 Notes, and a $1.5 million loss on the redemption of $50.0 million of the 2028 Notes. In addition, other income and (expense), net in 2020 included a $2.3 million gain on the recognition of the fair value of an embedded derivative in the 2028 Notes indenture and a $2.1 million credit from net periodic benefit cost other than service cost. See the Pension Funding section below for further details on the transactions that resulted in the pension settlement losses in both years.
Provision for Income Taxes
The $93.7 million income tax provision in 2021 primarily represents taxes at federal and local statutory rates where the Company operates, but generally excludes any tax benefit for losses in jurisdictions with historical losses. During 2021, the Company recorded a $1.6 million benefit as a result of releasing valuation allowances on certain state and foreign net operating losses, and a $0.8 million benefit related to the statute of limitations expiring on an uncertain tax position.
The $24.8 million income tax benefit in 2020 primarily represents taxes at federal and local statutory rates where the Company operates, but generally excludes any tax benefit for losses in jurisdictions with historical losses. During 2020, the Company recorded a benefit of $1.8 million related to the statute of limitations expiring on an uncertain tax position.
Noncontrolling Interest
In both 2021 and 2020, Ryerson China’s results of operations was income and the portion attributable to the noncontrolling interest was $1.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively.
Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share was $7.67 and $7.56, respectively, in 2021. Basic and diluted loss per share was $1.73 in 2020. The changes in earnings per share are due to the results of operations discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, and borrowing availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility that matures on November 5, 2025. Our principal source of operating cash is from the sale of metals and other materials. Our principal uses of cash are for payments associated with the procurement and processing of metals and other materials inventories, costs incurred for the warehousing and delivery of inventories, the selling and administrative costs of the business, capital expenditures, and for interest payments on debt.
The global COVID-19 pandemic led to disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which, depending on future developments, could adversely impact our capital resources and liquidity in the future. As a proactive, precautionary measure, we borrowed approximately $166 million under the Ryerson Credit Facility in the first quarter of 2020 to maintain access to cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2021, we are no longer holding excess cash due to COVID-19 concerns. We had cash and cash equivalents of $51.2 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $61.4 million at December 31, 2020. Our total debt outstanding at December 31, 2021 decreased to $639 million compared to $740 million of total debt outstanding at December 31, 2020 due to proceeds received from the facility sale and leaseback transactions and cash flow from operations in 2021. See Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 5: Property, Plant, and Equipment for further discussion. We had a debt-to-capitalization ratio of 54% and 84% at December 31, 2021 and at December 31, 2020, respectively. We had total liquidity (defined as cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash from sales of property, plant, and equipment, and availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility and foreign debt facilities) of $741 million at December 31, 2021 versus $373 million at December 31, 2020. Our net debt (defined as total debt less cash and cash equivalents, and restricted cash from sales of property, plant, and equipment) was $588 million and $679 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Total liquidity and net debt are not U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) financial measures. We believe that total liquidity provides additional information for measuring our ability to fund our operations. Total liquidity does not represent, and should not be used as a substitute for, net income or cash flows from operations as determined in accordance with GAAP and total liquidity is not necessarily an indication of whether cash flow will be sufficient to fund our cash requirements. We believe that net debt provides a clearer perspective of the Company’s overall debt situation given the excess borrowings discussed above. Net debt should not be used as a substitute for total debt outstanding as determined in accordance with GAAP.
Below is a reconciliation of cash and cash equivalents to total liquidity:
Below is a reconciliation of total debt to net debt:
Of the total cash and cash equivalents, as of December 31, 2021, $20.9 million was held in subsidiaries outside the United States which is deemed to be permanently reinvested. Ryerson does not currently foresee a need to repatriate earnings from its non-U.S. subsidiaries. Although Ryerson has historically satisfied needs for more capital in the U.S. through debt or equity issuances, Ryerson could elect to repatriate earnings held in foreign jurisdictions, which could result in higher effective tax rates. We have not recorded a deferred tax liability for the effect of a possible repatriation of these earnings as management intends to permanently reinvest these earnings outside of the U.S. Specific plans for reinvestment include funding for future international acquisitions and funding of existing international operations.
The following table summarizes the Company’s cash flows:
Operating activities. Working capital fluctuates throughout the year based on business needs. Working capital needs tend to be counter-cyclical, meaning that in periods of expansion the Company will use cash to fund working capital requirements, but in periods of contraction the Company will generate cash from reduced working capital requirements. Working capital requirements in 2021 increased significantly as improved economic conditions increased demand and supply constraints increased metals pricing, which increased sales and the related accounts receivable. Inventory quantities were increased to meet the higher demand and inventory costs increased due to rising metal prices throughout the year. The higher inventory investment also increased accounts payable balances. In 2020, working capital requirements significantly decreased, contributing to the operating cash flows generated in the period, as the Company had lower sales levels driven by lower tons sold and lower average selling prices due to weak economic
conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, the Company brought inventory levels down significantly in line with the weak market conditions. The Company also increased the days payable cycle in 2020 by working with our vendors on payment terms resulting in an increase in accounts payable year over year. Pension contributions were higher in 2021 than in 2020 as the Company elected in 2020 to defer $12 million of U.S. contributions due in 2020 to 2021, as permitted under the CARES Act that was passed in March 2020. The Company made contributions of $23.7 million in 2021 to the Company’s pension plans compared to contributions of $7.1 million in 2020. Interest paid to third parties was $10.9 million lower in 2021 compared to 2020 due to lower outstanding debt and interest rates, mainly due to the repurchase in 2020 of our 2022 Notes at 11% and the issuance of our 2028 Notes at 8.5% and lower LIBOR rates on our revolving line of credit borrowings.
Investing activities. The Company's main investing activities are capital expenditures and proceeds from the sale of property, plant, and equipment. In 2021, we sold and leased back a group of properties with net proceeds of approximately $163.2 million. Capital expenditures increased year-over-year as the Company reduced the 2020 annual capital expenditures budget due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, we acquired SMP for $14.0 million, net of cash acquired.
Financing activities. The Company's main source of liquidity to fund working capital requirements is borrowings on our credit facility. In 2021, we redeemed $150.0 million of our 2028 Notes, which was partially offset by credit facility borrowings. At December 31, 2020, we borrowed approximately $40 million of excess credit facility funds to maintain access to cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. This borrowing was offset by credit facility repayments from operating cash flows that were generated in 2020. In addition, during 2020 we redeemed and repurchased the outstanding principal amount of $587.9 million of our 2022 Notes. In the third quarter of 2020, we issued $500 million of our 2028 Notes to replace the 2022 Notes at a lower interest rate and debt level and paid $10.9 million of issuance fees on the transaction. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we redeemed $50.0 million of our 2028 Notes. Book overdrafts fluctuate based on the timing of payments.
As market conditions warrant and subject to our contractual restrictions, liquidity position, and other factors, we may from time to time seek to repurchase or retire our outstanding debt through cash purchases and/or exchanges for other debt or equity securities in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions, by tender offer, or otherwise. Any such cash repurchases by us may be funded by cash on hand or incurring new debt. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. Furthermore, any such repurchases or exchanges may result in our acquiring and retiring a substantial amount of such indebtedness, which would impact the trading liquidity of such indebtedness.
In the normal course of business with customers, vendors, and others, we have entered into off-balance sheet arrangements, such as letters of credit, which totaled $20 million as of December 31, 2021. We do not have any other material off-balance sheet financing arrangements. Our off-balance sheet arrangements are not likely to have a material effect on our current or future financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, or capital resources.
Total Debt
Total debt at December 31, 2021 decreased $100.7 million to $639.3 million from $740.0 million at December 31, 2020, mainly due to cash generated from sale-leaseback transactions and the net cash provided by operating activities in 2021.
Total debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021 consisted of the following amounts: $316.0 million borrowings under the Ryerson Credit Facility, $300.0 million under the 2028 Notes, $27.0 million of foreign debt, and $6.0 million of other debt, less $9.7 million of unamortized debt issuance costs. Availability under the Ryerson Credit Facility was $670 million and $277 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. For further information, see Note 10: Debt in Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.
Pension Funding
The Company made contributions of $23.7 million in 2021, $7.1 million in 2020, and $25.7 million in 2019 to improve the Company’s pension plans funded status. At December 31, 2021, as reflected in Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 11, pension liabilities exceeded plan assets by $95.8 million. The Company anticipates that it will have a minimum required pension contribution of approximately $5.8 million in 2022 under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”), Pension Protection Act in the U.S., and the Ontario Pension Benefits Act in Canada. The expected future contributions reflect recent pension funding relief measures under the American Rescue Plan Act (“ARPA”) passed in March 2021. Future contribution requirements depend on the investment returns on plan assets, the impact of discount rates on pension liabilities, and changes in regulatory requirements. The Company is unable to determine the amount or timing of any such contributions required by ERISA or whether any such contributions would have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial position or cash flows.
Effective September 24, 2021, the Ryerson Pension Plan purchased $206.6 million of annuities on behalf of a portion of plan participants which, due to the size of the transaction, resulted in settlement accounting. The pension plan was remeasured as of September 30, 2021. The remeasurement resulted in a settlement loss of $98.3 million which was recorded within Other income and (expense), net in the Statement of Operations as of September 30, 2021.
Changes in returns on plan assets may affect our plan funding, cash flows, and financial condition. Differences between actual plan asset returns and the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets impact the measurement of the following year’s pension expense and pension funding requirements. However, we believe that cash flow from operations and the Ryerson Credit Facility described above will provide sufficient funds to make the minimum required contributions.
Income Tax Payments
The Company made income tax payments of $70.2 million in 2021 and received income tax refunds of $5.7 million and $6.6 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively. Income tax payments in 2021 increased as the Company fully utilized existing federal income tax net operating loss carryforwards and had increased pre-tax income year over year. See Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 19: Income Taxes for further discussion.
Material Cash Requirements
The Company expects to make approximately $649 million in principal payments to satisfy its debt obligations, consisting of $27 million in foreign debt coming due in 2022, $6 million of other debt coming due between 2023 and 2024, $316 million for the Ryerson Credit Facility coming due in 2025, and $300 million for the 2028 Notes due in 2028. Please refer to Part II. Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 10: Debt for further information.
The Company leases various assets including real estate, trucks, trailers, mobile equipment, processing equipment, and IT equipment. We have noncancelable operating leases expiring at various times through 2036, and finance leases expiring at various times through 2027. The total amount of future lease payments is estimated to be $278 million with $44 million for the next 12 months. Including leases signed but not yet commenced as of December 31, 2021, total lease payments are $471 million. Please refer to Part II, Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 6: Leases for further information.
The Company expects to pay approximately $32 million of interest on the 2028 Notes, Ryerson Credit Facility, foreign debt, and other debt over the next 12 months and $160 million thereafter. Interest payments related to the variable rate debt were estimated using the weighted average interest rate for the Ryerson Credit Facility, including the effect of the interest rate swaps.
Purchase obligations with suppliers are entered into when we receive firm sales commitments with certain of our customers. As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding purchase obligations of approximately $14 million expiring in 2022.
Restructuring
During 2021, the Company paid the remaining $0.5 million of employee-related costs related to prior year staff reductions. The Company has a $0.7 million reserve for tenancy-related costs for facilities closed in prior years, which are expected to be paid through 2025.
In 2020, the Company recorded a $2.2 million charge for employee-related costs primarily for severance costs for corporate staff reductions. The Company paid $1.9 million of the employee costs related to these actions. In addition, the Company paid $0.8 million related to 2019 staff reductions.
During 2020, the Company also paid $0.3 million for costs related to facilities closed in prior years and recorded an addition of $0.1 million to the reserve for tenancy-related costs, which was charged to warehousing, delivery, selling, general, and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
In 2019, the Company recorded a $2.1 million charge for employee-related costs primarily for severance costs for corporate staff reductions. The Company paid $1.2 million for employee costs related to these actions. In addition, the Company paid $0.3 million related to 2018 staff reductions.
During 2019, the Company also recorded a $0.3 million charge to increase the reserve for tenancy-related costs for a facility closed in 2013. The Company paid $0.9 million in 2019 for costs related to facilities closed in prior years.
Deferred Tax Amounts
At December 31, 2021, the Company had a net deferred tax liability of $94 million comprised primarily of a deferred tax asset of $24 million related to pension liabilities, a deferred tax asset related to postretirement benefits other than pensions of $15 million, deferred tax assets of $10 million related to state, local, and foreign tax loss carryforwards, and $26 million of other deferred taxes relating to accrued compensation and other items, offset by a valuation allowance of $5 million and deferred tax liabilities of $57 million related to fixed assets, $97 million related to inventory, and $10 million related to intangibles. The Company’s deferred tax assets include $10 million related to state net operating loss (“NOL”) carryforwards and $0.3 million related to foreign NOL carryforwards at December 31, 2021. Due to the volatile macro-economic conditions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, we may experience fluctuations in our forecasted earnings before income taxes as a result of events which cannot be predicted, which could affect our deferred tax balances.
In accordance with ASC Topic 740, “Income Taxes,” the Company assesses the realizability of its deferred tax assets. The Company records a valuation allowance when, based upon the evaluation of all available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not that all or a portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. In making this determination, we analyze, among other things, our recent history of earnings, the nature and timing of reversing book-tax temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and future income. After considering both the positive and negative evidence available, in the second quarter of 2009, the Company determined that it was more-likely-than-not that it would not realize a portion of its U.S. deferred tax assets. As a result, the Company established a valuation allowance against a portion of its U.S. deferred tax assets. The Company released a portion of the valuation allowance related to one of its U.S. subsidiaries, JT Ryerson, during 2012. The Company released most of the remaining U.S. related valuation allowance during 2013. In 2018, the Company further reduced its valuation allowance related to state and foreign net operating losses. As of December 31, 2019, the Company had a valuation allowance of $13.7 million, a decrease of $15.6 million from the prior year mainly related to expiring NOLs and changes to U.S. foreign tax credits previously recorded. As of December 31, 2020, the company had a valuation allowance of $6.6 million, a decrease of $7.1 million from the prior year mainly related to expiring NOLs and changes to U.S foreign tax credits previously recorded. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a valuation allowance of $5.0 million, a decrease of $1.6 million from the prior year mainly related to a release of a valuation allowance on state NOL deferred tax assets, which we now expect to realize due to improved profitability.
As described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Company assesses the need for a valuation allowance considering all available positive and negative evidence, including past operating results, projections of future taxable income, and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies.
The Company will continue to maintain a valuation allowance on certain U.S. federal and foreign deferred tax assets until such time as in management’s judgment, considering all available positive and negative evidence, the Company determines that these deferred tax assets are more likely than not realizable.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Preparation of this Form 10-K requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts of sales and expenses during the reporting period. Our critical accounting policies, including the assumptions and judgments underlying them, are disclosed in Item 8 within Note 1: Summary of Accounting and Financial Policies. These policies have been consistently applied and address such matters as revenue recognition, depreciation methods, inventory valuation, asset impairment recognition, and pension and postretirement expense. While policies associated with estimates and judgments may be affected by different assumptions or conditions, we believe our estimates and judgments associated with the reported amounts are appropriate in the circumstances. Actual results may differ from those estimates.
We consider the policies discussed below as critical to an understanding of our financial statements, as application of these policies places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, with financial reporting results relying on estimation of matters that are uncertain.
Provision for allowances, claims, and doubtful accounts: We perform ongoing credit evaluations of customers and set credit limits based upon review of the customers’ current credit information, payment history, and the current economic and industry environments. We monitor customer payments and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based on historical experience and specific customer collection issues that we have identified. Estimation of such losses requires adjusting historical loss experience for current economic conditions and judgments about the probable effects of economic conditions on certain customers. We cannot
guarantee that the rate of future credit losses will be similar to past experience. Provisions for allowances and claims are based upon historical rates, expected trends, and estimates of potential returns, allowances, customer discounts, and incentives. We consider all available information when assessing the adequacy of the provision for allowances, claims, and doubtful accounts.
Inventory valuation: Our inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. The valuation of our inventories at the lower of cost or market could be subject to certain estimates; however, the measurement is primarily based on historical purchasing and sales information rather than forecasted metals pricing. Inventory costs reflect metal and in-bound freight purchase costs, third-party processing costs, and internal direct and allocated indirect processing costs. Cost is primarily determined by the LIFO method. We regularly review inventory on hand and record provisions for obsolete and slow-moving inventory based on historical and current sales trends. Changes in product demand and our customer base may affect the value of inventory on hand which may require higher provisions for obsolete inventory.
Income Taxes: Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserve for uncertain tax positions reflect our best estimate of taxes to be paid. The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and several foreign jurisdictions. The determination of the consolidated income tax expense requires judgment and estimation by management. It is possible that actual results could differ from the estimates that management has used to determine its consolidated income tax expense.
We record operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and the estimated effect of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. We follow detailed guidelines in each tax jurisdiction when reviewing tax assets recorded on the balance sheet and provide for valuation allowances as required. Deferred tax assets are reviewed for recoverability based on historical taxable income, the expected reversals of existing temporary differences, tax planning strategies, and on forecasts of future taxable income. The forecasts of future taxable income require assumptions regarding volume, selling prices, margins, expense levels, and industry cyclicality. If we are unable to generate sufficient future taxable income in certain tax jurisdictions, we may be required to record additional valuation allowances against our deferred tax assets related to those jurisdictions.
The Company’s income tax provisions are based on calculations and assumptions that are subject to examination by the Internal Revenue Service and other tax authorities. Although the Company believes that the positions taken on filed tax returns are reasonable, it has established tax and interest reserves in recognition that various taxing authorities may challenge the positions taken. For uncertain tax positions, the Company applies the provisions of relevant authoritative guidance, which requires application of a “more likely than not” threshold to the recognition and derecognition of tax positions. The Company’s ongoing assessments of the more likely than not outcomes of tax authority examinations and related tax positions require significant judgment and can increase or decrease the Company’s effective tax rate.
Long-lived Assets and Other Intangible Assets: Long-lived assets held and used are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We estimate the future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition. If the sum of the expected future cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) is less than the carrying amount of the asset, an impairment is recognized. Determining whether an impairment has occurred typically requires various estimates and assumptions, including determining which undiscounted cash flows are directly related to the potentially impaired asset, the useful life over which cash flows will occur, their amount, and the asset’s residual value, if any. Any related impairment loss is calculated based upon comparison of the fair value to the carrying value of the asset. Separate intangible assets that have finite useful lives are amortized over their useful lives. An impaired long-lived or intangible asset would be written down to fair value, based on various available valuation techniques, including the discounted cash flow method.
Goodwill: We assess the recoverability of the carrying value of recorded goodwill annually in the fourth quarter of each year or whenever indicators of potential impairment exist. We test for impairment of goodwill by assessing various qualitative factors with respect to developments in our business and the overall economy. Factors that may be considered indicators of impairment include: deterioration in general economic conditions; declines in the market conditions of our products, including metals prices; a sustained significant decline in our share price and market capitalization; reduced future cash flow estimates; and slower growth rates in our industry, among others. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than the carrying value based on our qualitative assessment, we will proceed to the goodwill impairment test. We compare the fair value of the reporting unit in which goodwill resides to its carrying value. If the carrying amount exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, not to exceed the carrying amount of the goodwill. The fair value of the reporting unit is estimated using a combination of an income approach and a market approach as this combination is deemed to be the most indicative of our fair value in an orderly transaction between market participants. An income approach based on discounted future cash flows requires us to estimate income from operations based on projected results and discount rates based on a weighted average cost of capital of comparable companies. A market approach estimates fair value using market multiples of various financial measures of comparable
public companies. If these estimates or their related assumptions for commodity prices and demand change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges for these assets.
Based on the impairment test performed on October 1, 2021, the Company concluded that the fair value of the reporting unit tested for impairment exceeded the carrying value. The discount rate for the reporting unit was estimated to be 15.5% at October 1, 2021. The Company determines a discount rate based on an estimate of a reasonable risk-adjusted return an investor would expect to realize on an investment in the reporting unit. Deterioration in market conditions in our industry or products, changes in expected future cash flows, expected growth rates, or to discount rates could result in impairment charges in future periods.
Purchase Price Accounting: Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting. This method requires the Company to record assets and liabilities of the business acquired at their estimated fair market values as of the acquisition date. Any excess of the cost of the acquisition over the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Any shortfall in the cost of the acquisition compared to the fair value of the net assets acquired is recorded in the Statement of Operations as a bargain gain. The Company uses valuation specialists, where necessary, to perform appraisals and assist in the determination of the fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. These valuations require management to make estimates and assumptions that are critical in determining the fair values of the assets and liabilities.
Pension and postretirement benefit plan assumptions: We sponsor various benefit plans covering a portion of our employees for pension and postretirement medical costs. Statistical methods are used to anticipate future events when calculating expenses and liabilities related to the plans. The statistical methods include assumptions about, among other things, the discount rate, expected return on plan assets, rate of increase of health care costs, and the rate of future compensation increases. Our actuarial consultants also use subjective factors such as withdrawal and mortality rates when estimating expenses and liabilities. The discount rate used for U.S. plans reflects the market rate for high-quality fixed-income investments on our annual measurement date (December 31) and is subject to change each year. The discount rate was determined by matching, on an approximate basis, the coupons and maturities for a portfolio of corporate bonds (rated Aa or better by Moody’s Investor Services or AA or better by Standard and Poor’s) to the expected plan benefit payments defined by the projected benefit obligation. The discount rates used for plans outside the U.S. are based on the yield of long term high quality corporate bonds, the duration of the liability, and appropriate judgment.
When calculating pension expense for 2021, we assumed the pension plans’ assets would generate a long-term rate of return between 4.35% and 5.05% for the JT Ryerson plan (adjusted for the remeasurement in 2021) and 2.05% for the Central Steel and Wire Company, a JT Ryerson subsidiary, plan, and between 1.75% and 4.25% for the Canadian plans. The expected long-term rate of return assumption was developed based on historical experience and input from the trustee managing the plans’ assets. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based on a target allocation of assets, which is based on a goal of earning the highest rate of return while maintaining risk at acceptable levels. Our projected long-term rate of return for the JT Ryerson pension plan is slightly higher than some market indices due to the active management of our plans’ assets, and is supported by the historical returns on our plans’ assets. The plans strive to have assets sufficiently diversified so that adverse or unexpected results from one security class will not have an unduly detrimental impact on the entire portfolio. We regularly review actual asset allocation and the pension plans’ investments are periodically rebalanced to the targeted allocation when considered appropriate. Pension expense increases as the expected rate of return on plan assets decreases. Lowering the expected long-term rate of return on plan assets by 50 basis points would have increased 2021 pension expense by approximately $2 million.
Future pension obligations for the U.S. plans were discounted using rates between of 2.84% and 3.27% at December 31, 2021. Future pension obligations for the Canadian plans were discounted using 2.85% at December 31, 2021. Lowering the discount rate by 50 basis points would increase the pension liability at December 31, 2021 by approximately $26 million.
The calculation of other postretirement benefit obligations requires the use of a number of assumptions, including the assumed discount rate for measuring future payment obligations. A decrease in the weighted average discount rate of 50 basis points would increase the postretirement benefit liability by approximately $3 million.
The assumptions used in the actuarial calculation of expenses and liabilities may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, higher or lower withdrawal rates, or longer or shorter life spans of participants. These differences may result in a significant impact on the amount of pension or postretirement benefit expense we may record in the future.
Legal contingencies: We are involved in a number of legal and regulatory matters including those discussed in Item 8 within Note 13: Commitments and Contingencies. We determine whether an estimated loss from a loss contingency should be accrued by assessing whether a loss is deemed probable and can be reasonably estimated. We analyze our legal matters based on available information to assess potential liability. We consult with outside counsel involved in our legal matters when analyzing potential outcomes. We cannot determine at this time whether any potential liability related to this litigation would materially affect our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements are discussed within Note 1: Summary of Accounting and Financial Policies in Part II, Item 8 Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.