Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as
a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report. Discussion and analysis of our 2020 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2020 financial performance to 2019, are located in Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Overview
We are a global, commercial-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on changing the paradigm for the treatment of rare genetic diseases of obesity, which are characterized by early-onset, severe obesity and hyperphagia, a pathological and insatiable hunger. While obesity affects hundreds of millions of people worldwide, we are advancing IMCIVREE™ (setmelanotide) as a precision medicine strategy for a subset of individuals who have severe obesity due to genetic variants that impair the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R) pathway, a pathway in the brain that is responsible for regulating hunger, caloric intake and energy expenditure, which consequently affect body weight. IMCIVREE, an MC4R agonist for which we hold worldwide rights, is the first-ever therapy developed for patients with certain ultra-rare genetic diseases of obesity that is approved or authorized in the United States, European Union (EU) or Great Britain. We made IMCIVREE commercially available in the United States for patients 6 years and older with obesity due to proopiomelanocortin (POMC), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1), or leptin receptor (LEPR) deficiency in early 2021, and we are working to achieve market access in several European countries in 2022. In addition to initial commercial efforts, we are preparing to bring IMCIVREE to additional populations in 2022 and beyond. We are advancing a broad clinical development program for setmelanotide in patients with additional rare genetic diseases of obesity in an effort to expand the approved indication to bring this potential therapy to approximately 100,000 to 200,000 patients in the United States and a similarly-sized rare patient population in Europe.
IMCIVREE was approved in November 2020 by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for chronic weight management in adult and pediatric patients 6 years of age and older with obesity due to POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency confirmed by genetic testing demonstrating variants in POMC, PCSK1, or LEPR genes that are interpreted as pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or of uncertain significance. The European Commission (EC) and Great Britain’s Medicines & Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), in July and September 2021, respectively, granted marketing authorization to IMCIVREE for the treatment of obesity and the control of hunger associated with genetically confirmed loss-of-function biallelic POMC, including PCSK1, deficiency or biallelic LEPR deficiency in adults and children 6 years of age and above. These approvals were based on Phase 3 data demonstrating a statistically significant and clinically meaningful reduction of weight and hunger in patients 12 years old or older with severe obesity due to POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency. In addition to the United States and Europe/UK, we and our partners are seeking approval for IMCIVREE to treat patients with these genetic obesities in Israel, China, Hong Kong and Macau.
Additionally, we are seeking regulatory approvals in the United States and Europe for setmelanotide to treat obesity and control hunger in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) or Alström syndrome. In November 2021, we announced the U.S. FDA has accepted for filing our supplemental New Drug Application (sNDA) for setmelanotide seeking to expand the approved label to include patients with BBS or Alström syndrome and granted us priority review for this sNDA. The FDA has assigned a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA) goal date of June 16, 2022 for this sNDA. In October 2021, we announced that we submitted a Type II variation application to the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for setmelanotide for the treatment of obesity and control of hunger in adult and pediatric patients 6 years of age and older with BBS or Alström syndrome. These regulatory submissions are based on positive results from a pivotal Phase 3 clinical trial that met its primary and all key secondary endpoints and achieved clinically meaningful and statistically significant reductions in body weight and in hyperphagia associated with these syndromes. The submissions include a series of comprehensive individual patient narratives supporting the disease burden of BBS. Our belief is that setmelanotide, if approved, has the potential to offer the first therapeutic option for the early-onset, severe obesity and unrelenting hunger that characterize these syndromes. Recently, we have decided to withdraw the Alström syndrome indication from the pending Type II variation application based on feedback from the EMA.
We also are advancing a broad clinical development program evaluating setmelanotide in several ongoing and planned clinical trials, and we are leveraging what we believe is the largest known DNA database focused on obesity -
with approximately 45,000 sequencing samples as of December 31, 2021 - to improve the understanding, diagnosis and care of people living with severe obesity due to certain variants in genes associated with the MC4R pathway. Having achieved proof-of-concept in our ongoing exploratory Phase 2 Basket Study evaluating setmelanotide in patients with severe obesity driven by variants in several different MC4R pathway associated genes, we expect to initiate in the first half of 2022, the pivotal Phase 3 EMANATE clinical trial, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled to evaluate setmelanotide in five independent sub-studies in patients with obesity due to a heterozygous variant of the POMC/PCSK1 genes or LEPR gene, certain rare variants of the SRC1 gene or the SH2B1 gene, or the N221D variant in the PCSK1 gene. We also have initiated the Phase 2 DAYBREAK clinical trial designed to evaluate setmelanotide in patients who carry a confirmed variant in one or more of 31 additional genes with strong or very strong relevance to the MC4R pathway. Our broad clinical program evaluating setmelanotide in rare diseases of obesity also includes the ongoing exploratory Phase 2 Basket study, an ongoing Phase 2 study evaluating setmelanotide in patients with hypothalamic obesity, a Phase 3 study in pediatric patients with MC4R pathway deficiencies between the ages of 2 and 6 years old, and potential registration-enabling study with our once-weekly formulation of setmelanotide.
We are studying additional diseases as part of investigator-initiated protocols. There are currently no effective or approved treatments for these MC4R pathway-related diseases. The FDA has acknowledged the importance of these results by giving setmelanotide Breakthrough Therapy designation for the treatment of obesity associated with genetic defects upstream of the MC4R in the leptin melanocortin pathways. The Breakthrough Therapy designation currently covers indications for POMC deficiency obesity, LEPR deficiency obesity, BBS and Alström syndrome.
On January 5, 2021, we entered into an asset purchase agreement with Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Alexion, pursuant to which we agreed to sell our Rare Pediatric Disease Priority Review Voucher, PRV, to Alexion, or the PRV Transfer. We were awarded the voucher under a FDA program intended to encourage the development of certain rare pediatric disease product applications. We received the PRV when IMCIVREE was approved by the FDA. Pursuant to the transfer agreement, Alexion agreed to pay us $100 million in cash upon the closing of the sale. The PRV Transfer closed on February 17, 2021.
On February 9, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 5,750,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $30.00 per share, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase up to 750,000 additional shares of common stock. We received aggregate net proceeds from the offering of approximately $161.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
On November 2, 2021, we entered into a sales agreement, or the Sales Agreement, with Cowen and Company LLC, or Cowen, as sales agent, pursuant to which we may, from time to time, issue and sell common stock with an aggregate value of up to $100 million in "at-the-market" offerings, or the ATM, under our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-260689) filed with the SEC on November 2, 2021. Sales of common stock, if any, pursuant to the Sales Agreement, may be made in sales deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a) of the Securities Act, including sales made directly through The Nasdaq Global Market or on any other existing trading market for our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, did not sell any shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, there was $100.0 million of common stock remaining available for sale under the ATM.
Our operations to date have been limited primarily to conducting research and development activities for setmelanotide. To date, we have not generated any significant product revenue and have financed our operations primarily through the proceeds received from the sales of common and preferred stock, asset sales, as well as capital contributions from the former parent company, Rhythm Holdings LLC. From August 2015 through August 2017, we raised aggregate net proceeds of $80.8 million through our issuance of series A preferred stock. Since our initial public offering, or IPO, on October 10, 2017 and our underwritten follow-on offerings through February 2021, we have raised aggregate net proceeds of approximately $611.4 million through the issuance of our common stock after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering related transaction costs. As noted above, we also received $100.0 million from an asset sale, specifically in connection with the PRV Transfer. In December 2021, we entered into an Exclusive License Agreement with RareStone Group Ltd., and received $7.0 million from the execution of that agreement.
We will not generate significant revenue from product sales until we are able to successfully establish a marketing and commercialization infrastructure for IMCIVREE. IMCIVREE became commercially available to patients 6 years of age and older with obesity due to POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency in the U.S. in the first quarter of 2021 and following marketing authorizations in the European Union and Great Britain, we are pursuing a country-by-country strategy to establish market access and reimbursement for IMCIVREE in several countries. We expect to continue to fund our operations through the sale of equity, debt financings or other sources. We intend to build our own marketing and commercial sales infrastructure and we may enter into collaboration or out license arrangements with other parties for certain markets outside the United States. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of setmelanotide.
As of December 31, 2021 we had an accumulated deficit of $528.9 million. Our net losses were $69.6 million and $134.0 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses over the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
● continue to conduct clinical trials for setmelanotide;
● engage contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, for the manufacture of clinical and commercial-grade setmelanotide;
● seek regulatory approval for setmelanotide for future indications;
● expand our clinical and financial operations and build a marketing and commercialization infrastructure;
● engage in the sales and marketing efforts necessary to support the continued commercial efforts of IMCIVREE globally;
● take into account the levels, timing and collection of revenue earned from sales of IMCIVREE and other products approved in the future, if any; and
● continue to operate as a public company.
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were approximately $294.9 million. We expect that our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our operating expenses into the second half of 2023.
Corporate Background
We are a Delaware corporation organized in February 2013 under the name Rhythm Metabolic, Inc., and as of October 2015, under the name Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Impact of Novel Coronavirus
We are closely monitoring how the spread of COVID-19 is affecting our employees, business, preclinical studies and clinical trials. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have limited access to our executive offices with most employees continuing their work outside of our offices and travel has been restricted. Based on current information we do not currently anticipate any disruption in the clinical supply of setmelanotide. Our CMOs have indicated that they have appropriate plans and procedures in place to ensure uninterrupted future supply of clinical and commercial-grade setmelanotide, subject to potential limitations on their operations due to COVID-19. As a result, we do not currently expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material impact on our business, results of operations and financial condition. At this time, however, there is still uncertainty relating to the trajectory of the pandemic and the impact of
related responses, and disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have resulted and may in the future result in difficulties or delays in initiating, enrolling, conducting or completing our planned and ongoing clinical trials and the incurrence of unforeseen costs as a result of disruptions in clinical supply or preclinical study or clinical trial delays. For example, we experienced interruption of key clinical trial activities, such as patient attendance and clinical trial site monitoring, in our Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating setmelanotide for the treatment of insatiable hunger and severe obesity in individuals with BBS or Alström syndrome. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the pandemic, the impact of variants, travel restrictions and social distancing in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the ultimate impact on financial markets and the global economy, the effectiveness of vaccines and vaccine distribution efforts and the effectiveness of other actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors-The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies, clinical trials and our commercialization prospects.” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated significant revenue from product sales. Our lead product candidate, IMCIVREE, was approved by the FDA in November 2020 for chronic weight management in adult and pediatric patients six years of age and older with obesity due to POMC, PCSK1 or LEPR deficiency confirmed by genetic testing. IMCIVREE became commercially available in the U.S. in the first quarter of 2021. We recorded our first sales of IMCIVREE in March 2021. We expect our initial sales of IMCIVREE will be limited by the ultra-rare nature of the disease and limited number of diagnosed patients in the United States.
Cost of sales
All of our inventory of IMCIVREE produced prior to FDA approval is available for commercial or clinical use. Most of the manufacturing costs have been recorded as research and development expenses in prior periods. Accordingly, the costs for IMCIVREE included in our cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 were insignificant. We expect cost of sales to increase in 2022 as we began to sell inventory that is produced after we began capitalizing IMCIVREE commercial inventory.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery and genetic sequencing efforts, and the clinical development of setmelanotide, which include:
● expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including CROs that conduct research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf, and the cost of consultants and CMOs that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● employee-related expenses including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
● the cost of lab supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical and clinical study materials;
● the cost of genetic sequencing of potential patients in clinical studies; and
● facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The capitalized amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
The following table summarizes our current research and development expenses:
We are unable to predict the duration and costs of the current or future clinical trials of our product candidates. The duration, costs, and timing of clinical trials and development of setmelanotide will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● the scope, rate of progress, and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● the rate of enrollment in clinical trials;
● the safety and efficacy demonstrated by setmelanotide in future clinical trials;
● changes in regulatory requirements;
● changes in clinical trial design; and
● the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with its development and potential commercialization.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our setmelanotide and other development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses to commercialization and there can be no guarantee that we can meet the funding needs associated with these expenses.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling expenses consist of professional fees related to preparation for the eventual commercialization of setmelanotide as well as salaries and related benefits for commercial employees, including stock-based compensation. As we accelerate our preparation for commercialization and start to market setmelanotide and as we explore new collaborations to develop and commercialize setmelanotide, we anticipate that these expenses will materially increase.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, relating to our full-time employees not involved in R&D or commercial activities. Other significant costs include rent, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services.
The following table summarizes our current selling, general and administrative expenses.
We anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued and expanding business support needs, commercialization for IMCIVREE in the United States and the European Union as well as other international markets as well as increased costs of operating as a global commercial stage biopharmaceutical public company. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, compliance with exchange listing and SEC expenses, insurance and investor relations costs, among other expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by us for changes in facts and circumstances on an ongoing basis, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued research and development expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate the value associated with goods and services received in the period in connection with research and development activities. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost, or alternatively, the deferral of amounts paid for goods or services to be incurred in the future. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses or prepaid expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at the time those financial statements are prepared. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to CROs, CMOs and consultants in connection with research and development activities.
We accrue our expenses related to CROs, CMOs and consultants based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with CROs, CMOs and consultants that conduct research and development and manufacturing on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. The allocation of CRO upfront expenses for both clinical trials and preclinical studies generally tracks actual work activity. However, there may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees delivered over a period of time, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust accrued or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do
not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based compensation
We have a 2017 equity incentive plan, or the 2017 Plan. The 2017 Plan provides for the grant of incentive and non-qualified stock options and restricted stock and stock grants to employees, consultants, advisors and directors, as determined by the Board of Directors. As of December 31, 2021, we had reserved 8,994,352 shares of common stock under the 2017 Plan. Shares of common stock issued pursuant to awards are generally issued from authorized but unissued shares. The 2017 Plan provides that the exercise price of incentive stock options cannot be less than 100% of the fair market value of the common stock on the date of the award for participants who own less than 10% of the total combined voting power of stock, and not less than 110% for participants who own more than 10% of the voting power. Awards granted under the 2017 Plan will vest over periods as determined by our Compensation Committee and approved by our Board of Directors.
We estimate the fair value of our stock option awards to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the input of subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected volatility of our stock, (b) the expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate, and (d) expected dividends. Previously due to the lack of a public market for the trading of our common stock and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of companies in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries in a similar stage of development as us and that are publicly traded. For these analyses, we selected companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies' shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. During 2020, we began to estimate volatility by using a blend of our stock price history for the length of time we have market data for our stock and the historical volatility of similar public companies for the expected term of each grant. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
We have estimated the expected life of our employee stock options using the "simplified" method, whereby, the expected life equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The risk-free interest rates for periods within the expected life of the option are based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect during the period the options were granted. We have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur. Upon adopting Accounting Standards Update 2018-07, Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting (Topic 718) on July 1, 2018, we elected that unsettled equity-classified awards to nonemployees for which a measurement date has not been established be measured using the adoption date fair value.
Income taxes
We account for uncertain tax positions in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, or ASC 740. When uncertain tax positions exist, we recognize the tax benefit of tax positions to the extent that the benefit will more likely than not be realized. The determination as to whether the tax benefit will more likely than not be realized is based upon the technical merits of the tax position as well as consideration of the available facts and circumstances. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any uncertain tax positions.
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC 740, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. We determine our deferred tax assets and liabilities based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, which are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are provided, if
based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards to reduce federal and state incomes taxes of approximately $429.3 million and $392.0 million, respectively. If not utilized, these carryforwards begin to expire in 2033. Of the federal net operating loss carryforwards at December 31, 2021, $356.2 million can be carried forward indefinitely. At December 31, 2021, we also had available research and development tax credits for federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $9.3 million and $3.9 million, respectively. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, we had federal orphan drug credits related to qualifying research of $15.4 million. These tax credit carryforwards begin to expire in 2033 for federal purposes and 2028 for state purposes.
Utilization of the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future, as provided by Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, or Section 382, as well as similar state provisions and other provisions of the Code. Ownership changes may limit the amount of net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax, respectively. In general, an ownership change, as defined by Section 382, results from transactions that increase the ownership of 5.0% stockholders in the stock of a corporation by more than 50% in the aggregate over a three-year period.
Results of Operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in those items in dollars and as a percentage:
NM=Not meaningful
Product revenue, net increased to $3.2 million in 2021. There were no product revenues in the comparative prior period. We recorded our first sales of IMCIVREE in March 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2021 represents our first year of sales subsequent to the approval of IMCIVREE in November 2020. We expect our initial sales of IMCIVREE will be limited by the ultra-rare nature of the disease and limited number of diagnosed patients in the United States. To date, all of our product revenue has been generated in the United States.
Cost of sales increased to $0.6 million in 2021. There were no cost of sales in the comparative prior period. All of our inventory of IMCIVREE produced prior to FDA approval is available for commercial or clinical use. Most of the manufacturing costs have been recorded as research and development expenses in prior periods. Accordingly, the costs for IMCIVREE included in our cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 were insignificant and primarily reflect the amortization of our capitalized sales based milestone payment made to Ipsen upon our first commercial sale as well as a royalty due to Ipsen on our net product sales. We expect cost of sales to increase as we begin to sell inventory that is produced after we began capitalizing IMCIVREE commercial inventory.
Research and development expense. Research and development expense increased by $13.7 million to $104.1 million in 2021 from $90.5 million in 2020, an increase of 15%. The increase was primarily due to the following:
● an increase of $11.2 million in our clinical trial costs associated with new and planned clinical trials, including our Phase 2 DAYBREAK and Phase 3 EMANATE trials, Phase 3 pediatrics trial, QTc study, Phase 2 hypothalamic obesity study, and increased enrollment in our long-term extension study. These increases were partially offset by the conclusion of prior studies, including pivotal Phase 3 studies for POMC and LEPR, as well as GO-ID;
● an increase of $7.7 million in salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation related to the hiring of additional full-time employees in order to support the growth of our research and development programs; and
● an increase of $1.3 million of pre-clinical expenses associated with second generation drug development.
The above increases were partially offset by:
● a decrease of $3.0 million due to the milestone expenses associated with the license agreement with Ipsen on filing the NDA and MMA for setmelanotide for the treatment of POMC and LEPR deficiency obesities;
● a decrease of $2.0 million primarily related to purchases of setmelanotide API and drug product for clinical trials and preparation for potential commercialization; and
● a decrease of $1.4 million in costs associated with accessing sequencing data from third-party biobanks to further our genetic research efforts.
Selling, general and administrative expense. Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $22.4 million to $68.5 million in 2021 from $46.1 million in 2020, an increase of 48%. The increase was primarily due to the following:
● an increase of $9.9 million due to increased compensation and benefits related costs associated with additions to our executive leadership team, increased headcount to support our expanding business operations as well as to establish commercial operations in the United States and internationally;
● an increase of $5.9 million due to increased professional fees and consulting services to support the build out of our commercial operations in the United States and internationally as well as corporate legal and consulting support for our international expansion;
● an increase of $3.7 million related to efforts to drive patient engagement and disease awareness about rare genetic causes of obesity and prepare for the potential commercialization of setmelanotide in the U.S.;
● an increase of $1.6 million of fees associated with the sale of our PRV to Alexion; and
● and increase of $1.3 million of employee recruitment and other missellaneous office related expenses to support our expanding business operations in the United States and internationally.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were approximately $294.9 million.
Cash flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net cash used in operating activities
The use of cash in all periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital.
Net cash used in operating activities was $146.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $147.9 million adjusted for non-cash items, which consisted of the gain on the sale of the PRV, non-cash stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization and rent expense. The change in operating assets and liabilities reflected a total source of cash of approximately $1.9 million primarily driven by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $18.3 million due to the timing of payments, partially offset by an increase of $16.4 million in prepaid expenses, other current and other long term assets.
Net cash used in operating activities was $122.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, and consisted primarily of a net loss of $116.1 million adjusted for non-cash items, which consisted of non-cash stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization and rent expense. The change in operating assets and liabilities reflected a total use of cash of approximately $5.9 million for an increase in prepaid assets, accounts payable and accrued expenses due to the timing of payments and an increase in overall operating expenses.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $62.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 which relates to the purchases of short-term investments, net of maturities, of $163.7 million, $0.4 million related to the purchase of property plant and equipment and $5.0 million for the acquisition of an intangible asset, partially offset by the $100.0 million in proceeds from the sale of the PRV and $7.0 million in proceeds from an out-license agreement.
Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the net maturities of short-term investments of $158.7 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $166.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which represents the net proceeds of $161.7 million from our common stock offering in February 2021 and $4.8 million of cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of common stock from our 2017 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or the ESPP.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents cash proceeds from the exercise of stock options and the issuance of common stock from the ESPP.
Funding requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the clinical development of and seek marketing approval for setmelanotide for future indications. In addition, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators. We also expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
We expect that our $294.9 million of cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021, will enable us to fund our operating expenses into the second half of 2023. We may need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our research and development activities and any continuing operations thereafter. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on favorable terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the costs to commercialize setmelanotide, by building an internal sales force or entering into collaborations with third parties and providing support services for patients;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of clinical trials for our setmelanotide program;
● the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our setmelanotide program;
● the obligations owed to Ipsen Pharma S.A.S., or Ipsen, Camurus AB, or Camurus and Takeda pursuant to our license agreements;
● the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
● our ability to establish and maintain additional collaborations on favorable terms, if at all; and
● the costs of operating as a public company and losing our emerging growth company status.
Although IMCIVREE has been approved by the FDA in certain indications, and became commercially available in the first quarter of 2021, IMCIVREE may not achieve commercial success. In addition, developing our setmelanotide program is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that may take years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain future marketing approvals and achieve product sales. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
In addition, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our liquidity and future funding requirements is uncertain as of the filing date of this Annual Report as this continues to evolve globally. See “Impact of Novel Coronavirus” above and “Risk Factors- The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our business, including our preclinical studies, clinical trials and our commercialization prospects.” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report for a further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, involves agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our setmelanotide program on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our setmelanotide program that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual obligations
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with CROs and CMOs for clinical trials and clinical supply manufacturing and with vendors for clinical research studies and other services and products for operating purposes.
We do not classify these as contractual obligations where the contracts are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days' prior written notice to the vendor.
Milestone and royalty payments associated with our license agreements with Ipsen, Camurus and Takeda, have not been included as contractual obligations as we cannot reasonably estimate if or when they will occur. Under the terms of the Ipsen license agreement, assuming that setmelanotide is successfully developed, receives regulatory approval and is commercialized, Ipsen may receive aggregate payments of up to $40.0 million upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones under the license agreement and royalties on future product sales and at December 31, 2021 there were $31.0 million of remaining milestones that may be achieved and due to Ipsen at a future date. We expect to pay Ipsen a $4.0 million milestone in 2022 upon our first commercial sale of IMCIVREE in the Europe. The majority of the aggregate payments under the Ipsen license agreement are for milestones that may be achieved no earlier than first commercial sale of setmelanotide. In the event that we enter into a sublicense agreement, we will make payments to Ipsen, depending on the date of the sublicense agreement, ranging from 10% to 20% of all revenues actually received under the sublicense agreement. Under the terms of the Camurus license agreement, assuming that setmelanotide is successfully developed, receives regulatory approval and is commercialized, Camurus may receive aggregate payments of up to $64.75 million upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones under the license agreement and royalties on future product sales and at December 31, 2021 there were $63.5 million of remaining milestones that may be achieved and due to Camurus at a future date. We expect to pay Camurus a $1.0 million milestone in 2022 upon the achievement of a development milestone. The majority of the aggregate payments under the Camurus license agreement are for milestones that may be achieved no earlier than first commercial sale of this formulation of setmelanotide. Under the terms of the Takeda license agreement, assuming that RM-853, is successfully developed, receives regulatory approval and is commercialized, Takeda may receive aggregate payments of up to $140.0 million upon the achievement of certain development and commercial milestones under the license agreement and royalties on future product sales. The majority of the aggregate payments under the Takeda license agreement are for milestones that may be achieved no earlier than first commercial sale of the RM-853.
Based on our current development plans as of December 31, 2021, potential payments due to third parties, during the next 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report are estimated to be approximately $5.0 million in commercial and development milestones, in connection with our license agreements. These milestones generally become due and payable upon achievement of such milestones or sales. When the achievement of these milestones or sales have not occurred, such contingencies are not recorded in our financial statements and are excluded from the table below.
In August 2018, we amended our existing Lease Agreement for our head office facility in Boston, Massachusetts. The new lease term commenced in May 2019 and has a term of six years with a five-year renewal option to extend the lease. The new lease includes approximately 13,600 square feet of office space.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of pending and recently adopted accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.